START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 53 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 53 
(Delegate Forbes, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Human Services - Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council 
 
 
This bill generally codifies the Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council (MSILC) 
– as created by an executive order in 1993 in accordance with the Federal Rehabilitation 
Act – as an instrumentality of the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (general/federal funds) and federal fund revenues may 
increase beginning in FY 2024 for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), as discussed 
below. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
General Responsibilities of the Statewide Independent Living Council and Related 
Provisions 
 
MSILC must (1) work in conjunction with Centers for Independent Living, defined as 
community‐based organizations that are designed and operated by people with disabilities, 
in submitting, monitoring, implementing, and evaluating the State Plan for Independent 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 53/ Page 2 
Living (SPIL) and (2) carry out other duties as required under State and federal law to 
support the implementation of SPIL. 
 
MSILC may (1) employ a staff; (2) adopt bylaws, policies, and procedures relating to its 
operations; (3) retain any necessary accountants, financial advisory, or other consultants; 
(4) maintain offices at a place it designates in the State; (5) accept loans, grants, or 
assistance of any kind from any entity of federal, State, or local government, an institution 
of higher education, or a private source if MSILC gives prior notice to the designated State 
entity (DSE); (6) enter into contracts and other legal instruments; (7) sue or be sued; and 
(8) do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers granted by the bill. 
 
The Attorney General is the legal advisor to MSILC. With the approval of the 
Attorney General, MSILC may retain any other necessary attorneys. Each year, DSE must 
audit the books and records of MSILC. The bill defines the DSE as the State entity 
identified in SPIL as having responsibility for providing administrative support and 
disbursement of funds to MSILC to carry out the State plan. 
 
Statewide Independent Living Council and Executive Director 
 
The Governor must appoint the members of MSILC in accordance with the Federal 
Rehabilitation Act or any other federal law that modifies provisions for statewide 
independent living councils. A member of MSILC must reside in the State. In making 
appointments to MSILC, the Governor must consider diversity based on sex, gender 
identity, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, and economic status, and representation from 
all geographic regions of the State. A member of MSILC may not serve more than 
two consecutive full three‐year terms, as specified. The Governor may remove an 
appointed member for incompetence, misconduct, or failure to perform the duties of the 
position. A member of MSILC may not receive compensation as a member of MSILC but 
is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the standard State travel regulations. 
 
MSILC may act with an affirmative vote of a majority of its members. Each year MSILC 
must elect a chair from among its members. 
 
MSILC must employ an executive director who has experience with, and possesses 
qualifications relevant to, the activities and purposes of MSILC. 
 
Applicability of Specified Provisions of State Law 
 
MSILC is generally exempt from Title 10 (miscellaneous provisions related to the Board 
of Public Works) and Division II (General Procurement Law) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article. However, the bill also establishes that (1) MSILC is subject to the 
Open Meetings Act and the Public Information Act; (2) the board and the employees of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 53/ Page 3 
MSILC are subject to the Public Ethics Law; and (3) MSILC and the employees of MSILC 
are subject to Title 12, Subtitle 4 of the State Finance and Procurement Article (written 
procurement policies and procedures for exempt units). The employees of MSILC are not 
subject to the provisions of Division I of the State Personnel and Pensions Article that 
govern the State Personnel Management System. 
 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
A debt, claim, obligation, or liability of MSILC is not (1) a debt, claim, obligation, or 
liability of the State or (2) a pledge of the credit of the State. MSILC is exempt from State 
and local taxes. 
 
Current Law:  An executive order in 1993 formally created MSILC to work in 
conjunction with the Maryland State Division of Rehabilitation Services (DORS) in 
submitting, monitoring, and evaluating the implementation of SPIL and to carry out other 
duties as stipulated in the Federal Rehabilitation Act. In order to receive assistance under 
the Act, federal law requires that a state submit a SPIL, which must stipulate that the state 
will provide independent living services, directly and/or through grants and contracts, with 
federal, state, or other funds, and must describe how and to whom those funds will be 
disbursed for this purpose. The Act also requires a state to establish and maintain an 
independent living council that meets specified requirements, including those related to the 
composition and appointment of members. The duties and authorities of MSILC are set 
forth in federal regulations. 
 
Also, pursuant to federal requirements, a MSILC must not be established as an entity within 
a State agency (including the DSE) and must be independent of and autonomous from the 
DSE and all other State agencies. 
 
DORS is specifically required in the aforementioned executive order to provide staffing 
and resources as may be determined necessary to support the operation and duties of 
MSILC. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) has statutory responsibility 
(§ 21-302 of the Education Article) to cooperate with the appropriate federal agencies in 
administering the federal rehabilitation acts and to do anything necessary to secure the 
benefits of such acts. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  As previously noted, DORS (within MSDE) is the designated 
entity within the State responsible for working with MSILC to ensure the overall 
facilitation of SPIL. MSDE anticipates that the bill has no impact on its expenditures or 
revenues; a minimal operational impact is anticipated to the extent that MSILC assumes 
some administrative functions under the bill. MSDE further advises that an assistant 
Attorney General (within MSDE) is currently serving as the legal advisor to MSILC (on a 
part-time basis). However, OAG, in response to a request for an estimate regarding the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 53/ Page 4 
fiscal impact of the bill, advises that two additional positions (one assistant 
Attorney General and one administrative assistant) are required, with associated 
expenditures of $212,545 in fiscal 2024, which assumes a 90‐day start‐up delay from the 
bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date, and a minimum of $258,000 annually thereafter. OAG 
specifically advises that the additional resources are necessary due to the bill’s requirement 
that OAG is the legal advisor to MSILC and the need to ensure compliance with various 
requirements, including those related to open meetings, the Public Information Act, and 
procurement. While the Department of Legislative Services acknowledges that additional 
resources may be needed, it is unable to independently validate the estimate prepared by 
OAG and reliably estimate whether any expenditures, particularly of the magnitude 
estimated by OAG, are required that can be solely attributable to the bill. To the extent that 
federal funds to support any potential new OAG positions are requested and awarded, 
federal fund revenues increase. 
 
Although the bill exempts MSILC from State and local taxes, it is anticipated that any 
potential decrease in tax revenues does not materially affect State or local finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 608 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; 
Governor’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 15, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4