START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

Chapter 587

(House Bill 11)

AN ACT concerning

Private Well Safety Act of 2023

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Private~~ ~~Well~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~Program~~ ~~in~~ requiring the
Department of the Environment to ~~manage~~ ~~and,~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~availability~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~
~~funding,~~ ~~address~~ ~~the~~ ~~contamination~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~private~~ ~~and~~ ~~domestic~~ ~~water~~ ~~supply~~
~~wells~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Private~~ ~~Well~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~award~~ ~~grants~~ ~~to~~
~~certain~~ ~~counties~~ ~~and~~ ~~households~~ ~~for~~ ~~costs~~ ~~associated~~ ~~with~~ ~~water~~ ~~quality~~ ~~testing~~ ~~and~~
~~remediation~~ adopt regulations on or before a certain date to identify additional
standards for water quality testing; requiring the Department of the Environment,
subject to certain funding and in consultation with the Department of Information
Technology, to utilize an online portal to receive and upload certain information and
to provide public access to the information; requiring a State–certified laboratory
that conducts water quality testing of certain wells to submit to the Department of
the Environment certain results of water quality testing in a certain manner;
requiring the Department of the Environment to share certain information
consistently with the Maryland Department of Health and local health departments
and to encourage the Maryland Department of Health and local health departments
to share certain information to the online portal; requiring a contract for the sale of
real property on which a certain well is located to include a provision requiring, as a
condition of the sale, that the purchaser ensure that certain water quality testing be
conducted; and generally relating to private and domestic water supply wells in the
State.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
~~Section~~ ~~9–4A–01~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~part~~ ~~“Part~~ ~~I.~~ ~~Definitions”;~~ ~~9–4A–04~~ ~~through~~
~~9–4A–10~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~part~~ ~~“Part~~ ~~II.~~ ~~Program~~ ~~and~~ ~~Fund”;~~ ~~and~~ ~~9–4A–13~~
~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~part~~ ~~“Part~~ ~~III.~~ ~~Private~~ ~~Well~~ ~~Water~~ ~~Quality~~ ~~Database”~~
Section 9–4A–01 through 9–4A–03
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Environment
~~Section~~ ~~9–4A–01~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~part~~ ~~“Part~~ ~~IV.~~ ~~Residential~~ ~~Rental~~ ~~Property”~~
Section 9–4A–01
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Section 10–713
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

~~PART~~ ~~I.~~ ~~DEFINITIONS.~~

9–4A–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “CONTAMINATION” MEANS THAT WATER QUALITY TESTING FOR A
COVERED HOUSEHOLD DEMONSTRATED THAT:

(1) A SUBSTANCE IS PRESENT THAT EXCEEDS THE LEGAL
~~THRESHOLD~~ ~~LIMIT~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SUBSTANCE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~ALLOWED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM UNDER THE FEDERAL SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT; OR

(2) THERE IS A HARMFUL LEVEL OF ANOTHER CONTAMINANT, AS
DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) “COVERED HOUSEHOLD” MEANS ONE OR MORE INDIVIDUALS WHO
RESIDE AT A PROPERTY THAT IS SERVED BY A PRIVATE WELL.

(D) “ELIGIBLE COUNTY” MEANS A COUNTY THAT:

(1) IS AWARDED A GRANT UNDER THE FUND FOR DISTRIBUTION TO
~~COVERED~~ ~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ASSIST~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~TESTING~~
AND REMEDIATION; AND

(2) MEETS THE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER §
9–4A–08 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) “FUND” MEANS THE PRIVATE WELL SAFETY FUND.

(F) “INELIGIBLE COUNTY” MEANS A COUNTY THAT HAS NOT BEEN AWARDED
A GRANT UNDER THE FUND.

(G) (B) “MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL” MEANS A STANDARD THAT IS:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

(1) SET BY THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR THE
DEPARTMENT FOR DRINKING WATER QUALITY; AND

(2) THE LEGAL THRESHOLD LIMIT ON THE AMOUNT OF A SUBSTANCE
THAT IS ALLOWED IN A PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM UNDER THE FEDERAL SAFE
DRINKING WATER ACT.

(H) (C) “PRIVATE WELL” MEANS A PRIVATE OR DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY
WELL THAT IS A SOURCE OF POTABLE WATER.

(I) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE PRIVATE WELL SAFETY PROGRAM.

~~(J)~~ ~~“REMEDIATION”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(1) THE DRILLING OF A NEW WELL; AND

(2) CONNECTION TO A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.

(K) (D) (1) “WATER QUALITY TESTING” MEANS WATER QUALITY
SAMPLING, TESTING, AND ANALYSIS:

(I) CONDUCTED BY A STATE–APPROVED WATER SAMPLER AND
A STATE–APPROVED LABORATORY FOR A PRIVATE WELL; AND

(II) OF WHICH THE MINIMUM SAMPLING CRITERIA INCLUDE
BACTERIA, NITRATE, AND TURBIDITY.

(2) “WATER QUALITY TESTING” INCLUDES WATER QUALITY
SAMPLING OF ANY CONTAMINANT OF CONCERN, AS DETERMINED BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

~~9–4A–02.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~9–4A–03.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

PART II. PROGRAM AND FUND.

~~9–4A–04.~~ 9–4A–02.

(A) THERE IS A PRIVATE WELL SAFETY PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO MANAGE AND, SUBJECT TO THE
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING IN THE FUND, ADDRESS THE CONTAMINATION OF
PRIVATE WELLS IN THE STATE.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

~~9–4A–05.~~

(A) THERE IS A PRIVATE WELL SAFETY FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO AWARD GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE
~~COUNTIES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~COVERED~~ ~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~INELIGIBLE~~ ~~COUNTIES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~COSTS~~
ASSOCIATED WITH WATER QUALITY TESTING AND REMEDIATION.

(C) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;
~~AND~~

(2) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR AWARDING GRANTS:

(1) TO ELIGIBLE COUNTIES FOR DISTRIBUTION TO COVERED
~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ASSIST~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~
TESTING AND REMEDIATION; AND

(2) TO COVERED HOUSEHOLDS LOCATED IN AN INELIGIBLE COUNTY
~~TO~~ ~~ASSIST~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~TESTING~~ ~~AND~~
~~REMEDIATION.~~

~~9–4A–06.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A GRANT APPLICATION PROCESS
FOR AWARDING A GRANT UNDER THE FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT MAY ESTABLISH A GRANT APPLICATION FEE.

(2) (I) THE APPLICATION FEE FOR AN AWARD FOR WATER QUALITY
TESTING MAY NOT EXCEED $10; AND

(II) THE APPLICATION FEE FOR AN AWARD FOR REMEDIATION
MAY NOT EXCEED $250.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT MAY WAIVE THE APPLICATION FEE ON A
CASE–BY–CASE BASIS, BASED ON HOUSEHOLD INCOME.

(C) IN AN APPLICATION FOR A GRANT AWARD UNDER THE FUND, A
COVERED HOUSEHOLD SHALL SUBMIT A COPY OF ITS MOST RECENT STATE INCOME
TAX RETURN OR AN AFFIDAVIT OF:

(1) A FILING OF A HOUSEHOLD INCOME EXEMPTION;

(2) A HOUSEHOLD INCOME REDUCTION; OR

(3) THE PROJECTED HOUSEHOLD INCOME FOR THE CURRENT YEAR.

~~9–4A–07.~~

~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) PROVIDE NOTICE TO EACH COUNTY OF:

(I) THE FUND; AND

(II) THE GRANT APPLICATION PROCESS ESTABLISHED UNDER §
9–4A–06 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) FOR THE PURPOSE OF INFORMING COVERED HOUSEHOLDS IN
INELIGIBLE COUNTIES, PUBLISH ON ITS WEBSITE INFORMATION ON:

(I) THE FUND; AND

(II) THE GRANT APPLICATION PROCESS; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) FOR THE PURPOSE OF INFORMING PRIVATE WELL OWNERS,
PUBLISH ON ITS WEBSITE INFORMATION ON WATER QUALITY TESTING, INCLUDING:

(I) RESOURCES FOR WATER QUALITY TESTING AND
~~REMEDIATION;~~

(II) CONTACT INFORMATION FOR LICENSED WELL DRILLERS,
PUMP INSTALLERS, AND STATE–CERTIFIED WATER QUALITY TESTING
~~LABORATORIES;~~

(III) INFORMATION ON POTENTIAL CONTAMINANTS OF
CONCERN IN THE STATE, BY REGION OR GROUNDWATER AQUIFER; AND

(IV) INFORMATION ON THE IMPORTANCE OF ANNUAL TESTING.

~~9–4A–08.~~

A COUNTY IS ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE A GRANT AWARD IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SUBTITLE IF THE COUNTY AGREES TO ENGAGE IN OUTREACH ACTIVITIES:

(1) TO EDUCATE COUNTY RESIDENTS ON THE EXISTENCE AND
PURPOSE OF THE FUND AND ON THE IMPORTANCE OF ANNUALLY TESTING WELL
WATER FOR CONTAMINANTS; AND

(2) THAT, AT A MINIMUM, INCLUDE:

(I) PUBLISHING INFORMATION ON THE COUNTY’S WEBSITE;

(II) PROVIDING INFORMATION TO RESIDENTS OVER THE
~~TELEPHONE~~ ~~WHEN~~ ~~A~~ ~~RESIDENT~~ ~~CALLS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~ABOUT~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~
TESTING OR REMEDIATION OR THE PROGRAM; AND

(III) SUBMITTING THE ANNUAL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–4A–10 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~9–4A–09.~~

(A) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE, AND SUBJECT TO THE
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING IN THE FUND, THE DEPARTMENT MAY AWARD A GRANT
UNDER THE FUND TO:

(1) AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY FOR DISTRIBUTION TO COVERED
~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ASSIST~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~
TESTING AND REMEDIATION; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

(2) A COVERED HOUSEHOLD LOCATED IN AN INELIGIBLE COUNTY TO
~~ASSIST~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~TESTING~~ ~~AND~~
~~REMEDIATION.~~

(B) IN AWARDING A GRANT TO AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY UNDER THIS SUBTITLE,
THE DEPARTMENT MAY CONSIDER:

(1) THE ESTIMATED PROPORTION OF COVERED HOUSEHOLDS IN THE
ELIGIBLE COUNTY;

(2) THE COUNTY’S SPECIFIC NEEDS RELATED TO THE COSTS OF
ADMINISTERING AND IMPLEMENTING GRANTS UNDER THE FUND;

(3) THE COUNTY’S NEED TO ADDRESS PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERNS OR
SPECIFIC CONTAMINATION CONCERNS; AND

(4) ANY OTHER RELEVANT FACTOR, AS DETERMINED BY THE
~~DEPARTMENT.~~

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OR AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY SHALL:

(I) BASE THE DOLLAR AMOUNT OF A GRANT AWARD FOR WATER
QUALITY TESTING ON:

1. SAMPLING PARAMETERS AND COSTS; AND

2. AN INCOME GUIDELINE SCALE ESTABLISHED BY THE
DEPARTMENT; AND

(II) BASE THE DOLLAR AMOUNT OF A GRANT AWARD FOR
~~REMEDIATION~~ ~~ON~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INCOME~~ ~~GUIDELINE~~ ~~SCALE~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
~~DEPARTMENT.~~

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OR AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY MAY AWARD A GRANT
FOR UP TO 100% OF THE COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH WATER QUALITY TESTING AND
~~REMEDIATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~COVERED~~ ~~HOUSEHOLD~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~CAN~~ ~~DEMONSTRATE~~ ~~HOUSEHOLD~~
INCOME BELOW 50% OF THE STATE’S MEDIAN INCOME LEVEL.

(D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A GRANT AWARD FOR THE COSTS
ASSOCIATED WITH REMEDIATION.

(2) A COVERED HOUSEHOLD SHALL, ON SATISFACTORY COMPLETION
OF THE REMEDIATION PROJECT, MAKE PAYMENT DIRECTLY TO THE LICENSED WELL

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DRILLER, WATER CONDITIONER INSTALLER, OR PUMP INSTALLER THAT HAS BEEN
CONTRACTED TO PERFORM THE REMEDIATION PROJECT.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT OR AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY MAY NOT AWARD A GRANT
UNDER THE FUND FOR COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH:

(1) ANY WORK OR TESTING CONDUCTED BEFORE THE GRANT AWARD
WAS APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR ELIGIBLE COUNTY;

(2) WELLS SERVING COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS;

(3) PRIVATE WELLS THAT DO NOT MEET THE ESTABLISHED
CONTAMINATION CRITERIA;

(4) DUG WELLS; AND

~~(5)~~ ~~POINT–DRIVEN~~ ~~WELLS.~~

(F) A COVERED HOUSEHOLD MAY NOT RECEIVE A GRANT AWARD UNDER
THIS SECTION MORE THAN TWICE A YEAR, INCLUDING ONE GRANT AWARD FOR
WATER QUALITY TESTING AND ONE GRANT AWARD FOR REMEDIATION.

(G) (A) THE ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2026, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IDENTIFY A LIST OF ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR
WATER QUALITY TESTING THAT THE DEPARTMENT DEEMS NECESSARY FOR EACH
COUNTY OR ANY SPECIFIC AREA WITHIN A COUNTY,.

(B) INCLUDING REQUIRING REGULATIONS ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SUBSECTION MAY REQUIRE, AS APPROPRIATE, TESTING FOR:

(1) MANGANESE;

(2) ARSENIC;

(3) RADON;

(4) MERCURY; AND

(5) ALL OTHER VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS FOR WHICH THERE
IS A MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL.

~~9–4A–10.~~

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

(A) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, A COUNTY THAT RECEIVED A
~~GRANT~~ ~~AWARD~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCORDANCE~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~SUBMIT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
DEPARTMENT A REPORT THAT INCLUDES, FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
FISCAL YEAR:

(1) THE LOCATIONS OF COVERED HOUSEHOLDS THAT RECEIVED A
GRANT AWARD;

(2) THE DOLLAR AMOUNT AWARDED TO EACH HOUSEHOLD,
CATEGORIZED BY FUNDING FOR WATER QUALITY TESTING AND REMEDIATION;

(3) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF WATER QUALITY TESTS CONDUCTED
UNDER THE PROGRAM AND THE PROPORTION THAT DETECTED A SUBSTANCE THAT
EXCEEDS THE MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL FOR THAT SUBSTANCE,
CATEGORIZED BY CENSUS TRACT OR OTHER IDENTIFYING FACTORS;

(4) THE NUMBER OF WATER QUALITY TESTS CONDUCTED WITHIN THE
PREVIOUS 12–MONTH PERIOD AND THE PROPORTION THAT DETECTED A
~~SUBSTANCE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~EXCEEDS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MAXIMUM~~ ~~CONTAMINANT~~ ~~LEVEL~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THAT~~
SUBSTANCE, CATEGORIZED BY CENSUS TRACT OR OTHER IDENTIFYING FACTORS;

(5) THE LOCATION OF AREAS OF POTENTIAL CONCERN;

(6) THE MOST COMMONLY DETECTED CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN,
CATEGORIZED BY CENSUS TRACT OR OTHER IDENTIFYING FACTORS;

(7) ANY OTHER INFORMATION TO FURTHER EXPLAIN OR QUALIFY
THE INFORMATION INCLUDED IN THE REPORT; AND

(8) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
~~STATE~~ ~~GOVERNMENT~~ ~~ARTICLE,~~ ~~ON:~~

(1) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF WATER QUALITY TESTS CONDUCTED
UNDER THE PROGRAM AND THE PROPORTION THAT DETECTED A SUBSTANCE THAT
EXCEEDS THE MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL FOR THAT SUBSTANCE,
CATEGORIZED BY COUNTY AND CENSUS TRACT OR OTHER IDENTIFYING FACTORS;

(2) THE NUMBER OF WATER QUALITY TESTS CONDUCTED WITHIN THE
PREVIOUS 12–MONTH PERIOD AND THE PROPORTION THAT DETECTED A
~~SUBSTANCE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~EXCEEDS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MAXIMUM~~ ~~CONTAMINANT~~ ~~LEVEL~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THAT~~

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SUBSTANCE, CATEGORIZED BY COUNTY AND CENSUS TRACT OR OTHER IDENTIFYING
~~FACTORS;~~

(3) THE LOCATION OF AREAS OF KNOWN CONTAMINATION;

(4) A DESCRIPTION OF THE BENEFITS REALIZED AND DEFICIENCIES
ADDRESSED AS A RESULT OF THE PROGRAM AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ANY
APPROPRIATE LEGISLATIVE ACTION; AND

(5) THE MOST COMMONLY DETECTED CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN,
CATEGORIZED BY CENSUS TRACT OR OTHER IDENTIFYING FACTORS.

~~9–4A–11.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~9–4A–12.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~PART~~ ~~III.~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~WELL~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~DATABASE.~~

~~9–4A–13.~~ 9–4A–03.

(A) THE SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING FOR THE PLANNING
AND IMPLEMENTATION OF AN ONLINE PORTAL, AND IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL UTILIZE
AN ONLINE PORTAL:

(1) TO RECEIVE THE RESULTS OF WATER QUALITY TESTING FROM
STATE–CERTIFIED LABORATORIES AND THE MARYLAND GEOLOGICAL SURVEY;

(2) TO UPLOAD CERTIFICATES OF POTABILITY AS REQUIRED UNDER
COMAR 26.04.04.30, RESULTS OF WATER QUALITY TESTING, AND OTHER
RELEVANT INFORMATION SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT RELATED TO PRIVATE
WELLS, ON AT LEAST A QUARTERLY BASIS; AND

(3) TO PROVIDE PUBLIC ACCESS TO THE INFORMATION RECEIVED
UNDER ITEMS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION IN A MANNER THAT IS EASY TO USE
AND CATEGORIZED BY COUNTY.

(B) ON AN ONGOING BASIS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ONLINE PORTAL
UNDER THIS SECTION,:

(1) A A COUNTY MAY SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT RECORDS OF
CERTIFICATES OF POTABILITY, AS REQUIRED UNDER COMAR 26.04.04.30, AND

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

ANY RESULTS OF WATER QUALITY TESTING RECEIVED VOLUNTARILY FROM
RESIDENTS.; AND

(C) (2) ON A QUARTERLY BASIS, A A STATE–CERTIFIED LABORATORY
THAT CONDUCTS WATER QUALITY TESTING OF PRIVATE WELLS FOR THE PURPOSE
OF IMPLEMENTING THIS SUBTITLE SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT THE
RESULTS OF EACH WATER QUALITY TEST CONDUCTED BY THE LABORATORY IN A
MANNER DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) CONSISTENTLY SHARE THE INFORMATION COLLECTED UNDER
THIS SECTION WITH THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND LOCAL HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS; AND

(2) ENCOURAGE THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS TO SHARE RELEVANT INFORMATION TO THE ONLINE
PORTAL.

~~9–4A–14.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~9–4A–15.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~PART~~ ~~IV.~~ ~~RESIDENTIAL~~ ~~RENTAL~~ ~~PROPERTY.~~

[9–4A–01.] ~~9–4A–16.~~ 9–4A–04.

(a) An owner of residential rental property that is served by a private [water
supply] well shall:

(1) Provide for water quality testing every 3 years;

(2) Disclose to a tenant the results of the water quality testing; and

(3) Notify a tenant:

(i) After any water quality test required under item (1) of this
subsection is complete; and

(ii) Of the most recent water quality test when they sign a lease.

(b) (1) The requirements of this subsection apply when a private [water
supply] well is contaminated by a substance that exceeds:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) The maximum contaminant level for that substance that is set
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for drinking water quality; or

(ii) A harmful level for that substance, as determined by the
Department.

(2) When a water quality test reveals a private [water supply] well is
contaminated, the owner of a residential rental property that is served by the well shall:

(i) Notify the Department and the local health department about
the contamination;

(ii) Provide an approved potable water supply until the
contamination is permanently remediated; and

(iii) Within 60 days of the date on which the owner knew of the
contamination, resolve the issue, including by:

1. Providing an approved potable water supply on an ongoing
basis;

2. Permanently remediating the contamination; or

3. Providing the tenant with the option to terminate the
lease.

(c) (1) A person who violates a provision of this section is subject to a civil
penalty not exceeding $1,000.

(2) A local health department may:

(i) Enforce this section; and

(ii) Collect the civil penalty provided under paragraph (1) of this
subsection.

(d) The Department shall adopt regulations to establish minimum criteria for
water quality testing required under this section.

Article – Real Property

10–713.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL” AND “WATER
QUALITY TESTING” HAVE THE MEANINGS STATED IN § 9–4A–01 OF THE
ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

(B) (1) A CONTRACT FOR THE SALE OF REAL PROPERTY ON WHICH A
PRIVATE OR DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY WELL IS LOCATED SHALL INCLUDE A
PROVISION REQUIRING, AS A CONDITION OF THE SALE, THAT THE PURCHASER
ENSURE THAT WATER QUALITY TESTING OF THE WELL BE CONDUCTED.

(2) (I) SETTLEMENT ON THE CONTRACT FOR THE SALE OF THE
REAL PROPERTY MAY NOT OCCUR UNTIL THE VENDOR AND THE PURCHASER HAVE
EACH RECEIVED AND REVIEWED THE RESULTS OF THE WATER QUALITY TESTING
CONDUCTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) AT SETTLEMENT ON THE CONTRACT FOR THE SALE OF THE
REAL PROPERTY, THE VENDOR AND THE PURCHASER SHALL EACH CERTIFY IN
WRITING THAT THEY HAVE RECEIVED AND REVIEWED THE RESULTS OF THE WATER
QUALITY TESTING.

(3) FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE RESULTS OF THE
WATER QUALITY TESTING REMAIN VALID FOR 3 YEARS.

(4) A PURCHASER MAY WAIVE IN WRITING THE WATER QUALITY
TESTING REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A STATE–CERTIFIED LABORATORY
THAT CONDUCTS WATER QUALITY TESTING FOR THE PURPOSE OF COMPLYING WITH
THIS SECTION.

(2) A STATE–CERTIFIED LABORATORY SHALL PROVIDE THE RESULTS
OF A WATER QUALITY TEST ON A STANDARDIZED REPORTING FORM, AS REQUIRED
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, THAT INCLUDES:

(I) A A REPORT ON ANY SUBSTANCE THAT EXCEEDS:

1. (I) THE MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL FOR THAT
SUBSTANCE; OR

2. (II) A HARMFUL LEVEL FOR THAT SUBSTANCE, AS
DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT; AND

(II) INFORMATION ON THE PRIVATE WELL SAFETY FUND
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–4A–05 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE, INCLUDING THE
WEBSITE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT ON WHICH INFORMATION ON
THE FUND IS POSTED.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 587 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) A STATE–CERTIFIED LABORATORY MAY PROVIDE THE RESULTS
OF WATER QUALITY TESTING ONLY TO:

(I) 1. THE VENDOR AND PURCHASER OF REAL PROPERTY
FOR WHICH THE WATER QUALITY TESTING WAS CONDUCTED; AND

2. ANY PERSON AUTHORIZED BY THE VENDOR OR
PURCHASER;

(II) THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN ACCORDANCE
WITH PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(III) ANY PERSON DESIGNATED BY A COURT ORDER.

(4) WITHIN 5 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER COMPLETION OF WATER
QUALITY TESTING, A STATE–CERTIFIED LABORATORY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT THE RESULTS OF WATER QUALITY TESTING
AND INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

(I) A STATEMENT THAT THE WATER QUALITY TESTING IS FOR
THE PURPOSE OF COMPLYING WITH THIS SECTION;

(II) THE LOCATION OF THE REAL PROPERTY, DESCRIBED BY
BLOCK AND LOT NUMBER, STREET ADDRESS, COUNTY, AND, IF APPLICABLE,
MUNICIPALITY;

(III) THE NAME AND MAILING ADDRESS OF THE PERSON THAT
REQUESTED THE WATER QUALITY TESTING;

(IV) THE NAME OF THE EMPLOYEE OR AN AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LABORATORY WHO COLLECTED THE WELL WATER
SAMPLE;

(V) THE DATE AND TIME THAT THE WELL WATER SAMPLE WAS
COLLECTED AND THE SPECIFIC POINT OF COLLECTION;

(VI) THE DATE AND TIME THE WELL WATER SAMPLE WAS
ANALYZED BY THE LABORATORY;

(VII) WHETHER THE WELL WATER SAMPLE IS RAW WATER OR
FINISHED WATER;

(VIII) THE WELL TAG NUMBER, IF KNOWN; AND

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 587

(IX) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Department of the
Environment shall:

(1) conduct a study on long–term funding options for the detailed
monitoring and analysis of groundwater resources in the State;

(2) on or before December 1, 2025, submit a report of its findings and
recommendations for long–term funding options under paragraph (1) of this section to the
Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General
Assembly; and

(3) assist in identifying a funding source for a private well grant fund.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15