START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 78 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 78 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Schools - Anaphylactic Food Allergies - Guidelines 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) to jointly update, by August 1, 2023, the Maryland State 
School Health Services guidelines to reduce the risk of exposure to anaphylactic causative 
agents (specifically, major food allergens) in classrooms and common areas. Each local 
board of education must make a good faith effort to adopt and implement the updated 
guidelines before the 2023-2024 school year but must do so before the 2024-2025 school 
year. Each public school must develop a system to disclose, within a reasonable time before 
service, the foods served in the school and the major food allergens contained in them. The 
principal of a public school that has a child attending with an anaphylactic allergy must 
implement, as necessary, the strategies developed in accordance with the Maryland State 
School Health Service guidelines and monitor and implement the guidelines ultimately 
adopted and implemented by the local board. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE and MDH can update the guidelines with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Major food allergen” means milk, eggs, fish, crustacean shellfish, tree 
nuts, wheat, peanuts, soybeans, and sesame. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 78/ Page 2 
At a minimum, the updated guidelines as well as those established by each local board of 
education must include certain specified elements, including an emphasis on 
communication and collaboration among students, staff, and parents; designation of 
food-free areas in the school and of tables in the cafeteria that are free of major food 
allergens; allergen-related guidelines for school-provided transportation, participation in 
school events, and functions held on school grounds; and strategies to reduce bullying and 
harassment of students with anaphylactic allergies. Each local board must publish the 
guidelines on its website and by any other method determined appropriate by the board.  
 
Each public school must develop a system to disclose, within a reasonable time in advance 
of service, the foods served in the school and any major food allergens contained in the 
food. A disclosure may be posted on the Internet, communicated electronically, or 
communicated via physical messages sent to the school community. 
 
Before January 1, 2026, a public school may not be required to dispose of a food product 
made or purchased before January 1, 2023, that was labeled in accordance with federal law 
before the effective date of the requirement that sesame be listed on the food product label 
under the federal Food Allergy Safety, Treatment, Education, and Research Act of 2021. 
If a public school is using a food product that was made or purchased before 
January 1, 2023, the school must disclose that the food may contain sesame.  
 
Current Law:  A principal of a public school in which a student has an anaphylactic 
allergy must take steps, in consultation with a school health professional, to reduce the 
child’s risk of exposure to anaphylactic causative agents and to establish procedures for 
self-administration of medication for anaphylaxis. A school may revoke a child’s authority 
to self-administer medication if the child misuses the medication. Current law limits the 
liability of school staff who respond in good faith with respect to treatment of students 
having anaphylactic allergic reactions. 
 
In consultation with a school health professional, a school principal must monitor the 
strategies developed in accordance with the Maryland State School Health Service 
guidelines to reduce the risk of exposure to anaphylactic causative agents in classrooms 
and common areas. A school principal must also designate a peanut- and tree-nut-free table 
in the cafeteria.  
 
MSDE and MDH are jointly responsible for developing public standards and guidelines 
for school health programs. Pursuant to that statutory authority, they have issued guidelines 
titled Management of Students at Risk for Anaphylaxis Reaction. The guidelines contain 
recommendations for minimum standards of care and current best practices for students 
with anaphylactic allergies. Last revised in 2009, MSDE advises that the department is 
presently collaborating with MDH to review and update the guidelines.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 78/ Page 3 
The 2009 guidelines note that school nurses should develop an emergency plan for all 
students with a diagnosis of anaphylaxis or at risk for anaphylaxis (including those with 
food allergies). The nurse must communicate the plan with parents/guardians and 
appropriate school staff. Part of this communication should be to the school food service 
manager in relation to students with food allergies, diagnosis of anaphylaxis, or health 
conditions that place them at risk from anaphylactic causative foods. The emergency plan 
should include, identify, and address possible allergen exposure in classrooms and 
cafeterias. The guidelines also indicate that school nurses should assess the special health 
needs of students with a diagnosis of or at risk for anaphylaxis. Part of this assessment 
should include an appraisal of a student’s food allergy history. Students who obtain school 
meals as part of any U.S. Department of Agriculture school meal program are entitled to 
meal modifications because of their special health needs.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that the agency, in conjunction with MDH, has 
drafted updated Maryland State School Health Services guidelines for anaphylaxis and that 
the document is currently under review for legal sufficiency. Therefore, MSDE and MDH 
can publish the updated guidelines by August 1, 2023, with existing resources. MDH’s 
Office of Food Protection oversees the regulation of food service facilities, including 
cafeterias, which is delegated to local health departments (LHDs) for inspections, 
licensing, and enforcement. MDH advises that the requirements of the bill are beyond the 
scope of the regulations for food service facilities and would not be enforced by MDH or 
LHD staff.   
 
Local Expenditures:  Local boards of education can adopt and implement the required 
guidelines before the 2024-2025 school year with existing resources. Local boards can also 
make a good faith effort to implement the updated guidelines before the  
2023-2024 school year with existing resources, although the August 1, 2023 date for the 
updated guidelines to be available to them may make the process operationally difficult. 
Similarly, public schools can develop systems to disclose the foods served in the school 
and major food allergens contained in the food with existing resources. Some school 
systems already implement these measures.  
 
Some school nurses are employed by LHDs, not local boards of education. To the extent 
that school nurses employed by LHDs must alter existing practices surrounding the 
creation of emergency plans and allergy assessments related to food allergens, there may 
be an operational impact, but school nurses can likely accommodate any changes with 
existing resources.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 78/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 95 and HB 154 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 120 (Senator Lam) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4