START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 30 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 30 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - On-Site Wastewater Services - Board, Fees, and Penalties 
 
 
This emergency bill (1) redirects any administrative penalty collected by the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) for a violation of any provision of § 9-217.2 of the 
Environment Article (which establishes licensing requirements for individuals inspecting 
on-site sewage disposal systems) from the Septics Account of the Bay Restoration Fund 
(BRF) to the Maryland Clean Water Fund and (2) alters the composition of the State Board 
of On-Site Wastewater Professionals. The bill also clarifies (1) that the licensing 
requirements under § 9-217.2 of the Environment Article apply only to those individuals 
conducting an inspection for the purpose of property transfer and (2) the distribution of 
fees into the On-Site Wastewater Professionals Fund. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall, the bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. The 
bill has no net impact on special fund revenues but results in a minimal shift in special fund 
administrative penalty revenue from the BRF to the Maryland Clean Water Fund in 
FY 2023, 2024, and 2025. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes do not have a direct, material impact on local finances or 
operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 30/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Septic System Installers and Inspectors 
 
Chapters 444 and 445 of 2021 require that any person (unless exempted) who engages in 
the business of inspecting a septic system obtain an on-site wastewater property transfer 
inspection license issued by MDE. The Acts required MDE to adopt regulations that 
establish license eligibility criteria, minimum training standards, license terms, and fees for 
license applications and renewals, as specified. MDE promulgated the required regulations 
in 2022 as emergency regulations. The emergency regulations took effect August 24, 2022, 
and expire February 20, 2023. 
 
An individual who violates a provision of Chapters 444 and 445 or any regulation adopted 
pursuant to those Acts is subject to an administrative penalty of up to $10,000. Each on-site 
sewage disposal system that an individual knowingly inspects without a valid on-site 
wastewater property transfer inspection license constitutes a separate violation. Any 
administrative penalty collected by MDE pursuant to these provisions must be paid into 
the Septics Account of the BRF. 
 
Chapter 419 of 2022 and the On-Site Wastewater Professionals Fund 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 419 of 2022, effective June 30, 2025, the provisions described above 
regarding septic system installers and inspectors are repealed. Chapter 419 established 
alternate provisions that (1) require an individual to hold a valid on-site wastewater 
property transfer license issued by MDE in order to engage in the business of inspecting 
an on-site sewage disposal system; (2) establish related application procedures; 
(3) establish an administrative penalty for violations; and (4) require MDE to adopt 
implementing regulations in consultation with the State Board of On-Site Wastewater 
Professionals by July 1, 2025. 
 
Chapter 419 also established the On-Site Wastewater Professionals Fund, which supports 
the board’s operations and is funded primarily by fees, penalties, and fines collected 
pursuant to Chapter 419. 
 
Maryland Clean Water Fund 
 
The Maryland Clean Water Fund consists of all application fees, permit fees, renewal fees, 
funds, and civil and administrative penalties collected under specified water pollution 
control laws. MDE must use the Maryland Clean Water Fund for activities related to a 
number of specified purposes that, broadly speaking, address water quality and wastewater 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 30/ Page 3 
treatment. In determining the use of money from the fund, priority must be given to 
activities relating to the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. 
 
Bay Restoration Fund 
 
Chapter 428 of 2004 established the BRF. The primary purpose of the fund is to support 
upgrades to Maryland’s 67 major publicly owned wastewater treatment plants with 
enhanced nutrient removal technology; funds are also used for septic system upgrade 
grants, among other things, and the Cover Crop Program within the Maryland Department 
of Agriculture. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 7 (Senator West) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3