START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 581

Chapter 581

(House Bill 6)

AN ACT concerning

Department of General Services – Energy–Conserving Standards
(Maryland Sustainable Buildings Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of General Services to establish and
periodically update standards for State buildings to conserve energy and minimize
adverse impacts on birds; requiring the Maryland Green Building Council to include
the standards in ~~any~~ certain requirements that the Council establishes for
~~participation~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~higher~~ ~~performance~~ ~~building~~ ~~program~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State;~~ the Maryland
High Performance Green Building Program; defining “State building”; and generally
relating to the construction, alteration, or acquisition of State buildings.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 4–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 4–410.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, The amount of glass used in new building construction is increasing
dramatically in Maryland and worldwide; and

WHEREAS, The increase in the use of glass in buildings threatens to undo energy
conservation efforts, cost the State money, and contribute to climate change and
biodiversity loss; and

WHEREAS, Adopting building standards to protect birds will reduce energy
consumption, making State buildings more sustainable and saving taxpayers money; now,
therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 581 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Department” means the Department of General Services.

(c) “Secretary” means the Secretary of General Services.

4–410.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ACQUIRED” DOES NOT INCLUDE A BUILDING LEASED BY THE
STATE.

(3) “STATE BUILDING” MEANS:

(1) (I) A BUILDING ACQUIRED THROUGH ANY MEANS BY THE
STATE FOR USE BY A STATE AGENCY OR DEPARTMENT;

(2) (II) A BUILDING CONSTRUCTED OR RENOVATED BY OR FOR THE
STATE FOR OCCUPANCY BY A STATE AGENCY OR DEPARTMENT; OR

(3) (III) A BUILDING ACQUIRED, CONSTRUCTED, OR RENOVATED
FOR WHICH MORE THAN 50% OF THE MONEY FOR THE ACQUISITION,
CONSTRUCTION, OR RENOVATION CAME FROM STATE FUNDS.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(1) A PUBLIC WORK CONTRACT OF LESS THAN $500,000;

(2) A PUBLIC WORK CONTRACT FOR WHICH 50% OR LESS OF THE
FUNDS USED FOR THE PROJECT ARE STATE FUNDS; OR

(3) A PROJECT FOR WHICH FUNDING IS PROVIDED IN THE CAPITAL
BUDGET AS A GRANT TO A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION; OR

(4) A PUBLIC SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION PROJECT.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH STANDARDS FOR STATE BUILDINGS TO
CONSERVE ENERGY AND MINIMIZE ADVERSE IMPACTS ON BIRDS THAT ARE
CONSISTENT WITH THE U.S. GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL COUNCIL’S LEED

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 581

INNOVATION CREDIT 55 FOR REDUCING BIRD COLLISIONS AND THE AMERICAN
BIRD CONSERVANCY BIRD–FRIENDLY DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL UPDATE THE STANDARDS DEVELOPED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION EVERY 5 YEARS.

(3) THE STANDARDS DEVELOPED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
SPECIFY THAT, EXCEPT WHERE FULL OPERATION OF BUILDING LIGHTING IS
DOCUMENTED AS NECESSARY, INCLUDING FOR PUBLIC SAFETY OR OTHER
PURPOSES, INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING SHALL BE APPROPRIATELY
SHIELDED AND MINIMIZED FROM MIDNIGHT TO DAWN EACH DAY:

(I) FROM MARCH 1 THROUGH MAY 31, BOTH INCLUSIVE; AND

(II) FROM AUGUST 1 THROUGH OCTOBER 31, BOTH INCLUSIVE.

(4) THE STANDARDS ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY NOT INCLUDE A REQUIREMENT FOR BIRD COLLISION
MONITORING.

(5) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER THE PHYSICAL HEALTH AND
MENTAL HEALTH OF BUILDING OCCUPANTS WHEN DEVELOPING OR UPDATING
STANDARDS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) EACH STATE BUILDING CONSTRUCTED, SUBSTANTIALLY ALTERED, OR
ACQUIRED BY THE STATE SHALL MEET, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND WITHIN
BUDGETARY CONSTRAINTS AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT, THE STANDARDS
ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REDUCE THE LIGHTING OF EXISTING STATE
BUILDINGS, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND WITHIN BUDGETARY CONSTRAINTS
AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT:

(1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C)(3) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(2) BY USING AUTOMATIC CONTROL TECHNOLOGIES, WHICH MAY
INCLUDE TIMERS, PHOTOSENSORS, INFRARED DETECTORS, AND MOTION
DETECTORS.

(F) (1) THE SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
MARYLAND GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL SHALL INCLUDE THE STANDARDS
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION IN ANY REQUIREMENTS THAT THE COUNCIL
ESTABLISHES FOR ~~PARTICIPATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~HIGHER~~ ~~PERFORMANCE~~ ~~BUILDING~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 581 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

PROGRAM IN THE STATE THE MARYLAND HIGH PERFORMANCE GREEN BUILDING
PROGRAM.

(2) STANDARDS INCLUDED IN THE MARYLAND HIGH PERFORMANCE
GREEN BUILDING PROGRAM UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL APPLY ONLY TO
STATE BUILDINGS AS DEFINED IN THIS SECTION.

(G) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4