START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 16 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 16 
(Delegate J. Lewis) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Primary and Secondary Education – Title IX – Notice (Hear Our Voices Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each public school to inform students, faculty, staff, and parents regarding 
(1) who serves as the Title IX coordinator for the school; (2) the process in place for filing 
a sexual misconduct complaint; and (3) the support measures that are in place for an 
individual who files a sexual misconduct complaint and how to access the support 
measures. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can inform students, faculty, staff, and parents about 
specified information using existing resources. It is assumed that the number of sexual 
misconduct complaints are not materially impacted; thus, related expenditures are not 
materially impacted. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Title IX 
 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex 
in any federally funded education program or activity. The principal objective of Title IX 
is to avoid the use of federal money to support sex discrimination in education programs 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 16/ Page 2 
and to provide individual citizens with effective protection against those practices. As 
entities that provide education and receive federal funds, local school systems must follow 
Title IX requirements. Some key issue areas in which federal fund recipients have Title IX 
obligations are recruitment, admissions, and counseling; financial assistance; athletics; 
sex-based harassment; treatment of pregnant and parenting students; discipline; 
single-sex education; and employment. The U.S. Department of Education’s (ED) Office 
for Civil Rights (OCR) enforces Title IX for recipients that receive funds from ED. 
 
Title IX Regulations 
 
In June 2022, ED released for public comment proposed amendments to Title IX’s 
implementing regulations. These proposed regulations are intended to replace regulations 
that were proposed in November 2018 and became effective on August 14, 2020. The 
public had 60 days to submit comments to ED regarding the proposed regulations following 
their publication in the federal register. ED must summarize and respond to the comments 
received and issue the resulting final regulations, which will include an effective date. Until 
the final regulations are issued, which may be months, the 2020 regulations remain in 
effect. 
 
According to ED, in part, the proposed regulations (1) clearly protect students and 
employees from all forms of sex discrimination including discrimination based on sexual 
orientation and gender identity; (2) restore full protection from sex-based harassment; 
(3) require schools to take prompt and effective action to end any sex discrimination in 
their education programs or activities – and to prevent its recurrence and remedy its effects; 
(4) require schools to respond promptly to all complaints of sex discrimination with a fair 
and reliable process that includes trained, unbiased decision makers to evaluate all 
permissible evidence; (5) require schools to provide supportive measures to students and 
employees affected by conduct that may constitute sex discrimination, including students 
who have brought complaints or been accused of sex-based harassment; and (6) ensure that 
schools share their nondiscrimination policies with all students, employees, and other 
participants in their education programs or activities. 
 
Under the current federal regulations, legal experts report, a school system may dismiss 
sexual harassment, abuse, or assault complaints if the alleged perpetrator quits before or 
during an investigation, thus, allowing an alleged sex offender to move to another district 
without a paper trail. However, when the regulations were introduced, ED advised it would 
enforce the provisions on prohibition on aiding and abetting sexual abuse in the 2015 
federal Every Student Succeeds Act, which prevent assisting an individual in obtaining a 
new job, apart from the routine transmission of files, if the local school system knows or 
has probable cause to believe that the individual engaged in sexual misconduct regarding 
a minor or student. The current regulations also made other changes to the process, 
including increasing reporting requirements and changing the hearing process. Live 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 16/ Page 3 
hearings between student victims and the accused are optional under the current 
regulations. 
 
Title IX Coordinator 
 
Under Title IX, each recipient must designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts 
to comply with and carry out its responsibilities, including any investigation of any 
complaint alleging its noncompliance or alleging any prohibited actions. The recipient 
must notify all of its students and employees of the name, office address, and telephone 
number of the employee or employees appointed. Further, a recipient must adopt and 
publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and 
employee complaints alleging any action that would be prohibited under Title IX. 
 
Office of Civil Rights – Title IX (and Other) Complaints 
 
Any individual who believes that an education institution that receives federal financial 
assistance has discriminated against someone on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
sex, disability, or age may file a complaint with OCR. The person or organization filing 
the complaint does not have to be a victim of the alleged discrimination. A complaint must 
be filed within 180 days of the alleged discrimination. OCR does not handle cases that are 
being addressed by another agency or within a school’s formal grievance procedure if OCR 
anticipates the agency or school will provide a comparable resolution process. Once that 
complaint process is complete, an individual has 60 days to file a complaint with OCR. 
OCR’s first step will be to determine whether to defer to the result reached in the other 
process. 
 
An OCR discrimination complaint may be filed by contacting the local OCR enforcement 
office to obtain a form, or the online complaint form may be used. In addition, an individual 
may write an email or a letter explaining the complaint to the OCR enforcement office. 
 
Selected Definitions 
 
“Child sexual abuse,” as defined in § 6-113.1 of the Education Article, means an act 
involving a minor or student by an adult that constitutes a sexual offense under the laws of 
the State or any sexual contact between an adult and a minor. 
 
“Direct contact with minors” as defined in § 6-113.2 means the possibility of care, 
supervision, guidance, or control of a minor or routine interaction with a minor. 
 
“Sexual misconduct,” as defined in § 6-113.1 of the Education Article, is an act by an adult, 
including oral, nonverbal, written, or electronic communication, or a physical activity 
directed toward or with a minor that is designed to promote a romantic or sexual 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 16/ Page 4 
relationship with the minor, including (1) sexual or romantic invitations; (2) dating or 
soliciting dates; (3) engaging in sexualized or romantic dialogue; (4) making sexually 
suggestive comments; (5) grooming behaviors; (6) self-disclosure or physical exposure of 
a sexual, romantic, or erotic nature; and (7) a sexual, indecent, romantic, or erotic contact 
with the minor. 
 
Annual Training 
 
A local board of education or nonpublic school that receives State funds must require each 
employee to receive instruction annually on the prevention, identification, and reporting of 
child sexual abuse. The instruction must include comprehensive training and information 
to help employees as specified, including recognizing sexual misconduct in adults and 
recognizing and appropriately responding to sexual inappropriate, coercive, or abusive 
behaviors among minors. 
 
Further, each local board of education must establish and implement policies that support 
the prevention of child sexual abuse through ongoing training of staff regarding specified 
topics. 
Mandatory Reporters 
 
Health care practitioners, police officers, educators, and human service workers who are 
acting in a professional capacity, and who have reason to believe that a child has been 
subjected to abuse or neglect, must notify the local department of social services or the 
appropriate law enforcement agency. An “educator or human service worker” means any 
professional employee of any correctional, public, parochial, or private educational, health, 
juvenile service, social or social service agency, institution, or licensed facility. Such 
workers include any teacher, counselor, social worker, caseworker, and parole or probation 
officer. If the worker is acting as a staff member of a hospital, public health agency, 
child care institution, juvenile detention center, school, or similar institution, then the 
individual must notify the head of the institution or the designee. A “health practitioner” 
does not include an emergency medical dispatcher. 
 
A worker who notifies the appropriate authorities must make an oral report by telephone 
or direct communication as soon as possible to the local department or the appropriate law 
enforcement agency if the worker has reason to believe the child has been subjected to 
abuse or neglect. A written report to the local department is required not later than 48 hours 
after the contact, examination, or treatment that caused the worker to believe that the child 
had been subjected to abuse or neglect. A copy of the written report must be provided to 
the local State’s Attorney. An agency that receives an oral report of suspected abuse or 
neglect must immediately notify the other agency. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 16/ Page 5 
As far as reasonably possible, a worker who makes a report must include the name, age, 
and home address of the child; the name and home address of the child’s parent or other 
person responsible for the child’s care; the whereabouts of the child; and the nature and 
extent of the child abuse or neglect. The report must include any available evidence about 
previous instances of abuse or neglect, any information that would help to determine the 
cause of the suspected abuse or neglect, and the identity of any person responsible for the 
abuse or neglect. 
 
In general, a person other than a health care practitioner, police officer, educator, or human 
service worker who has reason to believe that a child has been subjected to abuse or neglect 
must notify the local department of social services or the appropriate law enforcement 
agency. Such notification may be oral or in writing and must, to the extent possible, include 
the same information as specified above. Attorneys and clergy are generally exempt from 
reporting if they become aware of suspected abuse or neglect through privileged 
communications, as specified in statute. 
 
Individuals who in good faith make or participate in making a report of abuse or neglect or 
participate in an investigation or resulting judicial proceeding are immune from civil 
liability or criminal penalties. 
 
State law does not criminalize the failure of a worker to report suspected abuse or neglect. 
The licensing boards for some workers who are mandated to report child abuse and neglect 
(nurses, doctors, and social workers are examples) are authorized to discipline workers for 
failing to report. In accordance with Chapters 374 and 375 of 2016, if an agency is 
participating in a child abuse or neglect investigation and has substantial grounds to believe 
that a worker has knowingly failed to make a required report of suspected abuse or neglect, 
it must file a complaint with the worker’s licensing board, law enforcement agency, county 
board of education, or other agency, institution, or licensed facility, as appropriate, at which 
the worker is employed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 887 and HB 472 of 2022 and HB 1536 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland School for the Deaf; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Frederick 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 16/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2023 
Third Reader - February 17, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6