START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 57 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 57 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax – Tax Sales – Requirement to Sell 
 
 
This bill repeals limitations on the authority of local governments to set the time by which 
a property with taxes in arrears must be sold by the tax collector. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues may be delayed, beginning in FY 2024, 
as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may be delayed, beginning in FY 2024, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Subject to certain exceptions, State law requires a tax 
collector to sell, through the tax sale process established in statute, all property in the 
county on which tax is unpaid, at the time required by local law, but in no case, except in 
Baltimore City, later than two years from the date the tax is in arrears. In Calvert County, 
the collector must advertise and sell real property immediately after the tax becomes 
delinquent for one year. 
 
The bill repeals the time limit requirements in existing statute and instead only requires 
that the properties must be sold at the time required by local law. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 57/ Page 2 
State law includes various circumstances in which a property may or is required to be 
withheld from sale. Those circumstances include, among others:   
 
 
A tax collector is permitted to withhold from sale any property, when the total taxes 
owed on a property, including interest and penalties, amount to less than $250 in 
any one year. 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality is permitted to withhold from sale 
owner-occupied residential property that meets objective criteria established by the 
governing body of the county or municipality. 
 
A tax collector is permitted to withhold from sale any residential property, when the 
total taxes owed on the property, including interest and penalties, amount to less 
than $750. 
 
The tax collector, in Baltimore City, is required to withhold from sale 
owner-occupied residential property when the total taxes on the property, including 
interest and penalties, amount to less than $750. Additionally, in Baltimore City, the 
tax collector is required to withhold from sale a residential property or a property 
owned by a religious group or organization that is actually and exclusively used for 
public religious worship or a parsonage or convent if the taxes consist only of a lien 
for unpaid water and sewer charges. 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality may withhold from sale a 
residential property or a property owned by a nonprofit organization if the property 
is enrolled in a specified payment program. 
 
A tax collector is required to withhold from sale the dwelling of a homeowner who 
is enrolled in the Homeowner Protection Program administered by the State Tax 
Sale Ombudsman. 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality may withhold from sale a dwelling 
owned by a homeowner who is low income, at least 65 years old, or disabled if the 
homeowner meets eligibility criteria established by the county or municipality. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues (State property tax revenues) and local 
government revenues may be delayed, beginning in fiscal 2024, to the extent any local 
governments allow for properties to have taxes in arrears for longer periods of time before 
being sold at a tax sale, as a result of the bill’s elimination of the requirement that a property 
be sold within two years (or one year, in Calvert County) after taxes are in arrears. The 
extent of any delay cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s general obligation bonds are paid from the ABF. 
Revenue sources for the fund include State property taxes; premium from bond sales; and 
repayments from certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 57/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent any counties allow for properties to have taxes in 
arrears for longer periods of time before being sold at a tax sale, as a result of the bill, small 
businesses whose property may otherwise be sold at a tax sale may benefit from extended 
time to pay the taxes in arrears. Small businesses that would otherwise generate revenue 
from sales of properties (at tax sales) that are delayed or no longer occur (because taxes in 
arrears are paid within the extended time period) may be meaningfully affected. 
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman webpage on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. The office was established in 2020 pursuant 
to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Garrett, and Howard 
counties; City of Havre de Grace; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - May 15, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3