START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 728

Chapter 728

(House Bill 4)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Law – Sexual Crimes – Repeal of Spousal Defense

FOR the purpose of repealing a certain prohibition on prosecuting a person for rape or a
certain sexual offense against a victim who was the person’s legal spouse at the time
of the alleged rape or sexual offense; and generally relating to sexual crimes.

BY repealing
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–318
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

[3–318.

(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a person may not
be prosecuted under § 3–303, § 3–304, § 3–307, or § 3–308 of this subtitle for a crime against
a victim who was the person’s legal spouse at the time of the alleged rape or sexual offense.

(b) A person may be prosecuted under § 3–303(a), § 3–304(a)(1), or § 3–307(a)(1)
of this subtitle for a crime against the person’s legal spouse if:

(1) at the time of the alleged crime the person and the person’s legal spouse
have lived apart, without cohabitation and without interruption:

(i) under a written separation agreement executed by the person
and the spouse; or

(ii) for at least 3 months immediately before the alleged rape or
sexual offense; or

(2) the person in committing the crime uses force or threat of force and the
act is without the consent of the spouse.

(c) A person may be prosecuted under § 3–303, § 3–304, § 3–307, or § 3–308 of
this subtitle for a crime against the person’s legal spouse if at the time of the alleged crime
the person and the spouse live apart, without cohabitation and without interruption, under
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 728 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

a decree of limited divorce.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2