START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 98 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 98 
(Delegate Arentz) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Condominiums - Mandatory Insurance Coverage - Alterations 
 
  
This bill specifies that mandatory property insurance for condominiums, as required by 
existing provisions, must generally cover (1) the common elements and units (for attached 
or multifamily dwelling units only) and (2) the common elements only (for detached units). 
The bill makes other alterations to requirements regarding mandatory insurance for 
condominiums, including further specifying provisions that are applicable only to attached 
or multifamily dwelling units. Furthermore, the bill also requires owners of residential, 
detached condominium units to carry homeowners insurance coverage on the entirety of 
the unit. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State government operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, no later than the first conveyance of a 
condominium unit to a person other than the developer, the council of unit owners must 
maintain to the extent reasonably available:   
 
 
property insurance on the common elements and units, exclusive of improvements 
and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the developer, in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 98/ Page 2 
amounts determined by the council of unit owners but not less than any amount 
specified in the declaration or bylaws; and 
 
comprehensive general liability insurance, including medical payments insurance, 
in an amount determined by the council of unit owners but not less than any amount 
specified in the condominium’s declaration or bylaws. 
 
The bill specifies that mandatory property insurance coverage for detached units is only 
required to insure against the common elements. Under current law, the mandatory 
insurance policies must provide that, for property and casualty losses to the common 
elements and units, as specified, each unit owner is an insured person under the policy with 
respect to liability arising out of ownership of an undivided interest in the common 
elements or membership in the council of unit owners. The bill specifies that these 
provisions are subject to the applicable coverage specified above. The bill also requires an 
owner of a residential, detached unit to carry homeowners insurance coverage on the 
entirety of the unit. 
 
Under current law, any loss covered by the property policy must be adjusted with the 
council of unit owners, but the insurance proceeds for that loss must be payable to any 
insurance trustee designated for that purpose, or otherwise to the council of unit owners, 
and not any mortgagee. The bill specifies that subject to other provisions, the proceeds 
from the policy must be disbursed first for the repair or restoration of the damaged common 
elements and, for condominiums with attached or multifamily units that must maintain a 
property insurance policy on the units, the damaged units. In addition, the bill specifies 
that unit owners and lien holders are not entitled to receive payment of any portion of the 
proceeds unless there is a surplus of proceeds after the common elements and, for 
condominiums with attached or multifamily units that must maintain a property insurance 
policy on the units, the units have been completely repaired or restored. 
 
Under current law, if any portion of the common elements and the units (generally 
exclusive of improvements/betterments installed in the units by owners) is damaged or 
destroyed, it must promptly be repaired or replaced by the council of unit owners unless 
(1) the condominium is terminated; (2) repair or replacement would be illegal under any 
State or local health or safety statute or ordinance; or (3) 80% of the unit owners, including 
every owner of a unit or assigned limited common element, which will not be rebuilt, vote 
not to rebuild. The bill specifies that these requirements are subject to the applicable 
coverage provisions, as stated above. 
 
Generally, the cost of repair or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds and reserves 
is a common expense. A property insurance deductible is not a cost of repair or replacement 
in excess of insurance proceeds. If the cause of any damage originates from the common 
elements, the council of unit owners’ property insurance deductible is a common expense. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 98/ Page 3 
For more information on condominiums, a type of common ownership community, see the 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation was introduced within the last three years. See 
HB 553 of 2022 and HB 1305 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 403 (Senator Hershey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 98/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; rather, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for unpaid 
fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Since registration of the various COCs is not required statewide, the exact number of COCs 
in Maryland is unknown. However, public offering statements for condominium regimes 
are required by law to be registered with the Secretary of State (SOS). SOS registration 
records show that, as of December 2022, 2,788 condominium regimes have been registered 
with the State. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation, which maintains 
assessment records based on class of property, reports that there are more than 
227,000 condominium units in the State as of July 2022. The Foundation for Community 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 98/ Page 5 
Association Research estimated that there were 6,910 community associations with an 
estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2021, the most recent 
information available. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the education and 
training needs of COC boards and prospective buyers, availability of alternative dispute 
resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of assessments, and 
resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held five public hearings, and 
submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings and recommendations 
have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces of legislation intended 
to improve the operation of COCs. For example, legislation enacted from 2007 through 
2022: 
 
 
authorized a group of three or more unit or lot owners in a condominium or HOA 
to petition a circuit court to appoint a receiver in specified situations frequently 
found in aging communities (Chapter 321 of 2007);  
 
gave the Consumer Protection Division within the Office of the Attorney General 
increased authority over violations of the Maryland Homeowners Association Act 
(Chapter 593 of 2007);  
 
eased restrictions on the ability of condominiums and HOAs to amend their 
governing documents (Chapters 144 and 145 of 2008 and Chapter 480 of 2017); 
 
strengthened the transition process from developer to the governing body of a 
condominium or HOA by allowing the governing body to terminate specified 
contracts and requiring the developer to provide specified documents (Chapters 95 
and 96 of 2009);  
 
required the governing body of a COC to purchase fidelity insurance or a fidelity bond 
covering various acts of malfeasance by COC officers, directors, and other specified 
employees and agents (Chapters 77 and 78 of 2009 and Chapter 615 of 2010); 
 
granted priority to a specified portion of a lien of a condominium or HOA over the 
claim of a holder of a first mortgage or first deed of trust in the event of a foreclosure 
on a unit or lot (Chapter 387 of 2011); 
 
limited the amount of damages for which the governing body of a condominium or 
HOA may foreclose on a lien against a unit owner or lot owner (Chapters 448 and 
449 of 2013); 
 
expanded the purposes for which a condominium’s board of directors may hold a 
closed meeting, similar to the law for an HOA, by allowing a meeting to be closed 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 98/ Page 6 
to consider terms or conditions of a business transaction in the negotiation stage if 
disclosure could adversely affect the economic interests of the council of unit 
owners (Chapter 110 of 2013);  
 
established meeting standards and standards for late charges for delinquent 
payments, eviction restrictions, an auditing process for books and records, and a 
dispute settlement mechanism for cooperatives under specified circumstances 
(Chapter 567 of 2014);  
 
altered the contents of a required disclosure for the resale of a condominium unit, 
authorized the assessment of specified fees by a condominium council of unit 
owners or an HOA for providing specified information, and required the 
Department of Housing and Community Development to adjust the maximum 
authorized fees every two years (Chapter 735 of 2016 and Chapter 817 of 2017);  
 
increased to $10,000 the maximum amount of the council of unit owners’ property 
insurance deductible for which a specific unit owner is responsible if the cause of 
any damage to or destruction of the common elements or units of a condominium 
originates from an event inside that owner’s unit (Chapters 56 and 57 of 2020); and 
 
established that specified COCs in the State must conduct a reserve study satisfying 
specified requirements every five years to determine the amount and necessity of 
reserves for anticipated capital replacements, repairs, and improvements. COCs 
must also adequately fund the recommended reserves, as specified (Chapter 138 
of 2020; Chapter 433 of 2021; and Chapter 664 of 2022).  
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 

END OF PAGE 6