START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 43 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 43 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Tax Sales - Payment of Balance After Foreclosure 
 
 
This bill requires each county to establish a process for a person entitled to any remaining 
balance of the purchase price of a property sold at a tax sale – over the amount required for 
the payment of taxes, interest, penalties, and costs of sale – to claim the balance. The 
process must be applied uniformly to all claims for balances within the county and may not 
require a court order, unless there is a dispute regarding payment of the balance. Within 
90 days of delivering a deed to a purchaser, the tax collector must notify the prior property 
owner of the amount of any remaining balance and the process established by the county 
by which the prior property owner may claim the balance. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Subject to limited exceptions, the tax collector must require the purchaser 
of a property at a tax sale to pay, not later than the day after the sale, the full amount of 
taxes due on the property including interest and penalties, expenses incurred in making the 
sale, and a specified high-bid premium, if any. The residue of the purchase price remains 
on credit. If the property is not redeemed by the property owner and the right of redemption 
of the property is later foreclosed, the collector may not execute or deliver a deed to any 
purchaser other than the governing body of a county until the balance of the purchase price 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 43/ Page 2 
has been paid in full, together with all taxes and interest and penalties on the taxes accruing 
after the date of sale. Any balance over the amount required for the payment of taxes, 
interest, penalties, and costs of sale must be paid by the collector to the person entitled to 
the balance or, where there is a dispute regarding payment of the balance, to a court of 
competent jurisdiction pending a court order to determine the proper distribution of the 
balance. 
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report, 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. The office was established in 2020 pursuant 
to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Cecil, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - May 15, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2