START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 72 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 72 
(Delegate Watson) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Business Regulation - Charitable Organizations 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “charitable contribution” to exclude an authorization for 
(or a discount on) the use of services or materials, equipment, or facilities, including those 
relating to advertising and broadcast airtime (including public service announcements). 
The bill further authorizes the Secretary of State (SOS) to accept certain documentation in 
place of an audit or review in connection with a charitable organization’s registration 
statement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent SOS receives additional requests for registration and reporting 
waivers, additional staff may be needed, as discussed below. Any such increase is likely 
temporary once initial requests for waivers are processed. Revenues are not materially 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes SOS to accept other documentation in place of the 
audit or review that is otherwise required as part of the registration process. Specifically, 
SOS may accept supporting documents indicating, and an affidavit attesting, that: 
 
 
the charitable organization (1) primarily solicits in-kind contributions; (2) receives 
specified donations of property that are intended to be redistributed to individuals 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 72/ Page 2 
residing in the State without charge; (3) does not employ a professional solicitor or 
fund-raising counsel; (4) used Generally Accepted Accounting Principles to 
determine the value of property received as charitable contributions during the 
immediately preceding fiscal year; (5) has cash receipts from charitable 
contributions not exceeding $300,000 and amounting to 20% or less of the 
charitable organization’s gross income during the immediately preceding fiscal year 
that are used for program services or management and general expenses, as specified 
under State regulations; (6) is current and up to date in all relevant registration and 
reporting requirements; (7) is in good standing with the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation (if applicable); and (8) has tax-exempt status under 
specified provisions of the Internal Revenue Code; 
 
the charitable contributions of property are directly related to the purposes for which 
the charitable organization was organized and will be used in conducting the 
charitable organization’s programs; and  
 
the governing body of the charitable organization (1) is composed of at least 
three independent and unrelated directors and (2) completed an onboarding and 
training program during the immediately preceding fiscal year, provided internally 
or externally, that covered specified topics. 
 
Current Law:  The Business Regulation Article defines a “charitable contribution” as a 
contribution made on a representation that it will be used for a charitable purpose. A 
charitable contribution includes the payment, transfer, or enforceable pledge of financial 
help, including money, credit, property, or services. 
 
However, a charitable contribution does not include:   
 
 
an unsolicited gift; 
 
a government grant or government money; 
 
membership assessments, dues, or fines; 
 
a payment for property sold (or services rendered) by a charitable organization – 
unless the property is sold or the services rendered in connection with a charitable 
solicitation; and 
 
a public safety contribution (i.e., a contribution made on a representation that it will 
be used for the purposes of a public safety organization). 
 
SOS registers and oversees charitable organizations in the State and maintains an online 
database of registered entities. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 72/ Page 3 
A charitable organization is a person that:   
 
 
is or holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, eleemosynary, humane, 
patriotic, philanthropic, or religious organization; and 
 
either (1) solicits or receives charitable contributions from the public or (2) is an 
ambulance, firefighting, fraternal, rescue, or police or other law enforcement 
organization when it solicits charitable contributions from the public. 
 
A charitable organization must register and receive a registration letter from SOS before it 
(1) solicits charitable contributions in the State; (2) has charitable contributions solicited 
on its behalf in the State; or (3) solicits charitable contributions outside the State if the 
organization is in the State. 
 
A registered charitable organization must submit an annual report to SOS, as specified. 
SOS may exempt an organization from registration and reporting requirements if the 
charitable organization (1) is organized under the laws of another state that has a statute 
similar to Maryland’s; (2) has been exempted from the submission of a registration 
statement by the other state; (3) has a principal place of business outside the State; and 
(4) gets its money principally from sources outside the State. 
 
Auditing Requirements:  In addition to other information and materials necessary to 
complete the registration statement, charitable organizations must submit an audit by a 
certified public accountant (CPA) if the gross income from contributions in the most recent 
fiscal year is at least $750,000, or a review by an independent CPA if the gross income 
from contributions from the last fiscal year is at least $300,000 but less than $750,000. SOS 
may accept other documentation in place of either the audit or the review but may also 
require an audit or review if the amount of gross income is less than $750,000. SOS retains 
the authority to require an audit or review under the bill. 
 
State Expenditures:  SOS advises that the bill may have an operational impact on the 
agency, as the bill’s exclusion of certain charitable contributions may result in an influx of 
requests from charitable organizations to submit alternative documentation instead of 
audits or reviews, and that it must review and make a determination on each request. 
Although this analysis assumes the effect of additional exclusions from the audit 
requirement is limited, if the bill results in a significant level of exclusions, SOS may 
require additional staff to manage an influx of requests. Although SOS anticipates that as 
many as 18,000 charities may submit requests to provide alternative documentation, it 
acknowledges that the exact number of charities that may ultimately request an exemption 
cannot be reliably determined at this time. Thus, a reliable estimate of the impact on SOS 
operations cannot be determined. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 72/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 254 (Senator Hester) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Secretary of State; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4