START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 744

Chapter 744

(House Bill 13)

AN ACT concerning

Hate Crimes – Civil Remedy

FOR the purpose of providing that a person who is the victim of an act that would constitute
a violation of certain hate crime laws may bring a civil action against a certain
person; and generally relating to the right to file a civil action for a hate crime.

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Law
Section 10–309
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

10–309.

(A) A PERSON WHO IS THE VICTIM OF AN ACT THAT WOULD CONSTITUTE A
VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE PERSON OR
PERSONS WHO COMMITTED THE ACT IN A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION.

(B) THE COURT MAY:

(1) ISSUE AN INJUNCTION TO PREVENT OR RESTRAIN AN ACT THAT
WOULD CONSTITUTE A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) AWARD DAMAGES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION.

(C) (1) DAMAGES AWARDED BY A COURT UNDER THIS SECTION MAY
INCLUDE:

(I) ECONOMIC DAMAGES AND ANY OTHER PECUNIARY LOSS
SUSTAINED BY THE PLAINTIFF THAT WAS PROXIMATELY CAUSED BY THE VIOLATION
OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) NONECONOMIC DAMAGES, INCLUDING:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 744 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. PAIN AND SUFFERING;

2. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
EMOTIONAL DISTRESS;

3. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
MENTAL ANGUISH;

4. LOSS OF ENJOYMENT;

5. LOSS OF COMPANIONSHIP, SERVICES, AND
CONSORTIUM; AND

6. OTHER NONPECUNIARY LOSS SUSTAINED BY THE
PLAINTIFF THAT WAS PROXIMATELY CAUSED BY THE ACT THAT WOULD CONSTITUTE
A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE COURT MAY ALSO AWARD REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES
AND COURT COSTS TO A PREVAILING PLAINTIFF.

(3) NONECONOMIC DAMAGES UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II)2 AND 3 OF
THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT INCLUDE EMOTIONAL DISTRESS OR MENTAL ANGUISH
CAUSED SOLELY BY THE NEED TO REPLACE OR REPAIR PERSONAL OR REAL
PROPERTY.

(D) DAMAGES AWARDED BY A COURT UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1) OF THIS
SECTION MAY BE EQUAL TO THREE TIMES THE AMOUNT OF ACTUAL DAMAGES.

(E) THIS SECTION DOES NOT AFFECT ANY LEGAL OR EQUITABLE RIGHT OR
REMEDY OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
application to any cause of action arising before the effective date of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2