START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 19 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 19 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Examiners of Psychologists - License and Registration Issuance 
and Renewals - Electronic Means 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Examiners of Psychologists to issue electronic (as 
opposed to paper) licenses or registrations to any applicant who meets the existing statutory 
requirements. The board must, on the request of an applicant, print a paper copy of the 
verification of licensure or registration and send it by first-class mail to the address on the 
application for the license or registration. The bill also specifies that a renewal notice will 
only be sent by electronic means (rather than first-class mail) unless (1) a renewal notice 
sent by electronic means is returned as undeliverable or (2) a licensee or registrant 
specifically requests that a renewal notice be sent by mail. The bill also repeals the 
requirement that the board include specific information on each license and registration 
issued. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not materially affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Examiners of Psychologists licenses psychologists and 
registers psychology associates. In general, to qualify for a license as a psychologist, an 
applicant must be at least age 18, of good moral character, and (with limited exception) 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 19/ Page 2 
plan to reside or practice in Maryland. An applicant for a psychology license must also 
successfully pass a national examination in the practice of psychology and the State 
jurisprudence examination. To qualify as a registered psychology associate, an applicant 
must meet specified educational requirements (a minimum of a master’s degree in specified 
fields of study), successfully pass the State law examination, and submit to a criminal 
history records check. 
 
Each license or registration issued by the board must include (1) the full name of the 
licensee or registrant; (2) the dates of issuance and expiration; (3) a serial number; (4) the 
signatures of the chairman and vice chairman of the board; and (5) the seal of the board. 
 
Licenses and registrations expire on the date set by the board but may be valid for up to 
two years. At least 90 days before a license or registration expires, the board must send a 
renewal notice to a licensee/registrant either by first-class mail to the last known address 
of the licensee/registrant or, if requested by the licensee/registrant, by electronic means to 
the last known electronic mail address of the licensee/registrant. A renewal notice must 
include the expiration date of the license/registration, the date by which a renewal 
application must be received by the board in order for a renewal to be sent before the 
current license/registration expires, and the amount of any renewal fee. 
 
Each licensee or registrant must notify the board in writing of any changes to mailing 
address or electronic mailing address within 90 days of when the change occurs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 349 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2