START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 180

Chapter 180

(House Bill 92)

AN ACT concerning

Ground Leases – Collection of Rent, Interest, Fees, and Other Expenses –
Registration Requirements

FOR the purpose of establishing that ground leases and amendments that are not posted
on the State Department of Assessments and Taxation’s website are not considered
registered; prohibiting a ground lease holder from collecting or attempting to collect
rent, late fees, interest, collection costs, and other expenses related to a ground lease
unless the ground lease is registered with the Department; establishing a process
within the Department to render decisions on the legality of efforts by a ground lease
holder to collect rent, late fees, interest, collection costs, and other expenses;
authorizing a ground lease holder or leasehold tenant to file suit in circuit court for
a certain judicial determination following a decision by the Department; requiring
the Department to develop and make available certain forms and post a certain
notice on its website; and generally relating to ground leases.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 8–703 and 8–707
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

8–703.

(a) (1) The Department shall maintain an online registry of all properties that
are subject to ground leases.

(2) The online registry shall:

(i) Identify properties for which a renewal notice to preserve the
irredeemability of an irredeemable ground lease has been filed; and

(ii) Include a clear notation of the expiration date for each renewal
notice.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 180 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) A GROUND LEASE OR AN AMENDMENT IS NOT REGISTERED UNTIL THE
GROUND LEASE OR AMENDMENT IS POSTED ON THE ONLINE REGISTRY.

(C) The Department is not responsible for the completeness or accuracy of the
contents of the online registry.

8–707.

(A) If a ground lease is not registered in accordance with this subtitle, the ground
lease holder may not:

(1) Collect OR ATTEMPT TO COLLECT any ground rent payments [due
under], LATE FEES, INTEREST, COLLECTION COSTS, OR OTHER EXPENSES RELATED
TO the ground lease;

(2) Bring a civil action against the leasehold tenant to enforce any rights
the ground lease holder may have under the ground lease; or

(3) Bring an action against the leasehold tenant under Subtitle 8 of this
title.

(B) (1) A LEASEHOLD TENANT WHO BELIEVES THAT A GROUND LEASE
HOLDER HAS COLLECTED OR ATTEMPTED TO COLLECT GROUND RENT PAYMENT,
LATE FEES, INTEREST, COLLECTION COSTS, OR OTHER EXPENSES RELATED TO THE
GROUND LEASE IN VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION MAY SUBMIT
TO THE DEPARTMENT AN AFFIDAVIT STATING THE FACTUAL BASIS FOR THE
LEASEHOLD TENANT’S BELIEF AND ANY DOCUMENTS IN SUPPORT OF THE
AFFIDAVIT.

(2) ON RECEIPT OF AN AFFIDAVIT AND ANY SUPPORTING
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SEND NOTICE TO THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER THAT IS THE
SUBJECT OF THE SUBMISSION STATING THAT:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT HAS RECEIVED A SUBMISSION
ALLEGING THAT THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER HAS VIOLATED SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF
THIS SECTION; AND

(II) THE RELEVANT GROUND LEASE REGISTRATION OR
AMENDMENT SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT BY THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER
FOR THE PROPERTY IN QUESTION MAY BE VOIDED IN THE DEPARTMENT’S RECORDS
UNLESS, WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE NOTICE, THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER SUBMITS
TO THE DEPARTMENT A COUNTER–AFFIDAVIT AND ANY DOCUMENTS IN SUPPORT OF

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 180

THE COUNTER–AFFIDAVIT THAT SETS FORTH THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER’S BELIEF
THAT ANY COLLECTION OR ATTEMPTED COLLECTION DESCRIBED IN THE AFFIDAVIT
DID NOT VIOLATE SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION AND THE FACTUAL BASIS
FOR THAT BELIEF.

(3) NOTICE SENT TO THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER UNDER
PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT
REQUESTED, AND BY FIRST–CLASS MAIL TO THE ADDRESS PROVIDED IN THE
GROUND LEASE HOLDER’S GROUND LEASE REGISTRATION OR AMENDMENT, OR TO
ANY OTHER ADDRESS USED BY THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER KNOWN TO THE
DEPARTMENT; AND

(II) INCLUDE A COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT AND ANY SUPPORTING
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED BY THE LEASEHOLD TENANT TO THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) (1) IF, AFTER REVIEWING ANY AFFIDAVITS, TIMELY SUBMITTED
COUNTER–AFFIDAVITS, AND ANY SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS, THE DEPARTMENT
REASONABLY BELIEVES THAT THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER VIOLATED SUBSECTION
(A)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT MAY MAKE A FINAL DECISION.

(2) FOLLOWING A DECISION MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMPTLY SEND TO ALL PERSONS WHO
SUBMITTED AFFIDAVITS AND COUNTER–AFFIDAVITS NOTICE OF THE DECISION.

(3) NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL:

(I) BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT
REQUESTED, AND BY FIRST–CLASS MAIL; AND

(II) STATE THAT THE DEPARTMENT:

1. REASONABLY BELIEVES THAT THE GROUND LEASE
HOLDER HAS VIOLATED SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION; AND

2. MAY VOID A RELEVANT GROUND LEASE
REGISTRATION OR AMENDMENT IN THE DEPARTMENT’S RECORDS UNLESS, WITHIN
45 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THE NOTICE, THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER FILES AN
ACTION IN THE CIRCUIT COURT UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 180 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (1) IF, AFTER REVIEWING ANY AFFIDAVITS, TIMELY SUBMITTED
COUNTER–AFFIDAVITS, AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS, THE DEPARTMENT
REASONABLY BELIEVES THAT THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER DID NOT VIOLATE
SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMPTLY SEND
TO ALL PERSONS WHO SUBMITTED AFFIDAVITS OR TIMELY FILED
COUNTER–AFFIDAVITS NOTICE OF THE DECISION.

(2) NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL:

(I) BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT
REQUESTED, AND BY FIRST–CLASS MAIL; AND

(II) STATE THAT:

1. THE DEPARTMENT REASONABLY BELIEVES THAT THE
GROUND LEASE HOLDER DID NOT VIOLATE SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION;
AND

2. THE DEPARTMENT WILL TAKE NO FURTHER ACTION
UNLESS, WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THE NOTICE, THE LEASEHOLD
TENANT FILES AN ACTION IN THE CIRCUIT COURT UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
SECTION.

(E) (1) FOLLOWING NOTICE OF A FINAL DECISION BY THE DEPARTMENT
MADE UNDER THIS SECTION, A GROUND LEASE HOLDER OR A LEASEHOLD TENANT
MAY FILE AN ACTION IN THE CIRCUIT COURT.

(2) AN ACTION FILED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE FILED:

(I) WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF NOTICE BY THE
DEPARTMENT; AND

(II) 1. IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE COUNTY IN WHICH
THE PETITIONER RESIDES; OR

2. IF THE PERSON DOES NOT RESIDE IN THE STATE, IN
THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THE
GROUND LEASE IS LOCATED.

(3) AN ACTION FILED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE HEARD DE
NOVO BY THE CIRCUIT COURT.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 180

(4) EACH PERSON WHO WAS SENT A NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (C)
OR (D) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE A PARTY TO AN ACTION FILED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION.

(5) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT BE JOINED AS A PARTY IN AN ACTION
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(F) (1) IF A COURT DETERMINES THAT A GROUND LEASE HOLDER HAS
VIOLATED SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION:

(I) THE COURT SHALL ENTER AN ORDER REQUIRING THE
DEPARTMENT TO VOID THE APPROPRIATE GROUND LEASE REGISTRATION OR
AMENDMENT IN THE DEPARTMENT’S RECORDS;

(II) THE PREVAILING PARTY SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE
ORDER TO THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(III) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMPTLY VOID THE
REGISTRATION OR AMENDMENT AND ENTER A NOTATION IN THE DEPARTMENT’S
RECORDS THAT THE RELEVANT GROUND LEASE REGISTRATION OR AMENDMENT IS
VOID UNDER A COURT ORDER.

(2) IF A COURT DETERMINES THAT THE GROUND LEASE HOLDER HAS
NOT VIOLATED SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION:

(I) THE COURT SHALL ENTER AN ORDER FINDING THAT THE
COLLECTION OR ATTEMPTED COLLECTION THAT WAS THE SUBJECT OF THE
COMPLAINT WAS NOT UNLAWFUL; AND

(II) THE PREVAILING PARTY SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE
ORDER TO THE DEPARTMENT.

(G) (1) A GROUND LEASE HOLDER OR LEASEHOLD TENANT WHO FILES AN
ACTION UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION SHALL MAIL A COPY OF THE
COMPLAINT TO THE DEPARTMENT WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF NOTICE OF
DECISION ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) IF THE DEPARTMENT DOES NOT RECEIVE A COPY OF A
COMPLAINT FILED UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER
THE DATE OF THE NOTICE OF DECISION ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL TAKE ACTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS FINAL DECISION.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 180 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) A GROUND LEASE REGISTRATION OR AMENDMENT THAT HAS BEEN
VOIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED
REGISTERED.

(I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL INCLUDE NOTICE ON ALL GROUND RENT
FORMS AND ON ITS WEBSITE IN SUBSTANTIALLY THE FOLLOWING FORM:

“NOTICE REQUIRED BY LAW: A GROUND RENT LEASE HOLDER MAY NOT
COLLECT OR ATTEMPT TO COLLECT GROUND RENT, LATE FEES, INTEREST,
COLLECTION COSTS, OR ANY OTHER EXPENSES RELATED TO A GROUND LEASE THAT
IS NOT REGISTERED AND POSTED ON THE DEPARTMENT’S ONLINE GROUND RENT
REGISTRY.”.

(J) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP A FORM AFFIDAVIT AND A
FORM COUNTER–AFFIDAVIT THAT SHALL BE USED BY A LEASEHOLD TENANT AND
GROUND LEASE HOLDER, RESPECTIVELY, FOR SUBMISSIONS MADE TO THE
DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) THE FORM AFFIDAVIT AND FORM COUNTER–AFFIDAVIT
DEVELOPED BY THE DEPARTMENT SHALL INCLUDE AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT
THE FORM IS BEING SIGNED UNDER PENALTY OF PERJURY.

(K) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT CHARGE A FEE TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

(L) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6