START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 26 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 26 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Psychologists - Licensure Qualification 
 
 
This bill establishes a second pathway for licensure as a psychologist from the State Board 
of Examiners of Psychologists. To qualify, an individual must have (1) a doctoral degree 
in psychology from a school or university that, at the time the degree was awarded, had a 
regional accreditation recognized by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation 
(CHEA) or the Canadian Psychological Association (CPA); (2) received a postdoctoral 
respecialization certificate from a department of psychology that, at the time the certificate 
was issued, had a degree program accredited by the American Psychological Association 
(APA) or CPA and included a minimum of 1,750 hours in a supervised internship in 
accordance with board regulations; and (3) completed at least 1,500 hours of training, as 
specified.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering licensure criteria for psychologists does not affect 
governmental finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In general, to qualify for a license as a psychologist, an 
applicant must be at least age 18, of good moral character, and (with limited exception) 
plan to reside or practice in Maryland. An applicant for a psychology license must also 
successfully pass a national examination in the practice of psychology and the State 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 26/ Page 2 
jurisprudence examination. The bill retains these requirements for both pathways to 
become a licensed psychologist. 
 
Under current law, the pathway for licensure requires that an applicant have at least 
two years of professional, supervised experience in psychology (as specified) and a 
doctoral degree in psychology, including either (1) a degree received from a program that, 
at the time the degree was awarded, is accredited by APA or CPA or is listed in the 
designated doctoral programs in psychology published by the Council for the National 
Register of Health Service Providers in Psychology or (2) a doctoral degree in psychology 
that the Council for the National Register of Health Service Providers in Psychology 
determines meets its criteria for a doctoral degree in psychology, if the degree was received 
from a doctoral program in psychology that meets specified criteria. This pathway for 
licensure remains unchanged by the bill. 
 
Under the bill, a second pathway for licensure is established requiring (1) a degree received 
from a doctoral program in psychology from a school or university that, at the time the 
degree was awarded, had a regional accreditation recognized by CHEA or CPA; (2) a 
postdoctoral respecialization certificate from a department of psychology that, at the time 
the certificate was issued, had a degree program that was accredited by APA or CPA and 
included a minimum of 1,750 hours in a supervised internship in accordance with board 
regulations; and (3) completion of at least 1,500 hours of post certification advanced 
training hours or precertification hours of services as a registered psychology associate in 
accordance with board regulations.  
 
Additional Comments:  A postdoctoral respecialization certificate is obtained by 
doctoral-level psychologists (individuals with doctorates in a nonclinical field of 
psychology) who seek to become licensed clinical psychologists. 
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 911 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 26/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3