START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 92 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 92 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Ground Leases - Collection of Rent, Interest, Fees, and Other Expenses - 
Registration Requirements 
 
 
This bill establishes that a ground lease or an amendment is not registered until the ground 
lease/amendment is posted on the online registry (as currently maintained by the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT)). It also establishes a process for a 
leasehold tenant of a ground lease to challenge and bring action against a ground lease 
holder who takes specified collection actions after failing to properly register a ground 
lease, as required under existing statutory provisions. A ground lease registration or 
amendment that has been voided by SDAT under the provisions of the bill is prohibited 
from being considered registered. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SDAT and the Judiciary can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Prohibitions on Collections and Initial Review of Potential Violations 
 
The bill expands prohibitions on collection efforts by a ground lease holder that has not 
registered a ground lease by prohibiting any attempt to collect ground rent payments and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 92/ Page 2 
prohibiting the collection of late fees, interest, collections costs, or other expenses related 
to the ground lease (or an attempt to do so). 
 
The bill authorizes a leasehold tenant, who believes that a ground lease holder has collected 
or attempted to collect specific expenses related to ground rent in violation of the above 
provisions, to submit to SDAT an affidavit and any supporting documents evidencing the 
factual basis for the tenant’s beliefs. 
 
Generally, upon receipt of the affidavit and any supporting documentation, SDAT must 
send notice, as specified, to the ground lease holder indicating that the department has 
received notice of an alleged violation and that the ground lease registration or amendment 
may be voided unless the holder submits a counter‐affidavit and supporting documents 
within 45 days. The notice sent to the ground lease holder must (1) be sent by certified 
mail, return receipt requested, and by first‐class mail to the address provided in the ground 
lease holder’s ground lease registration or amendment, or to any other address used by the 
ground lease holder known to SDAT and (2) include a copy of the affidavit and any 
supporting documents submitted by the leasehold tenant to SDAT. 
 
Following review of the affidavits and supporting documents (and any timely submitted 
counter-information), SDAT may make a final decision on whether the ground lease holder 
violated the restrictions on collection efforts. After making a final decision, SDAT must 
promptly send notice (using specified methods) of the decision to all persons who 
submitted affidavits and counter‐affidavits. If SDAT reasonably believes that the ground 
lease holder has violated the prohibition on collection actions, the notice must indicate so 
and also advise that SDAT may void a registration/amendment in its records unless the 
ground lease holder files an action in circuit court (under the procedures specified below). 
A notice that SDAT reasonably believes that the ground lease holder did not violate the 
prohibition must advise that SDAT will take no further action unless the leasehold tenant 
files an action in circuit court. An individual who files an action must mail a copy of the 
complaint to SDAT within 45 days after the date of the notice of the decision issued by 
SDAT. If SDAT does not receive a copy within this timeframe, SDAT must take action in 
accordance with its final decision. 
 
Judicial Action 
 
The cause of action established under the bill must (1) be filed within 45 days after the date 
of the notice sent by SDAT; (2) be filed in the circuit court for the county in which the 
petitioner resides or in the circuit court for the county in which the property subject to the 
ground lease is located, as appropriate; (3) be heard de novo by the circuit court; and 
(4) include as a party all persons that received a notice from SDAT. SDAT may not be 
joined as a party. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 92/ Page 3 
If the court determines that the ground lease holder has violated the provisions regarding 
collection actions without proper registration, the court must enter an order requiring 
SDAT to void the appropriate registration/amendment in its records and the prevailing 
party must provide a copy of the order to SDAT. SDAT must promptly comply and enter 
a notation in its records that the relevant registration/amendment is void under a court 
order. 
 
If the court determines that the ground lease holder is not in violation, the court must enter 
an order that the collection/attempted collection that was the subject of the complaint was 
not unlawful and the holder must provide a copy of the order to SDAT. 
 
Additional Requirements 
 
SDAT must include notice, as specified, regarding the prohibition on collection efforts on 
its website and all ground rent forms. SDAT must also develop associated forms in 
accordance with the bill that meet specified requirements. SDAT may adopt regulations to 
execute the requirements of the bill. However, SDAT is prohibited from charging a fee to 
carry out the requirements of the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a ground lease creates a leasehold estate in the grantee that is 
personal – not real – property. The grantor retains a reversion in the ground lease property 
and fee simple title to the land. Ground rent is paid to the grantor (the ground lease holder) 
for the use of the property for the term of the lease in annual or semiannual installments. 
Under a typical ground lease contract, the tenant agrees to pay all fees, taxes, and other 
costs associated with ownership of the property. 
 
Under the Real Property Article, an irredeemable ground rent is a ground rent created under 
a ground lease executed before April 9, 1884, that does not contain a provision allowing 
the leasehold tenant to redeem the ground rent. However, statutory provisions require any 
ground lease holder of an irredeemable ground rent to take specified actions (e.g., record a 
renewal notice of intention to preserve irredeemability) in order to preserve this status. 
 
SDAT is required to maintain an online registry of all properties that are subject to 
ground leases. The registry must (1) identify properties for which a renewal notice to 
preserve the irredeemability of an irredeemable ground lease has been filed and (2) include 
a clear notation of the expiration date for each renewal notice. If a ground lease is not 
registered in accordance with statutory provisions, the ground lease holder may not 
(1) collect any ground rent payments under the ground lease; (2) bring a civil action against 
the leasehold tenant to enforce any applicable rights; or (3) bring an action against the 
leasehold tenant under Subtitle 8 of the Real Property Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 92/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 193 (Senators Sydnor and Hayes) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4