START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 272

Chapter 272

(House Bill 57)

AN ACT concerning

Property Tax – Tax Sales – Requirement to Sell

FOR the purpose of repealing certain limitations on the authority of certain local
governments to set the time by which a property with taxes in arrears must be sold
by the tax collector; and generally relating to tax sales of property.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 14–808
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

14–808.

(a) (1) Except for property that has been transferred by a municipality or
county to a land bank authority established under § 1–1403 of the Local Government
Article, and except as provided under § 14–811 of this subtitle, the collector shall proceed
to sell and shall sell under this subtitle, at the time required by local law [but in no case,
except in Baltimore City, later than 2 years from the date the tax is in arrears], all property
in the county in which the collector is elected or appointed on which the tax is in arrears.

(2) [The collector is required to sell, but failure] FAILURE of the collector
to sell within the [2–year period] TIME REQUIRED BY LOCAL LAW does not affect the
validity or collectability of any tax, or the validity of any sale thereafter made.

(b) In Calvert County the collector shall proceed to advertise and sell any real
property [immediately after the tax is delinquent for a period of 1 year] AS REQUIRED BY
LOCAL LAW.

(c) In St. Mary’s County, the Board of County Commissioners shall set by
resolution the date and time of a tax sale.

(d) In Garrett County, the Board of County Commissioners shall set by resolution
the date and time of a tax sale.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 272 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2