START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 48 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 48 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Collaborative Care Model Services – 
Implementation and Reimbursement Expansion 
 
 
This bill repeals the Collaborative Care Pilot Program and related language, including a 
report on the pilot program due November 1, 2023. Instead, the bill requires the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) to provide reimbursement for services provided in 
accordance with the Collaborative Care Model statewide in primary care settings that 
provide health care services to Medicaid recipients. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by as much as $15.7 million (61% federal 
funds, 39% general funds) in FY 2024 and $20.9 million annually beginning in FY 2025; 
federal fund revenues increase accordingly. This bill increases the cost of an entitlement 
program beginning in FY 2024. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FF Revenue 
$9.6 
$12.8 
$12.8 
$12.8 
$12.8 
GF Expenditure 
$6.1 
$8.2 
$8.2 
$8.2 
$8.2 
FF Expenditure 
$9.6 
$12.8 
$12.8 
$12.8 
$12.8 
Net Effect 
($6.1) 
($8.2) 
($8.2) 
($8.2) 
($8.2)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 48/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Collaborative Care Model” means an evidence-based approach for 
integrating somatic and behavioral health services in primary care settings that includes 
(1) care coordination and management; (2) regular, proactive outcome monitoring and 
treatment for outcome targets using standardized outcome measurement rating scales and 
electronic tools; and (3) regular systematic psychiatric and substance use disorder caseload 
reviews and consultation with specified providers. 
 
Chapters 683 and 684 of 2018 established a Collaborative Care Pilot Program to implement 
a Collaborative Care Model in primary care settings for HealthChoice Medicaid recipients. 
For fiscal 2020 through 2023, the Governor was required to appropriate $550,000 annually 
for the pilot program. 
 
A report on findings and recommendations of the pilot program is due November 1, 2023. 
However, MDH provided a report on the pilot program in response to the 2021 
Joint Chairmen’s Report. Although more limited than initially projected due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, preliminary results suggested that the pilot has improved clinical 
outcomes. At that time, MDH estimated that implementing the model statewide could cost 
between $18.8 million and $32.4 million in total funds annually. MDH recommended 
continuing the pilot program until the end of fiscal 2023 and conducting a full evaluation 
then. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, Medicaid must provide reimbursement for services 
provided in accordance with the Collaborative Care Model statewide in primary care 
settings that provide health care services to Medicaid recipients. 
 
MDH estimates that as many as 46,560 Medicaid enrollees (including both fee-for-service 
and managed care organization enrollees) are eligible for these services. MDH notes that 
this includes young children who may not clinically benefit from the program and, thus, 
may overstate the eligible population. Approximately 58% of those eligible (27,005) will 
receive services (based on participation rates for the pilot program) at an average annual 
cost of $775.30. Thus, the annual estimated cost of expanding the Continuity of Care Model 
statewide is as much as $20.9 million (61% federal funds, 39% general funds). The actual 
federal matching rate may vary based on the population that receives services under the 
bill. In fiscal 2024, Medicaid expenditures increase by as much as $15.7 million to reflect 
the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business behavioral health care providers that provide 
services in accordance with the Collaborative Care Model may serve additional clients and 
receive additional reimbursement under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 48/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 935 and SB 637 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 101 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3