START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

Chapter 512

(House Bill 12)

AN ACT concerning

Equitable and Inclusive Transit–Oriented Development Enhancement Act

FOR the purpose of repealing the authority of the Secretary of Transportation to designate
a transit–oriented development; establishing the Transit–Oriented Development
Capital Grant and Revolving Loan Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring
interest earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; authorizing the Department
of Transportation to use the Fund to provide financial assistance to local jurisdictions
to be used for certain purposes within a transit–oriented development; and generally
relating to transit–oriented development in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 7–101(a), ~~(l),~~ ~~(m),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(o)~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Transportation~~
~~Section~~ ~~7–102(a)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2020~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 7–101(l) and 7–103; and 7–1201 through 7–1205 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 12. Transit–Oriented Development Capital Grant and Revolving
Loan Fund”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 7–101(l) through (p) and 7–102(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and 10–306(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 512 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171. and 10–306(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

7–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(L) (1) “TRANSIT CORRIDOR” MEANS A GEOGRAPHICALLY BOUND SET OF
TWO OR MORE CONTIGUOUS SUBWAY, LIGHT RAIL, BUS RAPID TRANSIT, OR BUS
TRANSIT STATIONS.

(2) “TRANSIT CORRIDOR” INCLUDES A GEOGRAPHICALLY BOUND SET
OF TWO OR MORE CONTIGUOUS BUS TRANSIT STATIONS THAT HAVE FIXED–ROUTE
BUS SERVICE THAT OPERATES ON A ROADWAY DEDICATED TO BUSES.

(l) (M) “Transit facility” includes any one or more or combination of tracks,
rights–of–way, bridges, tunnels, subways, rolling stock, stations, terminals, ports, parking
areas, equipment, fixtures, buildings, structures, other real or personal property, and
services incidental to or useful or designed for use in connection with the rendering of
transit service by any means, including rail, bus, motor vehicle, or other mode of
transportation, but does not include any railroad facility.

(m) (N) “Transit–oriented development” means a mix of private or public
parking facilities, commercial and residential structures, and uses, improvements, and
facilities customarily appurtenant to such facilities and uses, that:

(1) Is part of a deliberate development plan or strategy involving:

(i) Property that is adjacent to the passenger boarding and alighting
location of a planned or existing transit station; ~~or~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

(ii) Property, any part of which is located within one–half mile of the
passenger boarding and alighting location of a planned or existing transit station; OR

(III) PROPERTY THAT IS ADJACENT TO A PLANNED OR EXISTING
TRANSIT CORRIDOR;

(2) Is planned to maximize the use of transit, walking, and bicycling by
residents and employees; and

(3) Is designated as a transit–oriented development by:

(i) The ~~Secretary,~~ ~~after~~ ~~considering~~ ~~a~~ ~~recommendation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ Smart
Growth Subcabinet established under § 9–1406 of the State Government Article; and

(ii) The local government or multicounty agency with land use and
planning responsibility for the relevant area APPLYING FOR DESIGNATION.

[(n)] (O) (1) “Transit service” means the transportation of persons and their
packages and baggage and of newspapers, express, and mail in regular route, special, or
charter service by means of transit facilities between points within the District.

(2) “Transit service” does not include any:

(i) Vanpool operation; or

(ii) Railroad service.

(o) (P) (1) “Transit station” means any facility, the primary function of
which relates to the boarding and alighting of passengers from transit vehicles.

(2) “Transit station” includes platforms, shelters, passenger waiting
facilities, parking areas, access roadways, and other real property used to facilitate
passenger access to transit service or railroad service.

[(p)] (Q) “Transit vehicle” means a mobile device used in rendering transit
service.

7–102.

(a) (1) (I) The development of improved and expanded railroad facilities,
railroad services, transit facilities, and transit services operating as a unified and
coordinated regional transportation system, and the realization of transit–oriented
development throughout the State, represent transportation purposes that are essential for
the satisfactory movement of people and goods, the alleviation of present and future traffic

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 512 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

congestion, the economic welfare and vitality, and the development of the metropolitan area
of Baltimore and other political subdivisions of the State.

(II) IN ORDER TO REALIZE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
AS A TRANSPORTATION PURPOSE, IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THAT THE DEPARTMENT MAKE ALL REASONABLE ATTEMPTS TO INCLUDE
TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AS PART OF THE PREFERRED PLAN FOR
DEVELOPMENT IN AREAS SERVED BY TRANSIT SERVICES BY PROVIDING
PREFERENCE TO PROPOSALS THAT FURTHER THIS PURPOSE WHEN:

1. DISTRIBUTING FUNDS FROM:

A. STATE PROGRAMS OFFERING GRANTS AND LOANS
FOR DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT, INCLUDING THE
COMPLETE STREETS PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 9 OF THIS
ARTICLE;

B. FEDERAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK
GRANTS ELIGIBLE FEDERAL FUNDING; AND

C. THE PROCEEDS OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND AND
GRANT ANTICIPATION REVENUE VEHICLE ISSUANCES; AND

2. AWARDING STATE TAX CREDITS.

(III) 1. AN EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 3 OF
THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, AN AREA DESIGNATED AS TRANSIT–ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT AFTER JULY 1, 2023, SHALL RETAIN THAT DESIGNATION FOR A
PERIOD OF 10 YEARS.

2. BEFORE THE END OF A 10–YEAR DESIGNATION
PERIOD UNDER THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, A LOCAL GOVERNMENT OR MULTICOUNTY
AGENCY MAY APPLY TO THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET TO HAVE THE
DESIGNATION EXTENDED FOR AN ADDITIONAL 10 YEARS.

3. AN AREA DESIGNATED AS A TRANSIT–ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT THAT IS SUBJECT TO A GROUND LEASE OR OTHER AGREEMENT WITH
THE STATE SHALL RETAIN THAT DESIGNATION FOR THE DURATION OF THE GROUND
LEASE OR OTHER AGREEMENT.

(2) The establishment of the realization of transit–oriented development as
a transportation purpose under paragraph (1) of this subsection may not be construed to:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

(i) Limit the authority of local governments to govern land use as
established under any other law; or

(ii) Grant the State or a department of the State additional authority
to supersede local land use and planning authority.

7–103.

(A) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 30, 2024, AND ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER
30 EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE SECRETARY SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE ON EFFORTS TO INCREASE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
THROUGHOUT THE STATE.

(B) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE AN ANALYSIS OF THE FOLLOWING ISSUES
FOR EACH TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT IN THE STATE:

(1) THE DEMOGRAPHIC AND SOCIOECONOMIC INDICATORS PRESENT
IN THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AND THE SURROUNDING AREAS;

(2) DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY OCCURRING IN THE
TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT DURING THE PERIOD THAT THE REPORT
COVERS; AND

(3) TRANSIT STATION UTILIZATION RATES FOR THE
TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER THE FINDINGS OF THE REPORT
REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION FOR PURPOSES OF UPDATING THE SCORING
STANDARDS FOR APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE
TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL GRANT AND REVOLVING LOAN
FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBTITLE 12 OF THIS TITLE.

SUBTITLE 12. TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL GRANT AND
REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

7–1201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE” MEANS A GRANT OR LOAN FROM THE FUND.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 512 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) “FUND” MEANS THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL
GRANT AND REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

(D) “GAP FUNDING” MEANS FUNDING PROVIDED TO COMPENSATE FOR A
SHORTFALL BETWEEN THE EXPECTED DEVELOPMENT COSTS OF A PROJECT AND
THE AVAILABLE FUNDS FOR THE PROJECT.

(E) “LOCAL JURISDICTION” MEANS A COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION.

(F) “MUNICIPAL CORPORATION” MEANS A MUNICIPALITY AS DEFINED IN §
1–101 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

7–1202.

(A) THERE IS A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL GRANT AND
REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

(B) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO
§ 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

7–1203.

(A) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROMOTE THE EQUITABLE AND
INCLUSIVE DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENTS THROUGHOUT
THE STATE.

(B) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY, AND THE
COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(C) (1) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND;

(II) MONEY MADE AVAILABLE FOR QUALIFYING USES BY THE
FUND FROM OTHER GOVERNMENTAL SOURCES, INCLUDING COMMUNITY
~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~BLOCK~~ ~~GRANTS~~ ELIGIBLE FEDERAL FUNDING AND THE
TRANSPORTATION TRUST FUND;

(III) GROUND RENTS OR LAND SALE PROCEEDS IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 10–306(C)(2) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

(IV) PAYMENTS OF PRINCIPAL OF AND INTEREST ON LOANS
MADE UNDER THIS TITLE;

(V) INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(VI) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE, PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE, ACCEPTED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(2) CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FUND UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(III) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) BE SEPARATELY ACCOUNTED FOR IN THE FUND; AND

(II) BE USED ONLY FOR THE BENEFIT OF TRANSIT–ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SAME COUNTY WHERE THE REAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO
THE GROUND RENT OR LAND SALE IS LOCATED.

(D) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION SUFFICIENT TO ENSURE A FUND
BALANCE OF AT LEAST $10,000,000 $5,000,000 AT THE START OF THE FISCAL YEAR.

7–1204.

(A) (1) THE FUND MAY BE USED BY THE DEPARTMENT TO PROVIDE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL JURISDICTIONS FOR:

(I) DESIGN PLANS FOR A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT,
PROVIDED THAT THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT WILL BE DESIGNED TO
MEET EQUITY GOALS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

(II) PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN A
TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT; OR

(III) GAP FUNDING FOR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
WITHIN A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT.

(2) A PRIVATE ENTITY, INCLUDING A NONPROFIT ENTITY,
PARTICIPATING IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
MAY PARTNER WITH A LOCAL JURISDICTION TO SUBMIT AN APPLICATION FOR
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) (1) THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET ESTABLISHED UNDER §
9–1406 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE SHALL ESTABLISH ELIGIBILITY

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 512 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

REQUIREMENTS AND OBJECTIVE SCORING STANDARDS FOR THE REVIEW OF
APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.

(2) THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET ESTABLISHED UNDER §
9–1406 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE MAY ESTABLISH:

(I) DIFFERENT ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND OBJECTIVE
SCORING STANDARDS FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; AND

(II) SCORING PREFERENCES FOR APPLICATIONS THAT
DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PROPOSED PROJECT WILL:

1. ENHANCE ACCESS TO TRANSIT FOR LOW–INCOME
AND MINORITY RESIDENTS OF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION;

2. ENHANCE ACCESS TO TRANSIT IN AREAS WITH
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND A DIVERSITY OF JOB AND EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES; OR

3. ENCOURAGE DEVELOPMENT AROUND
UNDERDEVELOPED AND UNDERUTILIZED TRANSIT STATIONS IN
TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENTS.

~~(B)~~ (C) ~~(1)~~ THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(I) ESTABLISH ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND SCORING
STANDARDS FOR THE REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; AND

(II) (1) PUBLISH THE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND
SCORING STANDARDS ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE; AND

(2) IN COLLABORATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, SUPPORT RECIPIENTS OF AWARDS FROM THE FUND
BY SUPPORTING ANY STUDIES, PLANS, AND CODE CHANGES WITH TECHNICAL
SERVICES.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ESTABLISH:

(I) DIFFERENT ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND SCORING
STANDARDS FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; AND

(II) SCORING PREFERENCES FOR APPLICATIONS THAT
DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PROPOSED PROJECT WILL:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

1. ENHANCE ACCESS TO TRANSIT FOR LOW–INCOME
AND MINORITY RESIDENTS OF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION;

2. ENHANCE ACCESS TO TRANSIT IN AREAS WITH
~~AFFORDABLE~~ ~~HOUSING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~DIVERSITY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~JOB~~ ~~AND~~ ~~EDUCATIONAL~~
OPPORTUNITIES; OR

3. ENCOURAGE DEVELOPMENT AROUND
~~UNDERDEVELOPED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~UNDERUTILIZED~~ ~~TRANSIT~~ ~~STATIONS~~ ~~IN~~
~~TRANSIT–ORIENTED~~ ~~DEVELOPMENTS.~~

(C) (D) AN APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) COMMITMENTS FROM THE LOCAL JURISDICTION TO:

(I) ESTABLISH TRANSIT–SUPPORTIVE LAND USE
DESIGNATIONS FOR REAL PROPERTY WITHIN A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT;
AND

(II) IMPLEMENT, WHERE PRACTICABLE, IMPROVEMENTS TO
THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT THAT PROMOTE THE COMPLETE STREETS
POLICY ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–112 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(2) IF A PRIVATE ENTITY PARTNERS WITH A LOCAL JURISDICTION TO
SUBMIT AN APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE, COMMITMENTS FROM KEY
STAKEHOLDERS TO DEVELOP THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT; AND

(3) IF THE APPLICATION IS FOR A GRANT TO SUPPORT THE DESIGN
OR CONSTRUCTION OF A PROPOSED ENHANCEMENT TO A TRANSIT–ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT, CREDIBLE FUNDING STRATEGIES THAT DEMONSTRATE FULL
FUNDING OF THE DESIGN OR CONSTRUCTION COSTS FOR THE PROPOSED
ENHANCEMENT ON AWARD OF THE GRANT.

7–1205.

(A) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND IN
THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(B) ANY INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE PAID INTO THE
FUND.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 512 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL
GRANT AND REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

10–306.

(a) In this section, “capital asset” means an asset of a substantial permanent
nature.

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, if cash
is received as consideration for the disposition of a capital asset of the State or any unit of
the State government, the cash shall be applied to the State Annuity Bond Fund Account
for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonded indebtedness of the State.

(2) If the capital asset is real property that is being leased or sold to a
private party for the purpose of realizing a transit–oriented development as defined under
§ 7–101 of the Transportation Article, at the discretion of the State agency that is disposing
of the property, all or a portion of the cash proceeds resulting from the transaction shall be
deposited in:

(I) the Baltimore City Community Enhancement Transit–Oriented
Development Fund established under Title 15 of the Economic Development Article for the
purposes of that Fund; OR

(II) THE TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL GRANT
AND REVOLVING LOAN FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 7 OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE FOR THE PURPOSES OF THAT FUND.

(3) (i) If cash is received as consideration for the disposition of a capital
asset, and if the capital asset was originally purchased with special funds, the cash shall
be applied to the special fund.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

(ii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, cash
received as consideration for the disposition of helicopters, auxiliary helicopter equipment,
ground support equipment, or other capital equipment related to helicopters shall be
applied to the State Annuity Bond Fund Account for the payment of the principal of and
interest on the bonded indebtedness of the State.

(4) If cash is received as consideration for the disposition of any real or
personal property of the State or any unit of the State government, other than a capital
asset, the cash shall be accounted for and paid into the State Treasury.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11