START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 14 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 14 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Grounds for Divorce 
 
 
This bill repeals the authority of a court to grant a limited divorce and alters numerous 
grounds for an absolute divorce. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $18,000 in FY 2024 
only for programming changes. Otherwise, the bill does not materially affect the operations 
or finances of the Judiciary. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
18,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($18,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the workload of the circuit courts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Limited Divorce 
 
Under current law, a court may grant a limited divorce on the following grounds: 
 
 
cruelty of treatment of the complaining party or of a minor child of the complaining 
party; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 14/ Page 2 
 
excessively vicious conduct to the complaining party or to a minor child of the 
complaining party; 
 
desertion; or 
 
separation, if the parties are living separate and apart without cohabitation. 
 
The court may grant a limited divorce for a limited time or for an indefinite time. A limited 
divorce does not sever the marriage but does grant the complaining party the right to live 
separate and apart from the other spouse. A court that grants a limited divorce may revoke 
it at any time on the joint application of the parties. If the parties request an absolute divorce 
and the evidence is sufficient to entitle them to only a limited divorce, the court may grant 
a limited divorce. A limited divorce can also address issues of custody, visitation, 
child support, alimony, and use and possession of a family home. 
 
The bill repeals the above provisions. 
 
Absolute Divorce 
 
Under current law, a court may grant an absolute divorce on the following grounds: 
 
 
adultery; 
 
desertion, if the desertion is deliberate and final, has continued for 12 months  
without interruption, and there is no reasonable expectation of reconciliation;  
 
conviction of a felony or misdemeanor in any state or federal court, if the defendant 
has been sentenced to serve at least three years, or an indeterminate sentence, and 
has served 12 months of the sentence; 
 
12-month separation, when the parties have lived separate and apart without 
cohabitation for 12 months without interruption before the filing of the divorce 
application; 
 
insanity, as specified; or 
 
cruelty of treatment or excessively vicious conduct toward the complaining party or 
a minor child of the complaining party, if there is no reasonable expectation of 
reconciliation. 
 
The bill repeals the authority of a court to grant an absolute divorce based on any of the 
above grounds. Instead, the bill authorizes a court to grant an absolute divorce on the 
grounds of (1) six-month separation, if the parties have lived separate and apart for 
six months without interruption before the filing of the application for divorce or 
(2) irreconcilable differences based on the reasons stated by the complainant for the 
permanent termination of the marriage. The bill specifies that parties who have pursued 
separate lives must be deemed to have lived separate and apart for purposes of the ground 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 14/ Page 3 
of six-month separation even if the parties reside under the same roof or the separation is 
in accordance with a court order. 
 
Under current law, a court may also grant an absolute divorce on the ground of mutual 
consent if: 
 
 
the parties execute and submit to the court a written settlement agreement signed by 
both parties that resolves all issues relating to (1) alimony; (2) the distribution of 
property, as specified; and (3) the care, custody, access, and support of minor or 
dependent children; 
 
the parties attach to the settlement agreement a completed child support guidelines 
worksheet if the settlement agreement provides for the payment of child support;  
 
neither party files a pleading to set aside the settlement agreement prior to the 
divorce hearing required under the Maryland Rules; and 
 
after reviewing the settlement agreement, the court is satisfied that any terms 
relating to minor or dependent children are in the best interests of those children. 
 
The bill does not alter provisions regarding an absolute divorce based on the ground of 
mutual consent. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 639 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 36 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
Enrolled - April 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer K. Botts 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3