START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 93 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 93 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Residential Ground Leases - Redemption and Extinguishment - Requirements 
 
 
This bill repeals statutory provisions that prohibit a leasehold tenant from providing 
specified documentation and payment to the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) earlier than 90 days after an application for redemption/extinguishment 
has been posted on SDAT’s website. The bill specifies that SDAT must issue to a leasehold 
tenant a ground rent redemption/extinguishment certificate, as appropriate, when (1) notice 
that application has been made to redeem/extinguish the ground rent has been posted for at 
least 90 days and (2) SDAT has received specified documentation, fees, and any required 
payment amounts, as applicable. The bill also makes various technical changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill likely results in operational efficiencies but is not anticipated to 
materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a ground lease creates a leasehold estate in the grantee that is 
personal – not real – property. The grantor retains a reversion in the ground lease property 
and fee simple title to the land. Ground rent is paid to the grantor (the ground lease holder) 
for the use of the property for the term of the lease in annual or semiannual installments. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 93/ Page 2 
Under a typical ground lease contract, the tenant agrees to pay all fees, taxes, and other 
costs associated with ownership of the property. 
 
Under the Real Property Article, an irredeemable ground rent is a ground rent created under 
a ground lease executed before April 9, 1884, that does not contain a provision allowing 
the leasehold tenant to redeem the ground rent. However, statutory provisions require any 
ground lease holder of an irredeemable ground rent to take specified actions (e.g., record a 
renewal notice of intention to preserve irredeemability) in order to preserve this status. 
 
If a ground rent is redeemable, statutory provisions specify requirements for the 
redemption. In general, after a leasehold tenant has given the ground lease holder specified 
notice, the tenant may apply to SDAT to redeem a ground rent. The tenant must (1) provide 
SDAT with satisfactory documentation of the ground lease and the notice given to the lease 
holder and (2) pay a specified fee. Upon receipt, SDAT must post on its website that 
application has been made to redeem/extinguish the ground rent; this notice must remain 
posted for at least 90 days. 
 
A leasehold tenant must also provide:   
 
 
payment of the redemption amount and up to three years’ past due ground rent to 
the extent required under existing statutory provisions in a form satisfactory to 
SDAT; and 
 
an affidavit made by the leasehold tenant, in the form adopted by SDAT, certifying 
that (1) the leasehold tenant has not received a bill for ground rent due or other 
communication from the lease holder regarding the ground rent during the 
three years immediately before the filing of the documentation required for the 
issuance of a redemption certificate, as specified or (2) the last payment for ground 
rent was made to the ground lease holder identified in the affidavit, as specified. 
 
However, a tenant may not provide these items earlier than 90 days after the application 
for redemption/extinguishment has been posted. 
 
Similarly, a leasehold tenant seeking to extinguish an irredeemable ground rent or redeem 
a redeemable ground rent on abandoned or distressed property that was acquired or is being 
acquired by the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore must provide to SDAT payment of 
up to three years’ past due ground rent to the extent required under existing statute. A tenant 
must also provide an affidavit from the Commissioner of the Baltimore City Department 
of Housing and Community Development (or designee) certifying that (1) the property is 
abandoned or distressed property, as specified; (2) the property was acquired or is being 
acquired by the Mayor and City Council; and (3) the ground rent is an impediment to 
redevelopment of the site. This must be done no earlier than 90 days after the application 
for redemption/extinguishment has been posted to SDAT’s website. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 93/ Page 3 
Upon receipt of the documentation, fees, and (if applicable) the redemption amount and 
three years’ past due ground rent, SDAT must issue to the leasehold tenant a ground rent 
redemption certificate or a ground rent extinguishment certificate, as appropriate. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 196 (Senators Sydnor and Hayes) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3