START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 70 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 70 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Safe Access for All (SAFE) Roads Act of 2023 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) to implement all 
possible incremental and near-term safety improvements as soon as practicable when a new 
approved pedestrian or bicycle safety construction or improvement project is projected to 
take more than 12 months to complete. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because MDOT’s capital program is fully subscribed, MDOT may be 
required to redirect funding from other projects beginning as early as FY 2023 to 
implement the incremental and near-term safety improvements; however, any such impact 
is anticipated to be minimal due to the limited scope of projects to which the requirement 
applies. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Highway Administration is a modal unit within MDOT, and it 
is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately 16,800 lane miles of road, 
2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and 80 miles of sound/noise barriers 
in the State. It also has responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, and maintaining 
these roads and bridges to safety and performance standards while considering 
sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 70/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 16 (Senators Waldstreicher and Augustine) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2