START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 83 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 83 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Tax Sales - Redemption 
 
 
This bill requires a tax collector to make at least one attempt to contact a holder of a 
certificate of sale by phone and email, after the collector is informed that the plaintiff or 
the holder of the certificate of sale has failed to respond to a request, for the amount of 
expenses included in the redemption amount, that is made by the (1) owner of the property; 
(2) current mortgagee of the property, assignee of a mortgagee of record, or servicer of the 
current mortgage; or (3) current holder of a beneficial interest in a deed of trust recorded 
against the property. If the plaintiff or holder of the certificate of sale fails to respond within 
five business days, the tax collector may redeem the property without a satisfaction letter 
stating that the expenses of the plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale have been paid. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An owner or other person that has an estate or interest in property sold by 
a tax collector may redeem the property at any time until the right of redemption has been 
finally foreclosed. The person redeeming the property must pay the collector (1) the total 
lien amount paid at the tax sale for the property together with interest; (2) any taxes, 
interest, and penalties paid by any holder of the certificate of sale; (3) except if the property 
is owner-occupied residential property in Baltimore City, any delinquent taxes, interest, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 83/ Page 2 
and penalties accruing after the date of the tax sale; and (4) in the manner and by the terms 
required by the collector, any expenses or fees for which the plaintiff or the holder of a 
certificate of sale is entitled to reimbursement. Statute specifies the various expenses or 
fees which the plaintiff or holder of a certificate of sale may be reimbursed for, specifically 
those incurred in any action or in preparation for any action to foreclose the right of 
redemption.  
 
If an action to foreclose the right of redemption has not been filed, and the property is 
redeemed more than four months after the date of the tax sale, the holder of a certificate of 
sale may be reimbursed for the following expenses actually incurred:  (1) the cost of 
recording the certificate of sale; (2) a title search fee up to $250; (3) the postage and 
certified mail costs for sending required notices; and (4) reasonable attorney’s fees up to 
$500. 
 
In general, the plaintiff or holder of a certificate of sale may not be reimbursed for expenses 
incurred within four months after the date of sale.  
 
In Baltimore City, for owner-occupied residential property, the above-described statutory 
periods are seven months instead of four months.  
 
In general, any time after six months from the date of sale, a holder of a certificate of sale 
may file a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption; however, for owner-occupied 
residential property in Baltimore City, that time period is nine months instead of 
six months. Statute specifies additional expenses and fees that the plaintiff or holder of a 
certificate of sale may be reimbursed for if an action to foreclose the right of redemption 
has been filed. 
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman webpage on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report, 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. The office was established in 2020 pursuant 
to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 83/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3