START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 63 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 63 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Certified Local Farm and Fish Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill (1) renames the Certified Local Farm Enterprise Program to be the Certified Local 
Farm and Fish Program; (2) expands the program’s purpose to include preferences for the 
purchase of food made from specified invasive species; (3) adds an annual reporting 
requirement; and (4) makes conforming changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) can implement the 
expanded program and reporting requirement with existing budgeted resources. Any cost 
differential between seafood purchased from certified providers and seafood available from 
other sources is expected to be minimal and have no discernible effect on State agency 
expenditures for food, especially as more providers become certified. No effect on 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill affects only State agencies. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “certified Chesapeake invasive species” is a finfish species that is 
(1) ranked as high priority in the Maryland Aquatic Nuisance Species Management Plan 
and (2) harvested from the Chesapeake Bay or its tributaries. A “certified Chesapeake 
invasive species provider” is a person licensed and authorized as a seafood dealer under 
existing law that (1) is certified by MDA in accordance with specified regulations and 
(2) can demonstrate that the person’s product is a certified Chesapeake invasive species. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 63/ Page 2 
Under the bill, State agencies may count blue catfish (and other certified Chesapeake 
invasive species) provided by Chesapeake Bay watermen toward the statutory goal of 
purchasing at least 20% of food from certified local farms as that requirement is expanded 
to encompass purchases from certified Chesapeake invasive species providers. 
 
By December 31, 2023, and annually thereafter, the renamed Office for the Certified Local 
Farm and Fish Program in MDA must submit a consolidated report to specified committees 
of the General Assembly, based on data reported by units of State government. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 2 and 32 of 2021 established the Certified Local Farm Enterprise 
Program and office in MDA to encourage State agencies (including public four-year 
universities) to achieve an overall goal of purchasing 20% of food from certified local farm 
enterprises. The Acts also established a nonbudgeted Certified Local Farm Enterprise Food 
Aggregation Grant Fund within the Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry 
Development Corporation to establish and operate food aggregation, storage, processing, 
and distribution sites across the State through grants and near-equity investments. The bill 
adds certified Chesapeake invasive species providers to the calculation of the 20% goal as 
well as to certification requirements and grant-making opportunities described below, 
among other provisions of the program. 
 
Each State agency must structure its procurement procedures to try to achieve an overall 
percentage goal of 20% of its total dollar value of procurement contracts for food being 
made directly or indirectly to certified local farm enterprises. An agency may achieve the 
goal through competitive sealed bids and proposals and small procurements under terms in 
current law. 
 
The Office for the Certified Local Farm Enterprise Program administers the program and 
must establish (1) guidelines for each unit to consider when determining the appropriate 
participation goal for each food contract procurement; (2) procedures governing how the 
participation of certified local farm enterprises is counted toward contract goals; and 
(3) regulations to maximize notice to, and the opportunity to participate in the food 
procurement process by, a wide range of local farm enterprises. MDA must create 
two positions to provide staff to the office (MDA advises that the positions have been 
established). Each unit must consider specified factors and follow specified procedures in 
setting participation goals for each food contract. 
 
If an agency does not achieve the goal set for a specific contract, it must demonstrate to the 
office that it took all necessary and reasonable steps to achieve the goal. The office may 
grant a waiver if a unit provides a reasonable demonstration of good faith efforts to achieve 
the goal. Waivers may also be granted for sole source, expedited, or emergency 
procurements. The office must submit an annual report to the Board of Public Works 
(BPW) by July 31 of each year with specified information about waivers requested and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 63/ Page 3 
granted. BPW must keep a record of waivers requested and submit a copy to specified 
committees of the General Assembly by October 1 of each year. 
 
MDA must develop and maintain a directory of all certified local farm enterprises, 
including specified information about them, and make the directory accessible to the public 
on its website. 
 
Within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year, each unit must report specified information 
to the office. 
 
Certified Local Farm Enterprise Food Aggregation Grant Fund 
 
The fund is a nonbudgeted fund that consists of money appropriated in the State budget, 
principal that is repaid from near-equity investments, and any other money from any other 
source. It may only be used for establishing and operating food aggregation, storage, 
processing, and distribution sites across the State through grants and near-equity 
investments. From fiscal 2022 through 2025, $435,000 of mandated funding must be used 
to make grants and near-equity investments to (1) support the creation or expansion of 
agricultural product aggregation and storage sites and (2) facilitate participation in the 
Certified Local Farm Enterprise Program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Maryland-based suppliers of Chesapeake invasive species may 
benefit, through fiscal 2025, from grants to facilitate their participation in the program and, 
once certified, may experience higher demand for their products. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 386 (Senators Hester and Bailey) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland School for 
the Deaf; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of General Services; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; University System of Maryland; Department of Veterans 
Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 63/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 18, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4