START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 90 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 90 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Local Government - Regulatory Powers - Regulation of Invasive Bamboo 
 
 
This bill authorizes the governing body of a county or municipality to regulate (through an 
ordinance) invasive bamboo, including prohibiting a person from:  (1) selling invasive 
bamboo; (2) planting invasive bamboo; and (3) allowing invasive bamboo to grow on the 
property of the person without proper upkeep and appropriate containment measures, 
including barriers or trenches. The bill also authorizes the governing body of a county or 
municipality to provide for the enforcement of an ordinance adopted under the bill by 
requiring any damages caused by invasive bamboo to be mitigated and establishing a civil 
fine.  
 
The bill defines “invasive bamboo” as bamboo characterized by aggressive spreading 
behavior, including bamboo species in the genus Phyllostachys. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  County and municipal governments can implement the regulation of 
invasive bamboo with existing resources. Potential increase in local fine revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 90/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:    
 
Establishment of Lists of Tier 1 and Tier 2 Invasive Plants 
 
Chapter 142 of 2011 required the Secretary of Agriculture to – with the advice of the 
Invasive Plants Advisory Committee – (1) establish a list of tier 1 plants and tier 2 plants 
and (2) establish a procedure for classification or declassification of an invasive plant as a 
tier 1 invasive plant or a tier 2 invasive plant. “Tier 1 invasive plant” includes invasive 
plant species that cause or are likely to cause severe harm within the State. “Tier 2 invasive 
plant” includes invasive plant species that cause or are likely to cause substantial negative 
impact within the State.  
 
Most recently, Chapters 551 and 552 of 2022 required the Department of Natural 
Resources to publish on its website a list of plant species native to the State. The list must 
identify native plants that may be used and planted as an alternative to the use and planting 
of tier 2 invasive plants. Additionally, the Secretary of Agriculture must classify as a tier 1 
invasive plant or a tier 2 invasive plant each plant identified as invasive in the Plant 
Invaders of Mid-Atlantic Natural Areas publication issued by the National Park Service 
and the U.S.Fish and Wildlife Service. 
 
Bamboo has not been classified as a tier 1 invasive plant, but there are currently three types 
of bamboo that have been classified as tier 2 invasive plants:  (1) Nandina domestica 
(heavenly 
bamboo); 
(2) 
Phyllostachys 
aurea 
(golden 
bamboo); 
and 
(3) Phyllostachys aureosulcata (yellow groove bamboo).  
 
Regulation of Tier 1 and Tier 2 Invasive Plants 
 
In general, a person may not propagate, import, transfer, sell, purchase, transport, or 
introduce any living part of a tier 1 invasive plant in the State. However, a person may 
conduct these activities, with prior approval from the Secretary of Agriculture, for the 
purpose of disposing of, controlling, using for research or educational purposes, or 
exporting a plant out of the State. These restrictions do not apply to the transfer, lease, sale, 
or purchase of real property on which an invasive plant is located. In accordance with 
regulations adopted by the Secretary of Agriculture, a person may not (1) sell or offer for 
sale at a retail outlet a tier 2 invasive plant unless the retail outlet posts, in a conspicuous 
manner in proximity to all tier 2 plant displays, a sign identifying the plants as tier 2 plants 
or (2) provide landscaping services to plant or supply for planting a tier 2 invasive plant 
unless the person provides to the customer a list of tier 2 invasive plants. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 90/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses 
depending upon whether a county or municipal government decides to regulate invasive 
bamboo. Additional local regulations may (1) negatively affect small businesses that incur 
costs to comply with potential restrictions pertaining to invasive bamboo and (2) positively 
benefit landscaping businesses that are hired to remove or contain invasive bamboo.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll, Harford, and Queen Anne’s counties; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Association of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3