START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 623

Chapter 623

(House Bill 3)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland State Police Gun Center – Firearms Surrendered Under Final
Protective Orders

FOR the purpose of altering the purpose of the Maryland State Police Gun Center to include
the tracking, screening, and vetting of all firearms surrendered under final
protective orders in the State; requiring each law enforcement agency to report to
the Center certain information on certain firearms surrendered under final
protective orders; and generally relating to the Maryland State Police Gun Center.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 5–801 through 5–803
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

5–801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Center” means the Maryland State Police Gun Center.

(c) “Crime firearm” means a firearm that is:

(1) used in the commission of a crime of violence, as defined in § 5–101 of
this title; or

(2) recovered by a law enforcement agency in connection with illegal
firearm possession, transportation, or transfer.

(d) “Department” means the Department of State Police.

(e) “Federally licensed firearms dealer” means a person licensed by the federal
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives to deal in firearms.

(f) “Federally licensed firearms importer” means a person licensed by the federal
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives to import firearms.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 623 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) “FINAL PROTECTIVE ORDER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–501 OF
THE FAMILY LAW ARTICLE.

[(g)] (H) “Law enforcement agency” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of this
article.

5–802.

(a) The Center is established within the Department as a statewide firearms
enforcement center for the tracking, screening, and vetting of all:

(1) firearm crimes committed in the State; AND

(2) FIREARMS SURRENDERED UNDER FINAL PROTECTIVE ORDERS IN
THE STATE.

(b) This subtitle shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying
purposes and policies.

5–803.

(a) The Center shall create and maintain a statewide database to track
information on crimes committed with crime firearms AND FIREARMS SURRENDERED
UNDER FINAL PROTECTIVE ORDERS IN THE STATE.

(b) Each law enforcement agency shall report to the Center the following
information on crimes committed in the jurisdiction of the law enforcement agency with
crime firearms:

(1) the number and type of crime firearms;

(2) the jurisdictions where crime firearms are recovered;

(3) the sources of the crime firearms recovered, if discoverable, including:

(i) the federally licensed firearms importer;

(ii) the federally licensed firearms dealer; and

(iii) the first purchaser of the crime firearm;

(4) information regarding the individual found in possession of the crime
firearm, including:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 623

(i) the individual’s age;

(ii) the individual’s jurisdiction of residence;

(iii) the jurisdiction where the individual is charged; and

(iv) whether the individual was prohibited from possessing a firearm;
and

(5) any other information requested by the Center.

(C) EACH LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY SHALL REPORT TO THE CENTER THE
FOLLOWING INFORMATION ON FIREARMS SURRENDERED UNDER FINAL
PROTECTIVE ORDERS ISSUED IN THE JURISDICTION OF THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY:

(1) THE NUMBER AND TYPE OF FIREARMS;

(2) THE JURISDICTIONS WHERE FIREARMS ARE SURRENDERED; AND

(3) INFORMATION REGARDING THE INDIVIDUAL WHO SURRENDERED
EACH FIREARM, INCLUDING:

(I) THE INDIVIDUAL’S AGE;

(II) THE INDIVIDUAL’S JURISDICTION OF RESIDENCE; AND

(III) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUESTED BY THE CENTER.

[(c)] (D) The Center may require a law enforcement agency to report any other
information relating to firearm crimes committed in the jurisdiction of the law enforcement
agency to assist the Center in the tracking of firearm crimes committed in the State.

[(d)] (E) The Center shall designate how often law enforcement agencies are
required to report the information required under this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3