START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 573

Chapter 573

(House Bill 32)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Food System Resiliency Council

FOR the purpose of establishing that the Maryland Food System Resiliency Council is in
the Office of Resilience in the Maryland Department of Emergency Management;
altering the membership of the Council; altering the process for electing a cochair of
the Council; and generally relating to the Maryland Food System Resiliency Council.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 14–1101 and 14–1102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

14–1101.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Council” means the Maryland Food System Resiliency Council.

(c) [“Director” means the Director of the Maryland Emergency Management
Agency.

(d)] “Food council organization” means a local food council organization that is
established in the State.

14–1102.

(a) There is a Maryland Food System Resiliency Council IN THE OFFICE OF
RESILIENCE IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(b) The Council consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 573 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
House;

(3) the [Director] SECRETARY, or the [Director’s] SECRETARY’S
designee;

(4) the Secretary of Human Services, or the Secretary’s designee;

(5) the Secretary of Agriculture, or the Secretary’s designee;

(6) the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary’s designee;

(7) the Executive Director of the Maryland Farm Bureau, or the Executive
Director’s designee;

(8) the Executive Director of the Maryland Agricultural and
Resource–Based Industry Development Corporation, or the Executive Director’s designee;

(9) the Dean of the University of Maryland College of Agriculture and
Natural Resources, or the Dean’s designee; and

(10) the following members appointed by the [Director] SECRETARY:

(i) five representatives of five different food council organizations
who are recommended by members of food council organizations;

(ii) one representative of the University of Maryland Extension;

(iii) one representative of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Small Farm Program;

(iv) one representative of the Harry R. Hughes Center for
Agro–Ecology;

(v) one representative of a public school system in the State who has
experience in food security and local food procurement;

(vi) one representative of a statewide food security advocacy
organization;

(vii) one farmer in the State;

(viii) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SEAFOOD INDUSTRY;

(IX) one owner of a food business in the State;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 573

(ix) (X) one expert in food system policy;

(x) (XI) one expert on racial equity in the food system;

(xi) (XII) one expert on food system impacts on climate and the
environment;

(xii) (XIII) one expert on food nutrition and public health; and

(xiii) (XIV) any other individual that the [Director] SECRETARY
deems appropriate.

(c) The [Director] SECRETARY shall:

(1) ensure that all five geographic areas of the State are represented by the
appointed members of the Council; and

(2) appoint a successor in the event of a vacancy on the Council.

(d) (1) (i) The term of a member of the Council appointed by the [Director]
SECRETARY is 3 years.

(ii) An appointed member may not serve for more than 2 consecutive
three year terms.

(2) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
appointed and qualifies.

(3) A member who is appointed after a term has begun shall serve for the
rest of the term or until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(e) A member of the Council:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Council; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State Budget.

(f) A majority of the members then serving on the Council is a quorum.

(g) (1) (i) The [Director] SECRETARY, or the [Director’s] SECRETARY’S
designee, and one member [representing a food council organization] who is elected in
accordance with subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph shall cochair the Council.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 573 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) At the first meeting of each year, the Council shall elect a cochair
from among the [five] Council members [representing food council organizations] for a
term of 1 year.

(2) The Secretary of Agriculture, or the Secretary’s designee, the Secretary
of Human Services, or the Secretary’s designee, and the Dean of the University of Maryland
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, or the Dean’s designee shall co–vice chair
the Council.

(h) (1) The Council may establish subcommittees to provide technical
assistance to the Council.

(2) The Council may establish subcommittee topics and membership as the
Council deems appropriate.

(i) The [Maryland Emergency Management Agency and the University of
Maryland College of Agriculture and Natural Resources] DEPARTMENT shall provide staff
for the Council[, as deemed necessary by the cochairs].

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4