START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 285

Chapter 285

(House Bill 48)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Collaborative Care Model Services –
Implementation and Reimbursement Expansion

FOR the purpose of repealing the Collaborative Care Pilot Program; requiring the
Maryland Department of Health to implement and provide reimbursement for
services provided in accordance with the Collaborative Care Model under the
Maryland Medical Assistance Program; and generally relating to the provision and
reimbursement of somatic and behavioral health services in primary care settings
under the Maryland Medical Assistance Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–141.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 683 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018
Section 2

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 684 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–141.1.

(a) [(1)] In this section [the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2)], “Collaborative Care Model” means an evidence–based approach for
integrating somatic and behavioral health services in primary care settings that includes:

[(i)] (1) Care coordination and management;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 285 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(ii)] (2) Regular, proactive outcome monitoring and treatment for
outcome targets using standardized outcome measurement rating scales and electronic
tools, such as patient tracking; and

[(iii)] (3) Regular systematic psychiatric and substance use disorder
caseload reviews and consultation with a psychiatrist, an addiction medicine specialist, or
any other behavioral health medicine specialist as allowed under federal regulations
governing the model.

[(3) “Pilot Program” means the Collaborative Care Pilot Program.]

(b) This section may not be construed to prohibit referrals from a primary care
provider to a specialty behavioral health care provider.

[(c) There is a Collaborative Care Pilot Program in the Department.

(d) The purpose of the Pilot Program is to establish and implement a
Collaborative Care Model in primary care settings in which health care services are
provided to Program recipients enrolled in HealthChoice.

(e) The Department shall administer the Pilot Program.

(f) (1) The Department shall select up to three sites at which a Collaborative
Care Model shall be established over a 4–year period.

(2) The sites selected by the Department shall be adult or pediatric
nonspecialty medical practices or health systems that serve a significant number of
Program recipients.

(3) To the extent practicable, one of the sites selected by the Department
under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be located in a rural area of the State.

(g) The sites selected by the Department under subsection (f) of this section shall
ensure that treatment services, prescriptions, and care management that would be
provided to an individual under the Pilot Program are not duplicative of specialty
behavioral health care services being received by the individual.

(h) The Department shall provide funding to sites participating in the Pilot
Program for:

(1) Infrastructure development, including the development of a patient
registry and other monitoring, reporting, and billing tools required to implement a
Collaborative Care Model;

(2) Training staff to implement the Collaborative Care Model;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 285

(3) Staffing for care management and psychiatric consultation provided
under the Collaborative Care Model; and

(4) Other purposes necessary to implement and evaluate the Collaborative
Care Model.

(i) The Department shall:

(1) Collaborate with stakeholders in the development, implementation,
and outcome monitoring of the Pilot Program; and

(2) Collect outcomes data on recipients of health care services under the
Pilot Program to:

(i) Evaluate the effectiveness of the Collaborative Care Model,
including by evaluating the number of and outcomes for individuals who:

1. Were not diagnosed as having a behavioral health
condition before receiving treatment through the Pilot Program;

2. Were not diagnosed as having a behavioral health
condition before being referred to and treated by a specialty behavioral health provider;

3. Received behavioral health services in a primary care
setting before receiving treatment through the Pilot Program; and

4. Received specialty behavioral health care services before
being identified as eligible to receive treatment through the Pilot Program; and

(ii) Determine whether to]

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL implement AND PROVIDE REIMBURSEMENT
FOR SERVICES PROVIDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH the Collaborative Care Model
statewide in primary care settings that provide health care services to Program recipients.

[(j) The Department shall apply to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services for an amendment to the State’s § 1115 HealthChoice Demonstration waiver if
necessary to implement the Pilot Program.

(k) For fiscal year 2020, fiscal year 2021, fiscal year 2022, and fiscal year 2023,
the Governor shall include in the annual budget an appropriation of $550,000 for the Pilot
Program.

(l) On or before November 1, 2023, the Department shall report to the Governor
and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly
on the Department’s findings and recommendations from the Pilot Program.]

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 285 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Chapter 683 of the Acts of 2018

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2018. [It shall remain effective for a period of 6 years and, at the end of June 30, 2024,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

Chapter 684 of the Acts of 2018

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2018. [It shall remain effective for a period of 6 years and, at the end of June 30, 2024,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4