START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 66 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 66 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Circuit Courts and District Court - Dishonored Checks - Service Charges 
 
 
This bill increases, from $10 to $30, the amount of the service charge that may be imposed 
by a circuit court or the District Court for a dishonored check.    
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by a minimum of $7,600 in FY 2024 and by 
a minimum of $10,100 annually thereafter. Potential minimal increase in special fund 
revenues. No material effect on expenditures is anticipated. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$7,600 
$10,100 
$10,100 
$10,100 
$10,100 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$7,600 
$10,100 
$10,100 
$10,100 
$10,100  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local governmental operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A circuit court, or the District Court in any motor vehicle, criminal, or civil 
cases, may generally impose a service charge of $10 for a dishonored check. The service 
charge that may be imposed is in addition to any other penalty prescribed by law.  
       

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 66/ Page 2 
The Central Collection Unit (CCU) in the Department of Budget and Management, subject 
to various exceptions, is generally responsible for the collection of each delinquent account 
or other debt that is owed to the State or any of its officials or units.    
 
State Fiscal Effect:  According to information provided by the Judiciary, it has received 
over 720 dishonored checks annually since 2019. Although the bill increases the service 
charge fee that may be imposed, the impact on State revenues is dependent on the fees 
actually collected. Assuming that fees are successfully collected in at least 70% of cases 
and that the Judiciary continues to receive at least 720 dishonored checks annually, general 
fund revenues increase by a minimum of $7,600 in fiscal 2024, which reflects the bill’s 
October 1, 2023 effective date, and by a minimum of $10,100 annually thereafter.   
 
The Judiciary further advises that because a $30 minimum is required in order for CCU to 
take collection action, the increase in the amount of the service charge will also allow the 
Judiciary to pursue collection efforts through CCU. CCU recovers its operating expenses 
by assessing and collecting a fee in addition to and for the debts that it is assigned. To the 
extent that the Judiciary transfers debt related to service charges to CCU and CCU assesses 
and collects a fee on this debt, special fund revenues may increase minimally. Because any 
special fund balance for CCU in excess of 15% of the unit’s actual operating expenses 
reverts to the general fund, general fund revenues may also increase (beyond the estimate 
above) to the extent that additional funds revert. Any potential reversion impact, however, 
is assumed to be minimal. It is also assumed that CCU’s workload is not materially 
affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 99 (Senator Beidle) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - February 28, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2