START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 58 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 58 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Open Meetings Act - State Ethics Commission (Maryland State Agency 
Transparency Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill makes the State Ethics Commission (SEC) subject to enhanced requirements 
under the Open Meetings Act. The bill also requires that the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) provide the technical staff, support, and equipment necessary to 
livestream the open meetings of SEC. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10,000 in FY 2024 only for SEC to 
reimburse DoIT for procuring video streaming equipment and related support services for 
SEC. Reimbursable revenues and expenditures increase commensurately for DoIT in 
FY 2024. The Open Meetings Law Compliance Board can handle any additional 
complaints that may arise as a result of the bill with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Open Meetings Act, Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 58/ Page 2 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A “public 
body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by the 
Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum of 
understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of education 
and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; a rule, 
resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others. 
 
Guidance provided by the Office of the Attorney General indicates that when the meeting 
“place” is a conference call, the public can be provided access through a call-in number or 
by access to a meeting room with a speakerphone. 
 
Agendas 
 
Generally, a public body must make an agenda available to the public prior to meeting in 
an open session. The agenda must include known items of business or topics to be 
discussed at the meeting and indicate whether the public body expects to close any portion 
of the meeting in accordance with State law. The public body is not required to include in 
the agenda any information regarding the subject matter of a closed portion of the meeting. 
If a public body is unable to comply with specified deadlines for the release of a meeting 
agenda because the meeting is scheduled in response to an emergency, a natural disaster, 
or any other unanticipated situation, the public body must make available, on request, an 
agenda of the meeting within a reasonable time after the meeting occurs. 
 
Minutes 
 
As soon as practicable after an open session, a public body must prepare minutes of the 
meeting. The minutes must reflect each item that the public body considered, the action it 
took on each item, and each vote that was recorded. If a public body meets in closed 
session, the minutes for a public body’s next open session must include a summary that 
includes specified information about the proceedings of the closed meeting. A public body 
need not prepare written minutes of an open session if (1) live and archived video or audio 
streaming of the open session is available or (2) if the public body votes on legislation and 
the individual votes taken by each participating member of the public body are promptly 
posted on the Internet.  
 
In general, with limited exceptions, minutes of a public body must be available for public 
inspection during normal business hours. A public body must retain a copy of the minutes 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 58/ Page 3 
of each session and any specified recording for at least five years and, to the extent 
practicable, post them online. 
 
Enhanced Open Meetings Requirements 
 
Certain economic and regional development organizations and other public bodies are 
subject to additional requirements under the Open Meetings Act; the bill adds SEC to the 
list of public bodies subject to these requirements. Generally, these requirements include 
making available on the body’s website each open meeting agenda and other specified 
documents at least 48 hours in advance. The bodies must offer live video streaming of each 
portion of a meeting held in open session, as specified. In addition, the public body must 
also maintain on its website past meeting minutes for at least five years after the date of 
the meeting, and a complete and unedited archived video recording of the open meeting 
for at least one year after the date of the meeting. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $10,000 only in fiscal 2024 
for SEC to reimburse DoIT for the purchase of equipment and related support services for 
SEC; reimbursable revenues and expenditures for DoIT increase accordingly. It is assumed 
that ongoing costs for SEC to reimburse DoIT for continued technical support are minimal 
and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 35 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; State Ethics Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3