START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 32 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 32 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Food System Resiliency Council 
 
   
This bill establishes that the existing Maryland Food System Resiliency Council is in the 
Office of Resilience within the Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
(MDEM). MDEM must provide staff for the council. The bill (1) repeals the requirement 
that the elected cochair of the council be one of the five food council organization 
representatives on the council and (2) adds one representative of the seafood industry as a 
member of the council. The bill also makes technical changes reflecting the recent 
establishment of MDEM as a principal department of the Executive Branch.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill does not create additional duties for the council and MDEM 
already provides staff for the council, the bill alone does not require additional 
expenditures, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Food System Resiliency Council 
 
Established under Chapters 724 and 725 of 2021, the council must meet regularly for a 
period of at least two years to address food insecurity in the State. The cochairs of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 32/ Page 2 
council are the Director of the Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA), (the 
predecessor of MDEM), or the director’s designee, and one elected cochair who must be 
one of the five food council organization representatives on the council. MEMA and the 
University of Maryland College of Agriculture and Natural Resources must provide staff 
for the council, as deemed necessary by the cochairs.  
 
Among other entities, the council consists of representatives from several State agencies, 
one member of the Senate of Maryland, one member of the House of Delegates, and 
members appointed by the Director of MEMA (including a representative of a public 
school system, specified food council organizations, specified experts, and one farmer, 
among others). The director must (1) ensure that all five geographic areas of the State are 
represented by the appointed members of the council and (2) appoint a successor in the 
event of a vacancy.  
 
The council must pursue specified goals, including addressing the food insecurity crisis in 
the State resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic crisis; 
developing, by November 1, 2021, specified equity and sustainability policy 
recommendations to increase the long-term resiliency of the food system; expanding the 
impact of existing food council organizations by providing coordination and facilitation of 
knowledge exchange at the State level and supporting identification and application of 
grants to operating funds to support existing and new food council organizations; and 
developing, by November 1, 2021, a strategic plan to increase the production and 
procurement of Maryland certified food. The council must also submit interim reports to 
the General Assembly, as specified. Among other requirements, the council was required 
to submit a report to the General Assembly by November 1, 2022, on the council’s 
recommendations for a long-term structure for a statewide food policy council, including 
providing recommendations on (1) appropriate policy and legislative changes; (2) potential 
ways to restructure the council, as specified; and (3) any other recommendations of the 
council. This bill reflects one of the recommendations in the council’s November 2022 
report.  
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management and the Office of Resilience 
 
Chapters 287 and 288 of 2021 established MDEM as a principal department of the 
Executive Branch of State government and as the successor to MEMA. MDEM is 
responsible for coordinating the State response in any major emergency or disaster. This 
includes supporting local governments as needed or requested and coordinating assistance 
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other federal partners. MDEM 
manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad range of initiatives leading to 
enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of natural and man-made disasters 
that could threaten the State’s citizens. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 32/ Page 3 
Chapter 482 of 2022 established the Office of Resilience within MDEM. Led by the Chief 
Resiliency Officer (CRO), the office must (1) coordinate and administer federal prevention, 
protection, mitigation, and recovery-focused programs; (2) administer State mitigation 
grants and loans; (3) identify flood risk assessment tools for use by programs and projects 
statewide; (4) administer other programs as directed by the Secretary of Emergency 
Management and CRO; (5) prioritize vulnerable communities and ensure that investments 
are made with a focus on environmental justice; and (6) conduct outreach and provide 
technical assistance to local jurisdictions to support the development of local resiliency 
plans.  
 
State Expenditures:  According to MDEM, continued staffing for the council under the 
bill requires one full-time food resilience specialist and $100,000 annually for contractual 
services, at a total cost of approximately $167,800 in fiscal 2024 (which reflects the bill’s 
October 1, 2023 effective date), increasing to $232,600 by fiscal 2028. The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees. While the bill formally houses the council within 
MDEM’s Office of Resilience, MDEM already staffs the council, and the bill does not alter 
the duties of the council. Thus, the bill alone does not require additional MDEM 
expenditures. However, as discussed below, current funding for the council and the Office 
of Resilience may affect MDEM’s ability to meet the full scope of the council’s 
responsibilities and goals. While DLS acknowledges that both the council and the office 
may well be underfunded, any funding required for the council has already been accounted 
for in the fiscal and policy notes for Chapters 724 and 725 and is not a result of this bill. 
 
Chapters 724 and 725 established the council and, among other things, required MEMA 
(now MDEM) and the University of Maryland College of Agriculture and Natural 
Resources to provide staff for the council as deemed necessary by the council’s cochairs. 
The fiscal and policy notes for that legislation estimated the need to hire one program 
manager within MEMA (now MDEM) to staff the council, assist the council in working 
toward its stated goals, collaborate with stakeholders, and submit the required reports. 
 
MDEM advises that it is currently the sole staffing agency for the council. MDEM 
currently staffs the council with one full-time contractual food resilience specialist, who is 
funded through a federal grant set to expire in September 2023; one part-time 
administrative assistant with shared responsibilities within the department; and $100,000 
in contractual services to provide research, training, and other administrative support for 
the council. However, MDEM advises that there is no funding for the council in the 
fiscal 2024 budget as introduced.  
 
Further, while the bill houses the council within the Office of Resilience, MDEM advises 
that it has not yet hired any staff for the office. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced, 
however, includes two positions for the office (one CRO and one contractual 
administrator). For context, the fiscal and policy note for Chapter 482 of 2022, which 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 32/ Page 4 
established the office, estimated the need for five full-time staff and three half-time staff 
(one CRO, one half-time administrative assistant, one half-time fiscal services officer, 
four program administrators, and one half-time human resource officer) within MDEM to 
establish and maintain the office and to comply with the office’s duties and responsibilities 
under that legislation (which did not include staffing the council). 
 
As the University of Maryland College of Agriculture and Natural Resources does not 
provide staff for the council, the bill does not affect the expenditures of the University 
System of Maryland.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 124 (Senator Hester, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; University 
System of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4