START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 62 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 62 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Land Use - Public Service Companies - Pollinator-Friendly Vegetation 
Management and Utility-Designated Pollinator Areas 
 
 
This bill prohibits a local government from imposing any unreasonable limitation, 
including a land use restriction, on a utility-designated pollinator area maintained by a 
public service company if (1) the area is subject to a Candidate Conservation Agreement 
between the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the public service company or (2) the 
public service company maintains and regularly tends to the area by performing or 
overseeing pollinator-friendly vegetation management, as specified. The bill also specifies 
related intent of the General Assembly regarding the application of other State and local 
laws and public service company activities. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not appear to materially affect local government finances or 
operations, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Pollinator-friendly vegetation management” means landscape 
management that creates habitats for native pollinators and other native wildlife and native 
plants that together form an interdependent natural community and provides food, water, 
cover, or sites for nesting. It includes employing no-mow methods, employing rotational 
mowing cycles, using integrative vegetation management to maintain low-growing plant 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 62/ Page 2 
communities, and using scientifically accepted approaches for the protection of the State’s 
rare, threatened, or endangered plant and wildlife species. 
 
“Utility-designated pollinator area” means property, including any right-of-way or 
easement (1) that is maintained by a public service company; (2) for which the public 
service company has exclusive maintenance rights; and (3) that is voluntarily identified by 
the public service company as an area that will be maintained with pollinator-friendly 
vegetation management to support pollinators. 
 
An “unreasonable limitation on pollinator-friendly vegetation management” includes a 
limitation that significantly increases the cost or decreases the efficacy of 
pollinator-friendly vegetation management or requires cultivated vegetation to consist 
wholly or partly of turf grass. 
 
Exclusions 
 
The bill does not apply to a limitation imposed by a local government on pollinator-friendly 
vegetation management performed or overseen by a public service company on its 
property, including a right-of-way or an easement, located on or below a trail overlap, a 
park overlap, or active farmland. Additionally, the bill may not be construed to (1) prohibit 
a local government from imposing a land use restriction on the type, number, or location 
of pollinator-friendly vegetation management features that pertain to the safe and 
dependable delivery of energy products or human health and safety or (2) limit or restrict 
mowing outside of a utility-designated pollinator area. 
 
Current Law:  The Public Service Commission (PSC) is required to adopt regulations 
implementing service quality and reliability standards for the delivery of electricity to retail 
customers by electric companies. The resulting regulations set minimum reliability 
standards for each electric company based on past performance, established a mandatory 
annual performance reporting system, and mandated vegetation management, among other 
requirements. A county or municipality is prohibited from adopting or enforcing a local 
law, rule, or regulation or taking any other action that interferes with or materially increases 
the cost of the work of an electric company toward compliance with the vegetation 
management standards adopted by PSC. 
 
Electric company vegetation management programs must address several technical 
requirements such as tree pruning and removal; vegetation management around poles, 
substations, and overhead lines; vegetation management along rights-of-way; inspection of 
vegetation management; public education and notice; and debris management. Electric 
companies must determine the extent and priority of vegetation management at a site based 
on several factors, such as the relative importance of the affected conductor in maintaining 
reliable and safe power, the company’s legal rights to access the area where vegetation 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 62/ Page 3 
management is to be performed, State and local laws and regulations that affect vegetation 
management at the site, and customer acceptance of vegetation management at the site. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  No local government that responded to the request for information 
for this fiscal and policy note indicated a fiscal effect due to the bill; while this is just a 
sample, given the bill’s limited scope and various exclusions, it is likely to be the case for 
most or all local governments. 
 
Additional Comments:  A Candidate Conservation Agreement is a formal, voluntary 
agreement between the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and one or more parties to address 
the conservation needs of candidate species or species that may become candidates in the 
near future (for listing under the federal Endangered Species Act). Participants voluntarily 
commit to implement specific actions designed to remove or reduce threats to the covered 
species. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 62 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; City of Annapolis; 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
Enrolled - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3