START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 74

Chapter 74

(House Bill 10)

AN ACT concerning

Correctional Officers’ Retirement System – Talbot County

FOR the purpose of requiring membership in the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System
for certain local detention center officers of Talbot County in the event Talbot County
becomes a participating governmental unit in the Correctional Officers’ Retirement
System; providing that certain local detention center officers who join the
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System and receive certain service credit shall no
longer be members of the Employees’ Pension System; and generally relating to
Talbot County’s participation in the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System.

BY adding to
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 31–2B–08
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

31–2B–08.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A LOCAL DETENTION
CENTER OFFICER OF TALBOT COUNTY BEFORE THE EFFECTIVE DATE AND WHO
REMAINS A LOCAL DETENTION CENTER OFFICER OF TALBOT COUNTY THROUGH
THE EFFECTIVE DATE.

(B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, IF TALBOT
COUNTY BECOMES A PARTICIPATING GOVERNMENTAL UNIT IN THE CORRECTIONAL
OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM, MEMBERSHIP IN THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS’
RETIREMENT SYSTEM IS MANDATORY FOR AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) IF TALBOT COUNTY COMMENCES PARTICIPATION IN THE
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION IS ENTITLED TO ELIGIBILITY SERVICE AND CREDITABLE
SERVICE IN THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM FOR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 74 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

EMPLOYMENT WITH TALBOT COUNTY BEFORE THE EFFECTIVE DATE.

(D) ON JOINING THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
AND RECEIVING SERVICE CREDIT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION, AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL:

(1) NO LONGER BE A MEMBER OF THE EMPLOYEES’ PENSION
SYSTEM; AND

(2) HAVE NO FURTHER RIGHTS TO ANY BENEFIT IN THE EMPLOYEES’
PENSION SYSTEM.

(E) THE TRANSFER OF CREDITABLE SERVICE FOR AN INDIVIDUAL
DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION WHO IS A MEMBER OF THE
EMPLOYEES’ PENSION SYSTEM THROUGH THE EFFECTIVE DATE, AND WHO
TRANSFERS TO THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM UNDER THIS
SECTION, IS NOT GOVERNED BY TITLE 37 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(F) IF TALBOT COUNTY BECOMES A PARTICIPATING GOVERNMENTAL UNIT
IN THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM, § 31–2B–05(C) OF THIS
SUBTITLE SHALL GOVERN THE TRANSFER AND CREDITING OF ASSETS ON THE
EFFECTIVE DATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2