START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 177

Chapter 177

(House Bill 23)

AN ACT concerning

Mobile and Manufactured Homes – ~~Sale~~ ~~of~~ ~~Manufactured~~ ~~Housing~~ Relocation
Plans and Sales of Communities
(Manufactured Housing Modernization Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of altering requirements relating to relocation plans for mobile home
parks; requiring the owner of a manufactured housing community to comply with
certain requirements when selling the manufactured housing community, including
providing homeowners the opportunity to purchase the manufactured housing
community; requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development to
list certain organizations and certain county housing agencies on its website;
requiring the owner of a manufactured housing community to provide the list to
homeowners; requiring a certain community owner or purchaser of a manufactured
housing community to comply with certain notice requirements after the sale of a
manufactured housing community; and generally relating to mobile and
manufactured homes and manufactured housing communities.

BY renumbering
Article – Real Property
Section 8A–1801 through 8A–1803 and the subtitle “Subtitle 18. Applicability,
Enforcement and Short Title”
to be Section 8A–1901 through 8A–1903 and the subtitle “Subtitle 19. Applicability,
Enforcement and Short Title”, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 8A–1201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section ~~8B–401~~ ~~through~~ ~~8B–405~~ 8A–1801 through 8A–1806 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle ~~4.~~ 18. Sale of Manufactured Housing Communities”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 8A–1801 through 8A–1803 and the subtitle “Subtitle 18. Applicability,
Enforcement and Short Title” of Article – Real Property of the Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 177 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

be renumbered to be Section(s) 8A–1901 through 8A–1903 and the subtitle “Subtitle 19.
Applicability, Enforcement and Short Title”, respectively.

~~SECTION~~ ~~1.~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~ENACTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ASSEMBLY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND~~
SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read as
follows:

Article – Real Property

8A–1201.

(a) When a mobile home park owner submits an application for a change in the
land use of a park, the owner shall submit, as part of the application, a relocation plan for
park residents who will be dislocated as a result of the change.

(b) (1) If a mobile home park owner does not submit a relocation plan for the
park residents or does not comply with the terms of an approved plan, the mobile home
park owner is in default of the plan and the application for change of land use submitted
under subsection (a) of this section may not be approved until the owner submits and
complies with a plan.

(2) A relocation plan for park residents shall include:

(i) A complete list of park residents, including household sizes,
addresses, and contact information for residents;

(ii) A relocation calendar or timeline and written monthly updates
on the progress of the relocation;

(iii) If the plan is for closing a park with more than [38] 10 sites, a
budget reflecting the amount of relocation assistance allocated by the mobile home park
owner to be given to each household as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section;

(iv) A description of the requirement that a resident provide written
notice of the resident’s intention to vacate the park and the timetable for the owner to pay
relocation assistance, as provided under subsection (c)(2) of this section;

(v) A list of area mobile home parks with vacancies; and

(vi) A list of area companies that relocate mobile homes.

(3) If a mobile home park owner undertakes a reasonable, good faith
inquiry to obtain the information required under paragraph (2) of this subsection and the
information in the relocation plan is based on the owner’s reasonable, good faith inquiry,
the owner shall not incur any liability and may not be estopped from obtaining possession
of the premises because of a failure to provide accurate information in the relocation plan.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 177

(4) A relocation plan may not require, as a condition of approval by the local
governing body of the plan or the change in land use submitted under subsection (a) of this
section, that:

(i) Relocation assistance be paid unless the mobile home park owner
sends a notice of park closure to each resident;

(ii) The amount of relocation assistance exceed the amount described
in subsection (c)(1) of this section;

(iii) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any amount
of relocation assistance be paid to a resident before possession of the premises is returned
to the owner; or

(iv) The owner assure the relocation of any resident.

(5) If an owner rescinds a notice of park closure, the owner is not required
to pay relocation assistance after the date the notice of rescission is sent to the residents.

(6) An owner is not required to pay relocation assistance to any potential
resident who, after receiving written notice of the application for change in land use or
written notice of park closure, signs an agreement to rent premises in the park.

(c) (1) If a mobile home park with more than [38] 10 sites is closed, the
relocation assistance paid to each household shall equal the amount of rent for the
premises, excluding taxes and utilities, paid for the [10] 12 months immediately preceding
the date the resident vacates the premises.

(2) The relocation assistance shall be paid in the following manner:

(i) One half of the relocation assistance shall be paid to a resident
within 30 days after the mobile home park owner receives written notice of:

1. The resident’s intention to vacate the park; and

2. The date on which the resident will return possession of
the premises to the owner; and

(ii) One half of the relocation assistance shall be paid to a resident
within 30 days after the resident returns possession of the premises to the owner.

(3) If a resident fails to return possession of the premises by removing the
mobile home from the premises on or before the date specified in the resident’s notice of
intention to vacate, the resident shall forfeit the balance of any relocation assistance due
unless the mobile home park owner agrees in writing to a different date.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 177 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) (1) The local governing body of the county or municipal corporation in
which a mobile home park is located may provide additional relocation assistance to
residents.

(2) A mobile home park owner is not responsible for any payments made
under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

SUBTITLE 4. 18. SALE OF MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITIES.

~~8B–401.~~ 8A–1801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMUNITY OWNER” MEANS THE OWNER OF A MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY.

(C) “HOMEOWNER” MEANS THE AN OWNER OF A MANUFACTURED HOME
WHO LEASES OR RENTS A LOT IN A MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY FOR
RESIDENTIAL USE.

(D) “HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN INCORPORATED OR
UNINCORPORATED ORGANIZATION, INCLUDING A COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION, THAT:

(1) REPRESENTS THE INTERESTS OF THE HOMEOWNERS IN A
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY;

(2) IS OPEN TO ALL HOMEOWNERS RESIDING IN THE MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY; AND

(3) IS CONTROLLED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE ORGANIZATION; AND

(4) COMPRISES HOMEOWNERS WHO LEASE OR RENT AT LEAST 75%
OF THE LOTS IN THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY.

(E) “MANUFACTURED HOME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8B–101 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

(E) (F) (1) “MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY” MEANS ANY
PROPERTY LEASED OR HELD OUT FOR LEASE TO TWO OR MORE OWNERS OF
MANUFACTURED HOMES FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 177

(2) “MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY” INCLUDES A PARK, AS
DEFINED IN § 8A–101 OF THIS ARTICLE, FOR MOBILE HOMES, AS DEFINED IN §
8A–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~8B–402.~~ 8A–1802.

(A) THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLY SEPARATELY TO EACH
SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT OFFER TO SELL OR TO PURCHASE A MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY.

(B) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO THE POTENTIAL SALE OF A
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY IF:

(1) A MORTGAGEE, GRANTEE, OR OTHER SECURED PARTY HAS
FORECLOSED ON THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY AND THE
MORTGAGEE, GRANTEE, OR SECURED PARTY IS SELLING THE MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY:

(I) AT A FORECLOSURE SALE; OR

(II) AFTER PURCHASING THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING
COMMUNITY AT A FORECLOSURE SALE;

(1) (2) THE COMMUNITY OWNER IS SELLING THE MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY TO:

(I) A FAMILY MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY OWNER; OR

(II) A TRUST WHOSE BENEFICIARIES ARE FAMILY MEMBERS OF
THE COMMUNITY OWNER;

(2) (3) THE COMMUNITY OWNER IS A PARTNERSHIP, LIMITED
LIABILITY COMPANY, OR SIMILAR BUSINESS ENTITY AND THE SALE IS TO ONE OR
MORE OF THE PARTNERS OR MEMBERS OF THE BUSINESS ENTITY;

(3) (4) THE CONVEYANCE OF AN INTEREST IN THE
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY IS INCIDENTAL TO THE FINANCING OF THE
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY;

(4) (5) THE SALE OF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY
IS BETWEEN JOINT TENANTS OR TENANTS IN COMMON; OR

(5) (6) THE SALE OF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY
IS A RESULT OF THE EXERCISE OF THE POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN;
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 177 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) THE SALE OF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY
INVOLVES A MERGER, RECAPITALIZATION, OR SIMILAR TRANSACTION WHERE:

(I) AT LEAST ONE COMMUNITY OWNER PRIOR TO THE
TRANSACTION REMAINS A COMMUNITY OWNER AFTER THE TRANSACTION; AND

(II) THE COMMUNITY OWNER FILES AN AFFIDAVIT, RECORDED
IN THE LAND RECORDS IN THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE PROPERTY IS LOCATED,
AFFIRMING THAT THE COMMUNITY OWNER WILL ALLOW CONTINUED USE OF THE
LAND AS A MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY FOR AT LEAST 6 MONTHS AFTER
THE DATE THE TRANSACTION IS FINALIZED; OR

(8) THE SALE OF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY
INVOLVES:

(I) A LIKE–KIND EXCHANGE; OR

(II) A SALE OF MORE THAN ONE HOME IN THE COMMUNITY TO A
SINGLE PURCHASER.

~~8B–403.~~ 8A–1803.

(A) IF A MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY OWNER RECEIVES AN
OFFER TO PURCHASE THE COMMUNITY, ACCEPTANCE OF THAT OFFER SHALL BE
CONDITIONED ON THE COMMUNITY OWNER PURCHASER FILING AN AFFIDAVIT,
RECORDED IN THE LAND RECORDS IN THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE PROPERTY IS
LOCATED, AFFIRMING THAT:

(1) THE PURCHASER WILL ALLOW CONTINUED USE OF THE LAND AS A
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY FOR 5 YEARS AFTER THE DATE THE
PURCHASE IS FINALIZED; AND

(2) RENT FOR A LOT ON THE PROPERTY WILL NOT INCREASE BY MORE
THAN 10% PER YEAR FOR THE FIRST 3 YEARS AFTER THE DATE THE PURCHASE IS
FINALIZED.

(B) IF THE PURCHASER FAILS TO FILE AN AFFIDAVIT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, ACCEPTANCE BY THE COMMUNITY OWNER OF
THE OFFER TO PURCHASE THE COMMUNITY SHALL BE CONDITIONED ON THE
COMMUNITY OWNER:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 177

(1) PROVIDING NOTICE OF THE TERMS OF THE OFFER OR THE
CONTRACT THAT THE ~~MANUFACTURED~~ ~~HOME~~ COMMUNITY OWNER HAS
CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTED TO:

(I) EACH HOMEOWNER IN THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING
COMMUNITY; AND

(II) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT; AND

(III) THE APPROPRIATE HOUSING AGENCY; AND

(2) PROVIDING THE HOMEOWNERS WITH THE OPPORTUNITY TO
PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
8B–404 8A–1804 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (C) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) (B) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL:

(1) BE BE POSTED IN A PUBLIC AREA OF THE MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY;

(2) BE SENT BY REGISTERED OR CERTIFIED MAIL AND INCLUDE TO
THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION; AND

(3) INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

(1) (I) THE PRICE AND MATERIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE
OFFER THAT THE COMMUNITY OWNER HAS CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTED FOR THE
SALE OF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY WITH COPIES OF ANY
DOCUMENTS EVIDENCING THE PRICE AND TERMS AND CONDITIONS; AND

(2) (II) A STATEMENT INDICATING THAT THE HOMEOWNERS,
THROUGH A HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION, MAY PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY BY SUBMITTING AN OFFER WITHIN 60 DAYS OF THE MAILING
DATE OF THE NOTICE, CONTAINING SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR MATERIAL TERMS TO
THE OFFER THAT THE COMMUNITY OWNER HAS CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTED; AND

(III) THE LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS AND COUNTY HOUSING
AGENCIES REQUIRED UNDER § 8A–1804(G) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) (D) THE PRICE AND TERMS AND CONDITIONS STATED IN THE NOTICE
TO THE HOMEOWNERS MUST BE UNIVERSAL AND APPLICABLE TO ALL POTENTIAL
BUYERS AND MAY NOT BE SPECIFIC TO THE HOMEOWNERS OR THEIR ASSIGNEE.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 177 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (E) WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE COMMUNITY
OWNER PROVIDES NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COMMUNITY
OWNER SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION THE SAME
INFORMATION THAT THE COMMUNITY OWNER PROVIDED OR WOULD HAVE
PROVIDED TO OTHER PROSPECTIVE PURCHASERS.

(F) THE COMMUNITY OWNER IS NOT LIABLE TO ANY PARTY TO A REAL
ESTATE TRANSACTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

~~8B–404.~~ 8A–1804.

(A) ON NOTICE OF THE INTENT TO SELL A MANUFACTURED HOUSING
COMMUNITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 8B–403 8A–1803 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A
HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION MAY OFFER TO PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED
HOUSING COMMUNITY BY:

(1) PROVIDING DOCUMENTATION THAT A MAJORITY OF THE
HOMEOWNERS RESIDING IN THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY, WITH ONE
VOTE PER HOME, HAVE VOTED OR SIGNED A PETITION IN FAVOR OF SUBMITTING A
~~PROPOSAL~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURCHASE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MANUFACTURED~~ ~~HOUSING~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~TO~~
~~THE~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~OWNER~~ TO THE COMMUNITY OWNER INDICATING THAT AT LEAST
75% OF THE MEMBERS OF THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION WHO RESIDE IN THE
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY, WITH ONE VOTE PER HOME, HAVE VOTED
TO PURCHASE THE COMMUNITY;

(2) NOTIFYING THE COMMUNITY OWNER OF THE INTENT TO
PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY; AND

(3) SUBMITTING TO THE COMMUNITY OWNER A PROPOSED
AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY THAT
INCLUDES TERMS SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO THE TERMS INCLUDED IN THE SALES
NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER § 8B–403 8A–1803 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION SHALL SEND THE NOTICE OF INTENT
TO PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY AND THE PROPOSED
AGREEMENT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
COMMUNITY OWNER BY REGISTERED OR CERTIFIED MAIL.

(C) (1) IF THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION SUBMITS A PROPOSED
AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION WITHIN THE 60–DAY PERIOD
IDENTIFIED IN § 8B–403 8A–1803 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE COMMUNITY OWNER

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 177

SHALL CONSIDER THE OFFER IN GOOD FAITH, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE A DUTY NOT
TO ACT TO SCUTTLE THE PROPOSED AGREEMENT, NOT TO ARBITRARILY OR
CAPRICIOUSLY REFUSE TO PROCEED WITH NEGOTIATIONS, AND NOT TO ENGAGE IN
MISCONDUCT OR DISHONESTY IN THE NEGOTIATIONS.

(2) AFTER THE EXPIRATION OF THE 60 DAYS IDENTIFIED IN § 8B–403
8A–1803 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A COMMUNITY OWNER MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO
CONSIDER ADDITIONAL OFFERS FROM THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION.

(D) IF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY OWNER AND THE
HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT FOR THE SALE OF THE
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY, UNLESS THE PARTIES AGREE TO A LONGER
AN ALTERNATIVE PERIOD OF TIME, THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION SHALL HAVE:
NOT MORE THAN 105 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THE AGREEMENT TO OBTAIN
FINANCING AND CLOSE ON THE PURCHASE.

(1) NOT MORE THAN 105 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THE AGREEMENT
TO OBTAIN FINANCING; AND

(2) NOT MORE THAN 45 DAYS AFTER THE DATE FINANCING IS
SECURED TO CLOSE ON THE PURCHASE.

(E) IF THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION DOES NOT OBTAIN FINANCING
FOR THE PURCHASE OR THE PARTIES FAIL TO CLOSE ON THE PURCHASE WITHIN THE
TIME PERIOD PRESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMUNITY
OWNER HAS COMPLIED WITH THE COMMUNITY OWNER’S OBLIGATIONS UNDER THIS
SECTION.

(E) (F) A HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION MAY ASSIGN ITS RIGHTS UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE TO A LOCAL GOVERNMENT, HOUSING AUTHORITY, NONPROFIT WITH
EXPERTISE RELATING TO HOUSING, OR THE STATE OR AN AGENCY OF THE STATE,
FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONTINUING THE USE OF THE PROPERTY AS A
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY THAT WILL PROVIDE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.

(G) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
SHALL MAINTAIN ON ITS WEBSITE A LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS AND COUNTY HOUSING
AGENCIES AVAILABLE TO ASSIST HOMEOWNERS WITH FINANCING FOR THE
PURCHASE OF A MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY.

~~8B–405.~~ 8A–1805.

A COMMUNITY OWNER WHO FILES AN AFFIDAVIT AS REQUIRED UNDER §
8A–1802(B)(7) OF THIS SUBTITLE OR A PURCHASER WHO FILES AN AFFIDAVIT AS
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 177 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

REQUIRED UNDER § 8A–1803(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL, NOT MORE THAN 30 DAYS
AFTER THE DATE OF THE SALE:

(1) PROVIDE NOTICE OF THE AFFIDAVIT TO EACH HOMEOWNER IN
THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY BY FIRST–CLASS MAIL; AND

(2) POST A COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT IN A PUBLIC AREA OF THE
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY.

8A–1806.

(A) IF A COMMUNITY OWNER WILLFULLY FAILS TO COMPLY WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE COMMUNITY OWNER SHALL BE LIABLE TO
THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION IN THE AMOUNT OF $10,000.

(B) A PURCHASER WHO FILES AN AFFIDAVIT AS REQUIRED UNDER §
8A–1803(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE IS LIABLE TO THE HOMEOWNERS ORGANIZATION IN
THE AMOUNT OF $10,000 IF THE PURCHASER:

(1) CLOSES THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY WITHIN 5
YEARS AFTER THE DATE THE PURCHASE IS FINALIZED; OR

(2) INCREASES THE RENT FOR A LOT ON THE PROPERTY BY MORE
THAN 10% PER YEAR IN THE FIRST 3 YEARS AFTER THE DATE THE PURCHASE IS
FINALIZED.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10