START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 43

Chapter 43

(House Bill 53)

AN ACT concerning

Human Services – Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council

FOR the purpose of codifying the Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council as an
instrumentality of the State to submit, monitor, implement, and evaluate the State
Plan under the federal Rehabilitation Act in conjunction with ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~State~~ ~~entity;~~
~~establishing~~ ~~a~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Directors~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Council~~ Centers for Independent Living in
the State; requiring the Attorney General to be the legal advisor to the Council; and
generally relating to the Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council.

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 7–1001 through 7–1007 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10. Maryland
Statewide Independent Living Council”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

SUBTITLE 10. MARYLAND STATEWIDE INDEPENDENT LIVING COUNCIL.

7–1001.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE MARYLAND
~~STATEWIDE~~ ~~INDEPENDENT~~ ~~LIVING~~ ~~COUNCIL.~~

(C) (B) “CENTERS FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING” MEANS
COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE DESIGNED AND OPERATED BY
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.

(C) “COUNCIL” MEANS THE MARYLAND STATEWIDE INDEPENDENT LIVING
COUNCIL.

(D) “DESIGNATED STATE ENTITY” MEANS THE STATE ENTITY IDENTIFIED
IN THE STATE PLAN FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING AS HAVING RESPONSIBILITY FOR
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 43 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~ADMINISTERING~~ PROVIDING ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT AND DISBURSEMENT OF
FUNDS TO THE COUNCIL TO CARRY OUT THE STATE PLAN.

(E) “STATE PLAN” MEANS THE STATE PLAN FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING
THAT IS REQUIRED TO RECEIVE FUNDS UNDER THE FEDERAL REHABILITATION ACT.

7–1002.

(A) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND STATEWIDE INDEPENDENT LIVING
COUNCIL THAT IS AN INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE.

(2) THE COUNCIL IS THE ENTITY THAT WAS CREATED IN 1993 BY AN
EXECUTIVE ORDER ISSUED BY THE GOVERNOR, WHICH ESTABLISHED THE COUNCIL
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FEDERAL REHABILITATION ACT.

(B) THE COUNCIL SHALL:

(1) WORK IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE DESIGNATED STATE ENTITY
CENTERS FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING IN SUBMITTING, MONITORING,
IMPLEMENTING, AND EVALUATING THE STATE PLAN; AND

(2) CARRY OUT OTHER DUTIES AS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
AND THE FEDERAL REHABILITATION ACT TO SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
THE STATE PLAN.

7–1003.

(A) (1) THERE IS A BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE MARYLAND
~~STATEWIDE~~ ~~INDEPENDENT~~ ~~LIVING~~ ~~COUNCIL.~~

(2) THE BOARD SHALL MANAGE THE ENTITY KNOWN AS THE COUNCIL
AND EXERCISE ITS ORGANIZATIONAL POWERS.

(B) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD
COUNCIL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FEDERAL REHABILITATION ACT OR ANY
OTHER FEDERAL LAW THAT MODIFIES PROVISIONS FOR STATEWIDE INDEPENDENT
LIVING COUNCILS.

(2) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD COUNCIL SHALL RESIDE IN THE
STATE.

(3) IN MAKING APPOINTMENTS TO THE BOARD COUNCIL, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL CONSIDER:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 43

(I) DIVERSITY BASED ON SEX, GENDER IDENTITY, SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, RACE, ETHNICITY, AND ECONOMIC STATUS; AND

(II) REPRESENTATION FROM ALL GEOGRAPHIC REGIONS OF
THE STATE.

(C) (B) (1) (I) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD COUNCIL MAY NOT SERVE
MORE THAN TWO CONSECUTIVE FULL 3–YEAR TERMS.

(II) AT THE END OF A TERM, AN APPOINTED MEMBER
CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES IN THE
EVENT OF A VACANCY ON THE COUNCIL:

1. THE COUNCIL MAY CONTINUE TO EXECUTE ITS
DUTIES; AND

2. THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT A MEMBER OF THE
COUNCIL IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(III) A MEMBER APPOINTED TO FILL A VACANCY SHALL SERVE
ONLY FOR THE BALANCE OF THE REMAINING TERM AT THE TIME OF APPOINTMENT.

(2) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE AN APPOINTED MEMBER FOR
INCOMPETENCE, MISCONDUCT, OR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE
POSITION.

(3) EACH YEAR THE BOARD COUNCIL SHALL ELECT A CHAIR FROM
AMONG ITS MEMBERS.

(4) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD COUNCIL:

(I) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
BOARD COUNCIL; BUT

(II) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER
THE STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

(D) (C) THE BOARD COUNCIL MAY ACT WITH AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF A
MAJORITY OF ITS MEMBERS.

7–1004.

(A) (1) THE COUNCIL SHALL EMPLOY AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 43 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE EXPERIENCE WITH, AND
POSSESS QUALIFICATIONS RELEVANT TO, THE ACTIVITIES AND PURPOSES OF THE
COUNCIL.

(B) THE COUNCIL MAY:

(1) EMPLOY A STAFF;

(2) ADOPT A SEAL;

(3) ADOPT BYLAWS, POLICIES, AND PROCEDURES RELATED TO
OPERATING THE COUNCIL;

(4) (3) RETAIN ANY NECESSARY ACCOUNTANTS, FINANCIAL
ADVISORS, OR OTHER CONSULTANTS;

(5) (4) MAINTAIN OFFICES AT A PLACE THE COUNCIL DESIGNATES
IN THE STATE;

(6) (5) ACCEPT LOANS, GRANTS, OR ASSISTANCE OF ANY KIND
FROM ANY ENTITY OF FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AN INSTITUTION
OF HIGHER EDUCATION, OR A PRIVATE SOURCE IF THE COUNCIL GIVES PRIOR
NOTICE TO THE DESIGNATED STATE ENTITY;

(7) (6) ENTER INTO CONTRACTS AND OTHER LEGAL INSTRUMENTS;

(8) (7) SUE OR BE SUED; AND

(9) (8) DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO CARRY OUT
THE POWERS GRANTED BY THIS SUBTITLE.

7–1005.

(A) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL IS THE LEGAL ADVISOR TO THE COUNCIL.

(B) WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE COUNCIL MAY
RETAIN ANY OTHER NECESSARY ATTORNEYS.

7–1006.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (B), (C), AND (E) OF THIS
SECTION, THE COUNCIL IS EXEMPT FROM TITLE 10 AND DIVISION II OF THE STATE
FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 43

(B) THE COUNCIL IS SUBJECT TO:

(1) THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT; AND

(2) THE PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT.

(C) THE BOARD AND THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COUNCIL ARE SUBJECT TO
THE PUBLIC ETHICS LAW.

(D) THE BOARD AND THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COUNCIL ARE NOT SUBJECT
TO THE PROVISIONS OF DIVISION I OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE THAT GOVERN THE STATE PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.

(E) THE COUNCIL, THE BOARD, AND THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COUNCIL ARE
SUBJECT TO TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE.

(F) EACH YEAR, THE DESIGNATED STATE ENTITY SHALL AUDIT THE BOOKS
AND RECORDS OF THE COUNCIL.

7–1007.

(A) A DEBT, A CLAIM, AN OBLIGATION, OR A LIABILITY OF THE COUNCIL IS
NOT:

(1) A DEBT, A CLAIM, AN OBLIGATION, OR A LIABILITY OF THE STATE;
OR

(2) A PLEDGE OF THE CREDIT OF THE STATE.

(B) THE COUNCIL IS EXEMPT FROM STATE AND LOCAL TAXES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5