START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 21 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 21 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Tax Sales - Notices and Payoff Amount for Redemption 
 
 
This bill authorizes an owner of owner-occupied residential property – that has been sold 
at a tax sale and for which a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption has not yet been 
filed – to request, from the holder of the certificate of sale, the current payoff amount to 
redeem the property. The current mortgagee of the property and specified others are also 
authorized to request the current payoff amount. The authorization applies in jurisdictions 
other than Baltimore City (there is an existing, similar authorization applicable in the city, 
discussed under Current Law). The payoff amount provided by the holder of the certificate 
of sale must (1) include only those expenses incurred before the holder of the certificate of 
sale received the request for the payoff amount and (2) be deemed valid for a period of 
30 days from the date the holder provides it. The bill also requires that an email address be 
included in the holder’s and the tax collector’s contact information provided in specified 
notices sent by the holder to the owner and specified others. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 21/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Right of Redemption 
 
An owner or other person that has an estate or interest in property sold by a tax collector 
may redeem the property at any time until the right of redemption has been finally 
foreclosed. In general, a holder of a certificate of sale is not authorized to file a complaint 
to foreclose the right of redemption earlier than six months after the date of the tax sale. 
For owner-occupied residential property in Baltimore City, that time period is nine months 
instead of six months. 
 
The person redeeming the property must pay the collector (1) the total lien amount paid at 
the tax sale for the property together with interest; (2) any taxes, interest, and penalties paid 
by any holder of the certificate of sale; (3) except if the property is owner-occupied 
residential property in Baltimore City, any delinquent taxes, interest, and penalties accruing 
after the date of the tax sale; and (4) in the manner and by the terms required by the 
collector, any expenses or fees for which the plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale 
is entitled to reimbursement. Statute specifies the various expenses or fees, which the 
plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale may be reimbursed for, specifically those 
incurred in any action or in preparation for any action to foreclose the right of redemption. 
 
Notices Sent by the Holder of the Certificate of Sale 
 
Subject to limited exceptions, the holder of a certificate of sale must send two specified 
notices before filing a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption of the property to 
which the certificate relates. The notices are sent to (1) the person last listed as owner of 
the property on the collector’s tax roll and (2) the current mortgagee (or assignee of a 
mortgagee of record, or servicer of the current mortgage) or the current holder of a 
beneficial interest in a deed of trust recorded against the property. The holder of the 
certificate of sale may not file a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption until at least 
two months after sending the first notice and at least 30 days after sending the 
second notice. 
 
The notices must include, among other things: 
 
 
a statement of the fact of the issuance of a certificate of sale; 
 
a statement that the owner, a mortgage holder, or any other person that has an estate 
or interest in the property may redeem the property at any time until the right of 
redemption has been finally foreclosed; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 21/ Page 3 
 
a statement that the holder of the certificate of sale may file an action to foreclose 
the right of redemption at any time after two months from the date of the first notice;  
 
statements describing what must be paid to redeem the property; and 
 
the name, address, and telephone number of the holder of the certificate of sale, or 
the holder’s agent or attorney, and the collector who made the sale. 
 
Request for Payoff Amount – Applicable in Baltimore City 
 
In Baltimore City, for owner-occupied residential property, prior to the filing of a 
complaint to foreclose the right of redemption, an owner of property sold at a tax sale may 
request, from the holder of the certificate of sale, the current payoff amount to redeem the 
property. The payoff amount provided by the holder must be deemed valid for a period of 
30 days from the date the holder sends the payoff amount to the owner. 
 
Additional requirements and restrictions apply – to the request and the holder’s actions in 
response to the request – beyond what is included in the bill with respect to a request for a 
payoff amount for property in other jurisdictions. For example, the request must be sent to 
the holder by first-class certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, bearing a 
postmark from the U.S. Postal Service, and the holder must send the payoff amount to the 
owner in a similar manner, within 10 days of delivery of the request. 
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report, 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. The office was established in 2020 pursuant 
to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last three 
years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; 
Baltimore City; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative 
Hearings; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 21/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4