START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 37 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 37 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Commercial Law - Consumer Protection - Telephone Solicitation (Stop the Spam 
Calls Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill establishes numerous restrictions on telephone solicitations made to residents of 
the State. Unless prior express written consent is provided by the “called party,” the bill 
prohibits a person from making (or causing to be made) a telephone solicitation that 
involves (1) an automated system for the selection or dialing of telephone numbers or 
(2) the playing of a recorded message when a connection is completed to the number called. 
The bill also restricts the methods, times, and identifying information that a solicitor may 
utilize and establishes a rebuttable presumption that a telephone solicitation made to any 
area code in the State is made to a resident (or a person) who is reasonably presumed to 
reside or have a place of business in the State at the time the call is made. Violation of the 
bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer 
Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. The bill 
takes effect January 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General may incur 
minimal costs to handle additional complaints under the bill; however, any such impact is 
not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 37/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “called party” means a person who is a regular user of a 
telephone number that receives a telephone solicitation. 
 
General Requirements 
 
A person who makes (or causes to be made) a telephone solicitation may not:  
 
 
fail to transmit (or cause not to be transmitted) the originating telephone number 
and, when made available by the caller’s carrier, the name of the caller to any caller 
identification service in use by a called party; 
 
intentionally act to prevent the transmission of the telephone solicitor’s name or 
telephone number to the called party when the equipment or service used by the 
solicitor is capable of creating and transmitting the solicitor’s name and 
telephone number; or 
 
in order to conceal the true identity of the caller, use technology that deliberately 
displays a different caller identification number than the number the call is 
originating from. 
 
However, it is not a violation of this requirement to substitute (1) the name of the seller or 
other entity for whom the telephone solicitation is placed and (2) the customer service 
telephone number of the seller or other entity. 
 
Times Restrictions and Other Prohibitions 
 
A person may not make (or cause to be made) a telephone solicitation, including a call 
made through automated dialing or a recorded message:  
 
 
to a called party during the hours between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. in the called party’s 
time zone; 
 
more than three times to the same called party during a 24-hour period on the same 
subject matter or issue, regardless of the telephone numbers used to make the call; 
or  
 
by intentionally altering the voice of the caller in an attempt to disguise or conceal 
the identity of the caller in order to (1) defraud, confuse, or financially or otherwise 
injure the called party or (2) obtain personal information from the called party that 
may be used in a fraudulent or unlawful manner. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 37/ Page 3 
Applicability 
 
The bill establishes various entities and circumstances to which its requirements do not 
apply. For example, the bill specifies it does not apply to:   
 
 
a telephone solicitation that is an isolated transaction and not performed in the 
course of a pattern of repeated transactions of a similar nature; 
 
a noncommercial telephone solicitation for religious, charitable, political, or 
educational purposes, as specified; 
 
certain business-to-business sales; or 
 
a person who solicits contracts for the maintenance or repair of goods previously 
purchased from the person making the solicitation (or on whose behalf the 
solicitation is made). 
 
Additionally, the bill’s requirements do not preclude the applicability of specified 
provisions of the Public Utilities Article relating to telephone solicitations and automated 
dialing. 
 
Current Law:  A “telephone solicitation” is an organized activity, program, or campaign 
to communicate by telephone with residents of the State in order to:   
 
 
sell, lease, or rent goods or services (or attempt to do so); 
 
offer (or attempt to offer) a gift or prize; 
 
conduct (or attempt to conduct) a poll; or 
 
request (or attempt to request) survey information, if the results of the survey will 
be used directly to solicit persons to purchase, lease, or rent goods or services. 
 
A telephone solicitation includes the act of managing, directing, or supervising an 
individual engaged in telephone solicitation. 
 
A person may not use an automated dialing, push-button, or tone-activated address 
signaling system with a prerecorded message to:   
 
 
solicit persons to purchase, lease, or rent goods or services; 
 
offer a gift or prize; 
 
conduct a poll; or 
 
request survey information if the results will be used directly to solicit persons to 
purchase, lease, or rent goods or services. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 37/ Page 4 
The sender of an automated dialing, push-button, or tone-activated address signaling call 
must disconnect the prerecorded message machine from the recipient’s telephone line 
within five seconds after the termination of the call by either the person calling or the 
person called. 
 
A person who violates these requirements is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, 
is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 for a first offense and $5,000 for each subsequent 
offense. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 90 (Senator Kramer, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of 
People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer 
Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 37/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5