START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 517

Chapter 517

(House Bill 90)

AN ACT concerning

Local Government – Regulatory Powers – ~~Control~~ ~~of~~ ~~Running~~ Regulation of
Invasive Bamboo

FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing bodies of counties and municipalities to
adopt ordinances ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~upkeep~~ ~~and~~ ~~containment~~ ~~of~~ ~~running~~ to regulate
invasive bamboo; and generally relating to the ~~control~~ ~~of~~ ~~running~~ regulation of
invasive bamboo.

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section ~~13–412~~ 1–1318
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

~~13–412.~~ 1–1318.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “RUNNING INVASIVE BAMBOO” MEANS BAMBOO THAT
IS CHARACTERIZED BY AGGRESSIVE SPREADING BEHAVIOR, INCLUDING BAMBOO
SPECIES IN THE GENUS PHYLLOSTACHYS.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO ALL COUNTIES AND MUNICIPALITIES.

(C) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY, BY ORDINANCE,
MAY PROHIBIT REGULATE INVASIVE BAMBOO, INCLUDING BY PROHIBITING A
PERSON FROM ALLOWING RUNNING BAMBOO:

(1) SELLING INVASIVE BAMBOO;

(2) PLANTING INVASIVE BAMBOO; AND

(3) ALLOWING INVASIVE BAMBOO TO GROW ON THE PROPERTY OF
THE PERSON WITHOUT PROPER UPKEEP AND APPROPRIATE CONTAINMENT
MEASURES, INCLUDING BARRIERS OR TRENCHES; OR.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 517 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) TO SPREAD FROM THE PROPERTY OF THE PERSON TO:

(I) THE ADJOINING PROPERTY OF ANOTHER PERSON; OR

(II) A PUBLIC RIGHT–OF–WAY.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
~~GOVERNING~~ ~~BODY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ENFORCEMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~
ORDINANCE ADOPTED UNDER THIS SECTION BY:

(I) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, A CIVIL FINE NOT EXCEEDING $50;
~~AND~~

(II) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE OCCURRING
WITHIN A 12–MONTH PERIOD THAT DOES NOT ARISE FROM THE SAME OPERATIVE
SET OF FACTS AS THE PREVIOUS VIOLATION, A CIVIL FINE NOT EXCEEDING $200.

(2) EACH BUSINESS DAY THAT A VIOLATION CONTINUES IS A
SEPARATE OFFENSE.

(3) THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF ALL FINES IMPOSED FOR VIOLATIONS
ARISING FROM THE SAME OPERATIVE SET OF FACTS MAY NOT EXCEED $3,000 IN A
~~12–MONTH~~ ~~PERIOD.~~

(D) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY MAY PROVIDE
FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED UNDER THIS SECTION BY:

(1) REQUIRING ANY DAMAGES CAUSED BY INVASIVE BAMBOO TO BE
MITIGATED; AND

(2) ESTABLISHING A CIVIL FINE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2