START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 36 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 36 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property – Actions to Repossess – Proof of Rental Licensure 
 
 
This bill requires a landlord (in a jurisdiction that requires licensure) when filing a written 
complaint to repossess residential property to plead with supporting facts, in a form 
prescribed by the Judiciary, that the property is either (1) licensed in compliance with 
applicable local rental licensing requirements; (2) exempt from applicable local rental 
licensing requirements; or (3) unlicensed for specified reasons. These requirements are 
generally applicable upon the filing of a failure to pay rent, tenant holding over, or breach 
of lease action (subject to limited exception, including in circumstances involving a clear 
and imminent danger). At trial, the landlord must demonstrate by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the property is licensed, exempt, or unlicensed for specified reasons. A 
landlord may provide electronic proof of licensure to satisfy the requirement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can handle any document revisions or programming costs with 
existing budgeted resources. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially affect State 
operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  At trial, the landlord must demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the property listed in the written complaint is:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 36/ Page 2 
 
licensed in compliance with applicable local rental licensing requirements; 
 
exempt from applicable local rental licensing requirements; 
 
not licensed in compliance with applicable local rental licensing requirements 
because of a wrongful act of the tenant, regardless of intention, that caused the 
licensing authority to suspend, revoke, or refuse to grant or renew the rental license; 
 
not licensed in compliance with applicable local rental licensing requirements 
because an administrative error or omission by the licensing authority caused the 
licensing authority to suspend, revoke, or refuse to grant or renew the rental license; 
or 
 
part of a multi‐unit property not licensed in compliance with local rental licensing 
requirements because of a condition affecting another unit in the multi‐unit property 
and where (1) there is one license for multiple units; (2) the property listed in the 
written complaint and the surrounding common areas satisfy the inspection 
requirements of the local licensing authority and are free of defects that threaten the 
life, health, or safety of the tenant; and (3) the landlord has taken all necessary steps 
to obtain or renew the rental license for the property but is unable to obtain or renew 
the license due to a condition affecting another unit not subject to the eviction action 
on the multi‐unit rental license.  
 
The court must grant one postponement in the event that a party seeks additional evidence 
related to the assertion in the written complaint regarding licensure. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Actions to Repossess Property 
 
In general, a landlord seeking to repossess property must comply with any applicable 
procedural/notice requirements and file the appropriate action (e.g., failure to pay rent, 
breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. For example, if an unexpired lease authorizes 
the landlord to repossess the premises prior to the expiration of the term of the lease if the 
tenant breaches the lease, then the landlord may file a complaint for breach of lease. A 
complaint for breach of lease must be in writing, filed in the District Court of the county 
where the property is located, and based on the following circumstances:  (1) the tenant 
breaches the lease; (2) the landlord meets specified notice requirements or the breach 
“demonstrates a clear and imminent danger” and meets additional specified notice 
requirements; and (3) the tenant or person in actual possession of the premises refuses to 
comply. After specified procedural requirements are satisfied, if the court determines that 
the tenant breached the terms of the lease and that the breach was substantial and warrants 
an eviction, the court must give judgment for the restitution of the possession of the 
premises and issue its warrant to a sheriff/constable commanding the tenant to deliver 
possession to the landlord. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 36/ Page 3 
Licensing of Rental Property 
 
Statute does not include statewide requirements for rental property licensure. However, 
several jurisdictions require such licensing. For example, in Anne Arundel County, a 
person may not operate a multiple dwelling or rooming house without a license. A separate 
license is required for each multiple dwelling or rooming house. In Prince George’s County, 
licenses are generally required to operate (as an owner, lessee, agent, or in another capacity) 
single-family rental facilities or multifamily rental facilities, subject to specified 
exceptions. 
 
Under the Baltimore City Code, an individual is prohibited from (1) renting or offering to 
rent to another all or any part of any rental dwelling without a currently effective license 
from the Housing Commissioner or (2) charging, accepting, retaining, or seeking to collect 
any rental payment or other compensation for providing to another the occupancy of all or 
any part of any rental dwelling unless the person is licensed, as specified. A license is not 
required for any rental dwelling that is owned and operated by the Housing Authority of 
Baltimore City. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the General Assembly passed similar legislation in the 
2022 session (Senate Bill 563), the Governor vetoed the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 703 and SB 563 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 100 (Senator Hettleman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer 
Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3