START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 111 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 111 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program, Maryland Children's Health Program, 
and Workgroup on Low-Income Utility Assistance 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), by January 1, 2025 (subject 
to the limitations of the State budget and as permitted by federal law), to establish an 
Express Lane Eligibility (ELE) Program to enroll individuals in Medicaid and the 
Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP) based on eligibility findings by the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). The bill also requires the Workgroup 
on Low-Income Utility Assistance to submit a final report on its study, findings, and 
recommendations, including recommended legislation and regulatory changes, to the 
Senate Finance Committee and the House Economic Matters Committee by 
January 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on MDH revenues and expenditures to implement an 
ELE Program is indeterminate. The workgroup can submit a final report using existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  As part of the ELE Program, MDH may not consider any other income or 
eligibility requirements. To the extent that a waiver is needed to maximize the number of 
individuals who may qualify for the program, MDH must apply for one or more federal 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 111/ Page 2 
§ 1115 waivers to implement the program. MDH must make all reasonable efforts to 
expedite enrollment of eligible individuals in the program. MDH may propose or 
implement the use of ELE for renewals before proposing or implementing the use of ELE 
for initial enrollment. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Express Lane Eligibility 
 
The federal Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 created an 
ELE option that permits states to rely on eligibility findings from other need-based 
programs (including SNAP) to make Medicaid and/or Children’s Health Insurance 
Program (CHIP) eligibility and renewal determinations. The option is intended to reduce 
administrative burden, diminish churn, and improve customer service. This option does not 
apply to adults. 
 
State Medicaid agencies using ELE must ensure that individuals enrolled in SNAP have 
submitted appropriate documentation to establish their status as citizens, nationals, or 
qualified aliens, in accordance with the applicable documentation requirements. Medicaid 
agencies are not permitted to borrow eligibility findings with respect to citizenship from 
other agencies. The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has indicated that 
these requirements are not subject to waiver. 
 
Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s Health Program 
 
Medicaid is a comprehensive health insurance program for indigent and medically indigent 
individuals. Covered services in Maryland include inpatient and outpatient hospital, 
pharmacy, physician care, nursing facility, behavioral health, medical day care, dental, and 
various home- and community-based services. 
 
Recipients of Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) or Supplemental Security Income (SSI) 
benefits automatically qualify for Medicaid. Children in foster care are also automatically 
eligible. Individuals who were in foster care on their eighteenth birthday are eligible until 
age 26 regardless of income. Other individuals qualify based on their income or due to an 
inability to pay extraordinary medical bills resulting from a catastrophic illness or extended 
nursing home or hospital stay. Residents of Maryland who are U.S. citizens, meet 
qualifying immigration statuses, and have lived in the United States for at least five years, 
or who otherwise qualify, must meet one of the following conditions:  younger than age 65; 
disabled; blind; younger than age 21; caring for a related child in the home; pregnant; or 
parents of an unmarried child younger than age 21, as well as certain income limitations. 
Certain elderly individuals may also be eligible for assistance under Medicaid as well as 
Medicare. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 111/ Page 3 
MCHP provides comprehensive health insurance coverage to uninsured low-income 
children from birth up to age 19 living in households with incomes above the Medicaid 
eligibility limit but at or below 211% federal poverty guidelines (FPG). MCHP enrollees 
in households with incomes above 211% FPG but below 322% FPG are eligible for 
premium plans in which a family must pay a monthly premium of about 2% of family 
income ($61 or $76, depending on the household income). 
 
The federal Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023, among other things, requires all state 
Medicaid and CHIP agencies to provide up to 12 months of continuous eligibility for 
children by January 1, 2024. This guarantees full-year Medicaid/MCHP coverage for 
eligible Maryland children up to age 19. MDH is currently reviewing system requirements 
for implementing continuous eligibility, with a tentative start date of August 2023. 
 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
 
SNAP assists low-income households to purchase food. Households receiving or 
authorized to receive TCA, SSI, Temporary Disability Assistance Program, Public 
Assistance to Adults, or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families-funded services or 
benefits (including certain brochures) are categorically eligible for SNAP. 
 
Most noncategorically eligible households must meet both a gross income test (130% FPG) 
and a net income test (100% FPG). If the noncategorically eligible household includes an 
elderly person or a person who is disabled, only the net income test must be met. 
Deductions from gross income include 20% of earned income, a standard deduction (in 
federal fiscal 2023, this deduction is $193 for a three-person household), a dependent care 
deduction, certain medical expenses for elderly or disabled household members, housing 
costs in excess of 50% of adjusted net income, and legally owed child support expenses. 
 
Workgroup on Low-Income Utility Assistance 
 
Chapters 638 and 639 of 2021, among other things, established a Workgroup on 
Low-Income Utility Assistance, staffed by the Department of Human Services (DHS), to 
examine the forms of federal, State, local, and private assistance available to low-income 
residential electric and natural gas customers. The workgroup must study:   
 
 
the different systems and forms of financial assistance available to low-income 
electric and natural gas customers in the State from federal, State, local, and private 
sources, especially the Electric Universal Service Program and the Maryland Energy 
Assistance Program; 
 
inefficiencies and gaps in the availability, qualification, and processing of 
applications for and delivery of financial assistance to low-income electric and 
natural gas customers; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 111/ Page 4 
 
the feasibility of establishing a new natural gas universal service program or the 
expansion of existing programs to cover low-income natural gas customers, 
including the characteristics of any new or expanded program; 
 
coordination of benefits under existing financial assistance programs for 
low-income electric and natural gas customers and means to improve coordination 
so as to extend and enhance the effectiveness of these programs; 
 
anticipated short-term and long-term demand for financial assistance for 
low-income electric and natural gas customers in the wake of COVID-19 and 
systemic economic inequities, particularly in disadvantaged communities; 
 
the feasibility of establishing one or more financial assistance programs for small 
businesses in low-income communities; and 
 
any other matter the workgroup considers relevant and helpful to addressing the 
needs of low-income utility customers. 
 
The Acts required the workgroup, by January 1, 2022, to submit a report of its study, 
findings, and recommendations, including recommended legislation and regulatory 
changes, to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Economic Matters Committee. 
The workgroup submitted a report in December 2021 that noted that the workgroup would 
continue to meet. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that, subject to budget approval, the department can 
implement an ELE Program similar to that in Massachusetts. Massachusetts’ Medicaid 
program, MassHealth, partners with SNAP to renew coverage for children and other 
members of the SNAP household up to age 65 who are already enrolled in Medicaid and/or 
CHIP through a data matching process. The SNAP eligibility decision is used to verify 
ongoing residency in the state and serves as a proxy for income at renewal. Medicaid 
benefits are renewed based on the child’s eligibility for SNAP. Parents and legal caretaker 
relatives who are part of the same household group are included in this process and also 
have their Medicaid coverage renewed if they are eligible for SNAP. 
 
To implement an ELE Program, MDH must develop new data use agreements in 
partnership with DHS. Any impact of an ELE Program on Medicaid revenues and 
expenditures (and renewal outcomes) cannot be reliably estimated at this time. However, 
any new costs would be subject to a federal matching rate of 61%. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 111/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 26 (Senators Augustine and Hester) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5