START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 146 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 146 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Alcoholic Beverages - Public Hearing  
Ho. Co. 13-23 
 
 
This bill removes the requirement that the Howard County Board of License 
Commissioners hold a hearing (and that specified notice be provided 15 days before the 
hearing) for a license holder applying for a change of resident agent when the applicant 
(1) is seeking to be a resident agent for the same license for which the applicant is a license 
holder and (2) has previously appeared and been approved at a nonviolation hearing for the 
same license before the board or the Appointed Alcoholic Beverage Hearing Board. The 
bill also allows the board to hold a public hearing for a change of resident agent if the board 
determines there is good cause. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  Howard County expenditures for hearings related to resident agent changes 
decrease by up to approximately $14,000 annually beginning in FY 2024. Howard County 
revenues are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.       
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Regardless of license holder status, the board must hold a public hearing 
for an application for any change of resident agent. The board must also (1) post a hearing 
notice on the board’s website for at least 15 days before a hearing and (2) provide notice 
at least 15 days before a hearing to the Howard County Office of Public Information, which 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 146/ Page 2 
must in turn post the information in the same manner as other public meeting notices. 
Applicants for a change of resident agent must also post a hearing notice for at least 15 days 
before specified license application hearings. The notice must be posted at the location 
described in the license application, as specified. The applicant must submit photographic 
evidence of the hearing notice to the board.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Howard County advises that each hearing for a resident agent 
change costs approximately $1,400 including the cost of closed captioning, staffing, and 
board salaries for the duration of the case. In fiscal 2022, there were 10 hearings for a 
change in resident agent. Thus, county expenditures related to hearings decrease by up to 
approximately $14,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2024.           
 
Small Business Effect:  License holders who wish to become resident agents for licenses 
they hold will no longer require an additional hearing if they previously appeared and been 
approved at a nonviolation hearing for the same license.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2