START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 796

Chapter 796

(House Bill 131)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Law – Unnatural or Perverted Sexual Practice – Repeal

FOR the purpose of repealing the crime of unnatural or perverted sexual practice; and
generally relating to sexual crimes.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–801(aa)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–322
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–602(a)(4), 3–604(a)(9), and 3–809(a)(5)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–809(a)(1) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 8–302(a)(1) and (b) and 10–105(a)(11)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 8–302(a)(2)(i), 10–105(a–1), 11–701(q)(1)(v), and 11–1007(a)(6)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 796 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 5–701(z)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

3–801.

(aa) “Sexual molestation or exploitation” includes:

(1) Allowing or encouraging a child to engage in:

(i) Obscene photography, films, poses, or similar activity;

(ii) Pornographic photography, films, poses, or similar activity; or

(iii) Prostitution;

(2) Incest;

(3) Rape;

(4) Sexual offense in any degree; and

(5) [Unnatural or perverted sexual practices] ANY OTHER SEXUAL
CONDUCT THAT IS A CRIME.

Article – Criminal Law

[3–322.

(a) A person may not:

(1) take the sexual organ of another or of an animal in the person’s mouth;

(2) place the person’s sexual organ in the mouth of another or of an animal;
or

(3) commit another unnatural or perverted sexual practice with another or
with an animal.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 796

(b) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction
is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or both.

(c) A person who violates this section is subject to § 5–106(b) of the Courts Article.

(d) An indictment for a violation of this section:

(1) is sufficient if it states that the defendant committed an unnatural and
perverted sexual practice with a person or animal as applicable; but

(2) need not state the particular:

(i) unnatural or perverted sexual practice with which the defendant
is charged; or

(ii) manner in which the defendant committed the unnatural or
perverted sexual practice.]

3–602.

(a) (4) (i) “Sexual abuse” means an act that involves sexual molestation or
exploitation of a minor, whether physical injuries are sustained or not.

(ii) “Sexual abuse” includes:

1. incest;

2. rape;

3. sexual offense in any degree; and

4. [unnatural or perverted sexual practices] ANY OTHER
SEXUAL CONDUCT THAT IS A CRIME.

3–604.

(a) (9) (i) “Sexual abuse” means an act that involves sexual molestation or
exploitation of a vulnerable adult.

(ii) “Sexual abuse” includes:

1. incest;

2. rape;

3. sexual offense in any degree; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 796 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. [unnatural or perverted sexual practices] ANY OTHER
SEXUAL CONDUCT THAT IS A CRIME.

3–809.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(5) “Sexual activity” means:

(i) sexual intercourse, including genital–genital, oral–genital,
anal–genital, or oral–anal[, whether between persons of the same or opposite sex];

[(ii) an unnatural or perverted sexual practice under § 3–322 of this
title;

(iii)] (II) masturbation; or

[(iv)] (III) sadomasochistic abuse.

(c) A person may not knowingly distribute a visual representation of another
identifiable person that displays the other person with his or her intimate parts exposed or
while engaged in an act of sexual activity:

(1) with the intent to harm, harass, intimidate, threaten, or coerce the
other person;

(2) (i) under circumstances in which the person knew that the other
person did not consent to the distribution; or

(ii) with reckless disregard as to whether the person consented to the
distribution; and

(3) under circumstances in which the other person had a reasonable
expectation that the image would remain private.

Article – Criminal Procedure

8–302.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Qualifying offense” means:

(i) unnatural or perverted sexual practice under § 3–322 of the

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 796

Criminal Law Article, AS THAT OFFENSE EXISTED BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2023;

(b) A person convicted of a qualifying offense may file a motion to vacate the
judgment if the person’s participation in the offense was a direct result of being a victim of
human trafficking.

10–105.

(a) A person who has been charged with the commission of a crime, including a
violation of the Transportation Article for which a term of imprisonment may be imposed,
or who has been charged with a civil offense or infraction, except a juvenile offense, may
file a petition listing relevant facts for expungement of a police record, court record, or other
record maintained by the State or a political subdivision of the State if:

(11) except as provided in subsection (a–1) of this section, the person was
convicted of a crime and the act on which the conviction was based is no longer a crime;

(a–1) An expungement may not be obtained under subsection (a)(11) of this section
for a conviction for sodomy as that offense existed before October 1, 2020, OR A VIOLATION
OF § 3–322 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE AS THAT OFFENSE EXISTED BEFORE
OCTOBER 1, 2023, where the offense was committed:

(1) without consent;

(2) with a minor under the age of 16;

(3) with anyone the individual could not marry under § 2–202 of the Family
Law Article;

(4) with a mentally incapacitated individual, as defined in § 3–301 of the
Criminal Law Article;

(5) with a physically helpless individual, as defined in § 3–301 of the
Criminal Law Article; or

(6) with a substantially cognitively impaired individual, as defined in §
3–301 of the Criminal Law Article.

11–701.

(q) “Tier III sex offender” means a person who has been convicted of:

(1) conspiring to commit, attempting to commit, or committing a violation
of:

(v) the common law offense of sodomy, as that offense existed before

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 796 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

October 1, 2020, or § 3–322 of the Criminal Law Article, AS THAT OFFENSE EXISTED
BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2023, if the offense was committed with force or threat of force; or

11–1007.

(a) (6) (i) “Sexual abuse” means any act that involves sexual molestation
or exploitation of a child whether or not the sexual molestation or exploitation of the child
is by a parent or other individual who has permanent or temporary care, custody, or
responsibility for supervision of a child, or by any household or family member.

(ii) “Sexual abuse” includes[:

1.] incest, rape, or sexual offense in any degree[; and

2. unnatural or perverted sexual practices].

Article – Family Law

5–701.

(z) “Sexual molestation or exploitation” includes:

(1) allowing or encouraging a child to engage in:

(i) obscene photography, films, poses, or similar activity;

(ii) pornographic photography, films, poses, or similar activity; or

(iii) prostitution;

(2) incest;

(3) rape;

(4) sexual offense in any degree; and

(5) [unnatural or perverted sexual practices] ANY OTHER SEXUAL
CONDUCT THAT IS A CRIME.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Enacted under Article II, § 17(c) of the Maryland Constitution, May 28, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6