START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 164 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 164 
(Delegate Crosby, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Sexual Offenses - Crime of Violence and Lifetime Supervision 
 
 
This bill (1) expands the definition of a “crime of violence” under § 14-101 of the Criminal 
Law Article to include sexual abuse of a minor meeting specified criteria and (2) expands 
the list of offenses that subject an offender to lifetime sexual offender supervision to 
include sexual abuse of a minor meeting specified criteria and all circumstances of 
second-degree sexual offense and an attempt to commit second-degree sexual offense (as 
that crime existed before October 1, 2017) when committed by an adult. The bill applies 
prospectively to a conviction on or after the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase minimally, beginning in the out-years, 
due to expanded application of existing sentencing, incarceration, and lifetime sexual 
offender supervision provisions, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands the definition of a “crime of violence” under § 14-101 
of the Criminal Law Article to include sexual abuse of a minor under § 3-602 of the 
Criminal Law Article when the offender was at least age 21 and the victim was younger 
than age 16 at the time of the offense and the offense involved specified acts. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 164/ Page 2 
Additionally, the bill expands the list of persons subject to lifetime sexual offender 
supervision to include: 
 
 
a person who has been convicted of sexual offense in the second degree or an 
attempt to commit sexual offense in the second degree under § 3-306 of the Criminal 
Law Article (as that crime existed before October 1, 2017) for engaging in a sexual 
act when the victim was younger than age 14 and the person performing the sexual 
act was an adult at least 4 years older than the victim at the time of the offense (a 
person convicted of violating or attempting to violate the remaining second-degree 
sexual offense prohibitions is already subject to lifetime sexual offender supervision 
– the bill’s adult qualification also applies to these existing lifetime supervision 
requirements and the existing lifetime supervision requirement for a person 
convicted of first-degree sexual offense as that crime existed before 
October 1, 2017); and 
 
a person who has been convicted of sexual abuse of a minor under § 3-602 of the 
Criminal Law Article that was committed when the person was an adult against a 
child younger than age 13 (instead of the current application to an offense involving 
a child younger than age 12) or that was committed when the person was at least 
age 21 against a child younger than age 16. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Sexual Abuse of a Minor 
 
“Sexual abuse” is an act that involves sexual molestation or exploitation of a minor, 
whether physical injuries are sustained or not. Sexual abuse includes incest, rape, sexual 
offense in any degree, and unnatural or perverted sexual practices. A parent or other person 
who has permanent or temporary care or custody or responsibility for the supervision of a 
minor may not cause sexual abuse to the minor. A household member or family member 
is also prohibited from causing sexual abuse to a minor. A violator is guilty of a felony, 
punishable by imprisonment for up to 25 years. A sentence imposed for child sexual abuse 
may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based 
on the act that establishes the sexual abuse violation or an act of child abuse separate from 
the sexual abuse. 
 
Second-degree Sexual Offense 
 
Chapter 161 of 2017, which took effect on October 1, 2017, reclassified criminal conduct 
formerly classified as sexual offense in the second degree as rape in the second degree and 
made conforming statutory changes. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 164/ Page 3 
Crimes of Violence 
 
Sexual abuse of a minor under specified circumstances when the offender is an adult and 
the victim is younger than age 13 at the time of the offense is a crime of violence. 
 
Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of violence” as 
(1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, except 
involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; (9) robbery; 
(10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree sexual 
offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other crime of violence, 
except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance; (13) child 
abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor younger than age 13 under specified 
circumstances; (15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; 
(17) an attempt to commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual 
conduct with a child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, 
rape, rob, or commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
Mandatory Sentences for Crimes of Violence 
 
Subsequent offenders sentenced for a crime of violence under § 14-101 of the Criminal 
Law Article are generally subject to mandatory sentences. For a second conviction of a 
crime of violence committed on or after October 1, 2018, a person must be sentenced to a 
mandatory minimum, nonsuspendable and nonparolable term of 10 years, if the person has 
been convicted on a prior occasion of a crime of violence, including a conviction for a 
crime committed before October 1, 2018, and served a term of confinement in a 
correctional facility for that conviction. 
 
For a third conviction, a person must be sentenced to a mandatory minimum, 
nonsuspendable and nonparolable term of 25 years, if the person has been convicted on 
two prior separate occasions of a crime of violence, in which the second or succeeding 
crime is committed after there has been a charging document filed for the preceding 
occasion and for which the convictions do not arise from a single incident, and has served 
at least one term of confinement in a correctional facility as a result of a conviction of a 
crime of violence. 
 
For a fourth conviction, a person who has served three separate terms of confinement in a 
correctional facility as a result of three separate convictions of any crime of violence must 
be sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 164/ Page 4 
Diminution Credits 
 
Generally, inmates sentenced to a State correctional facility are entitled to earn diminution 
of confinement credits to reduce the lengths of their incarcerations. Individuals sentenced 
for a “crime of violence” earn diminution credits at a lower rate than other inmates. The 
following types of inmates may not earn diminution credits:  
 
 
an inmate who is serving a sentence for first- or second-degree rape against a victim 
younger than 16; 
 
an inmate who is serving a sentence for first- or second-degree sexual offense, as 
the offenses existed before October 1, 2017, against a victim younger than 16; 
 
an inmate who is serving a sentence for a subsequent conviction of third-degree 
sexual offense against a victim younger than 16; and 
 
an inmate imprisoned for a lifetime sexual offender supervision violation. 
 
Diminution credits are deducted from an inmate’s “term of confinement,” which is defined 
as (1) the length of the sentence, for a single sentence or (2) the period from the first day 
of the sentence that begins first through the last day of the sentence that ends last, for 
concurrent sentences, partially concurrent sentences, consecutive sentences, or a 
combination of concurrent and consecutive sentences. 
 
Diminution credits are made for good conduct, work tasks, education, and special projects 
or programs. For additional information on diminution credits, see the Maryland 
Diminution Credit System report published by the Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) in December 2020. 
 
Parole and Mandatory Supervision 
 
In general, a State inmate who is serving a sentence of six months or more is not eligible 
for parole until the inmate has served one-quarter of the inmate’s sentence. A sentence for 
a violent crime does not become parole-eligible until the inmate has served one-half of the 
sentence. An inmate serving a term of incarceration that includes a mandatory minimum 
sentence that is not subject to parole by statute is not eligible for parole until the inmate 
has served that mandatory minimum sentence. 
 
As previously noted, a person convicted for the fourth time of a crime of violence must be 
sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. In general, a sentence for 
a third crime of violence or a second crime of violence committed on or after 
October 1, 2018, is not eligible for parole. With the exception of a person registered as or 
eligible to register as a sexual offender, offenders who are age 60 or older who have served 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 164/ Page 5 
at least 15 years of a sentence for a subsequent crime of violence may apply for and be 
granted geriatric parole. 
 
Generally, a person convicted of a violent crime committed on or after October 1, 2009, is 
not eligible for release on mandatory supervision until after the person becomes eligible 
for parole. 
 
Substance Abuse Evaluation and Commitment 
 
A court may not order a person serving a sentence for a crime of violence under § 14-101 
of the Criminal Law Article to be evaluated for or committed to alcohol or drug abuse 
treatment with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) under §§ 8-505 and 8-507 of 
the Health-General Article, respectively, until the person is eligible for parole. However, 
these eligibility restrictions do not prohibit such a defendant from participating in any other 
treatment program or receiving treatment under MDH supervision under any other 
statutory provision. 
 
Lifetime Supervision of a Sexual Offender 
 
Except where a term of natural life without the possibility of parole is imposed, a sentence 
must include a term of lifetime sexual offender supervision for the following:  
 
 
a sexually violent predator; 
 
a person convicted of first- or second-degree rape, or first- or (certain circumstances 
of) second-degree sexual offense as the offenses existed before October 1, 2017; 
 
a person convicted of attempted first- or second-degree rape, or attempted first- or 
(certain circumstances of) second-degree sexual offense as the offenses existed 
before October 1, 2017; 
 
sexual abuse of a minor if the violation involved a child younger than age 12; 
 
a person required to register with the person’s supervising authority because the 
person was at least age 13 but not older than age 18 at the time of the act; and 
 
a person convicted more than once arising out of separate incidents of a crime that 
requires registration. 
 
A court is also authorized to sentence a person convicted of third-degree sexual offense, as 
specified, to lifetime supervision and must require a risk assessment before that sentence 
is imposed. 
 
The sentencing court or juvenile court must impose special conditions of lifetime sexual 
offender supervision at the time of sentencing or imposition of the registration requirement 
in juvenile court and advise the person of the length, conditions, and consecutive nature of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 164/ Page 6 
that supervision. Special conditions may include global positioning satellite tracking or 
equivalent technology and participation in a sexual offender treatment program. Before 
imposing the special conditions, the court must order a presentence investigation. The 
sentencing court may adjust the special conditions of such lifetime supervision in 
consultation with the person’s sexual offender management team. 
 
A person subject to lifetime supervision is prohibited from knowingly or willfully violating 
the conditions of the supervision, with the following penalties: 
 
 
for a first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum 
penalties of imprisonment for 5 years and/or a fine of $5,000; for a second or 
subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a felony and subject to maximum 
penalties of imprisonment for 10 years and/or a fine of $10,000; and 
 
a person imprisoned for a violation of lifetime supervision is not entitled to 
diminution credits and continues to be subject to lifetime supervision upon release 
until discharge from supervision, as specified. A court may remand the person to a 
correctional facility pending the hearing or a determination on a charge of violation 
of a condition of lifetime sexual offender supervision. 
 
A person may petition for discharge from lifetime sexual offender supervision after serving 
at least five years of the extended sexual offender supervision. The sentencing court must 
hear and adjudicate a petition for discharge from lifetime sexual offender supervision. The 
court may not deny a petition for discharge without a hearing. Further, the court may not 
discharge a person unless the court makes a finding on the record that the petitioner is no 
longer a danger to others. Subject to specified exceptions, the judge who originally imposed 
the lifetime sexual offender supervision must hear the petition. If a petition for discharge 
is denied, the person is prohibited from renewing the petition for a minimum of one year. 
 
Under the supervision of the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP), a sexual offender 
management team must conduct lifetime sexual offender supervision and the supervision 
of probation, parole, or mandatory release of a person subject to lifetime sexual offender 
supervision. A sexual offender management team must submit a progress report on each 
person under supervision to the sentencing court or juvenile court once every six months. 
Unless disclosure of a report would be in violation of laws regarding confidentiality of 
treatment records, a sexual offender management team must also provide copies of each 
progress report to local law enforcement units of the county in which the offender resides. 
 
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) is required to adopt 
regulations necessary to carry out the duties of the department relating to lifetime sexual 
offender supervision. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 164/ Page 7 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for DPSCS increase minimally, 
beginning in the out-years, due to the bill’s expanded application of provisions related to 
lifetime sexual offender supervision, sentencing, and incarceration. This estimate assumes 
that the bill applies to a small population and does not independently subject a significant 
number of individuals to lifetime sexual offender supervision or unique sentencing and 
incarceration provisions for crimes of violence. 
 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy advises that it received 
information for 158 individuals sentenced to 175 total counts of sexual abuse of a minor 
under § 3-602 of the Criminal Law Article in the State’s circuit courts during fiscal 2022. 
These statistics include all convictions for sexual abuse of a minor under § 3-602, 
regardless of the age of the victim. DPSCS advises that for fiscal 2022, 5 inmates with an 
average sentence of eight years were sentenced to the Division of Corrections for a 
second-degree sexual offense under § 3-306 (as that crime existed before October 1, 2017). 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$4,970 per month. Excluding overhead, the average cost of housing a new State inmate 
(including health care costs) is about $1,219 per month. Excluding all health care (which 
is a fixed cost under the current contract), the average variable costs total $282 per month. 
 
DPSCS advises that for fiscal 2022, DPP opened lifetime supervision cases for 
41 individuals. As noted above, this estimate assumes that the bill applies to a small 
population of offenders. However, should the bill generate the need for additional 
supervision agents, general fund expenditures increase. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the workload of the Judiciary and State’s 
Attorneys’ offices. The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises in its most recent 
response that the bill increases agency caseloads, necessitating the hiring of one full-time 
attorney, at a cost of $110,101 in fiscal 2024 increasing to $153,791 in fiscal 2028. 
However, OPD provided no information on the bill’s anticipated effect on the agency’s 
caseloads. DLS assumes that the bill applies to a small population and is unlikely to 
generate enough additional cases to warrant the hiring of an additional attorney. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 68 of 2022 and SB 268 and HB 896 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 57 (Senator Bailey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 164/ Page 8 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Worcester counties; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8