START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 132 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 132 
(Delegate Qi) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, and Refrigeration Services - Journeyman 
License - Qualifications 
 
   
This bill alters the qualifications for a journeyman license to provide heating, ventilation, 
air-conditioning, and refrigeration services (HVACR). Specifically, the bill increases the 
number of years (from three to four) an applicant must be licensed as an apprentice before 
applying for a journeyman license. Additionally, the bill increases the hours of training 
required (from 1,875 to 6,000) for a journeyman license applicant. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund licensing revenues may be delayed to the extent applicants 
spend more time in training prior to applying for a journeyman license. However, the bill 
is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Division of Workforce Development and Adult 
Learning within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) oversees the Maryland 
Apprenticeship and Training Program (MATP), which is a model of job preparation that 
combines paid on-the-job learning with related instruction to progressively increase 
workers’ skill levels and wages. MDL advises this model provides an effective way for 
employers to recruit, train, and retain highly skilled workers. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 132/ Page 2 
MDL further notes that, as part of MATP, an HVACR apprentice must work 8,000 hours 
and attend 576 hours of related instruction to graduate and receive a journeyman license. 
These requirements are intended to ensure that graduates are highly skilled and are 
educated in their occupation. 
 
Individuals who are currently in the HVACR industry via nonregistered apprenticeships 
can take a licensing exam with a relatively low number of hours (1,875 versus 8,000 for 
individuals enrolled in the program). By increasing the number of years needed to hold an 
apprentice license from three to four and the number of training hours needed, MDL 
advises the bill more closely aligns the licensing requirements in statute with those of the 
registered apprenticeship system. 
 
Finally, MDL notes that apprentices who graduate from an approved registered 
apprenticeship program receive a journeyman license without an exam, while those who 
do not go through the program must pass an exam, which has a significant nonpassing rate. 
Thus, the bill may increase the total number of HVACR licenses issued in the State, to the 
extent more individuals enroll in the State’s registered apprenticeship program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that train HVACR apprentices must provide 
training and oversight for longer periods of time, given the increased number of years and 
hours required to apply for a journeyman license. However, businesses engaged in the 
training and oversight for individuals enrolled in the registered apprenticeship program are 
not significantly affected, as the registered apprenticeship program already requires more 
hours than required under the bill (8,000 versus 6,000 under the bill).         
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 23 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2