START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 188 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 188 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Wildlife Advisory Commission - Membership 
 
 
This bill increases the number of members of the Wildlife Advisory Commission – from  
9 to 10 – and requires the Governor to appoint one member to the commission who is an 
academic researcher with expertise in wildlife biology, wildlife conservation, wildlife 
management, or ecology. The additional member must serve for a term of four years – 
beginning July 1, 2024, and ending June 30, 2028 – and serve until a successor is appointed 
and qualifies. The bill also establishes that the terms of the commission members are 
staggered so that three end in 2023, three end in 2024, three end in 2025, and one ends in 
2028; however, the bill may not alter the term of a member serving as of the effective date 
of the bill. The bill also requires that the commission include representation from the 
hunting, wildlife preservation, and passive wildlife recreation communities. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There is a Wildlife Advisory Commission within the Department of 
Natural Resources, composed of nine members appointed by the Governor. The Governor 
must solicit nominations for vacancies on the commission from individuals or 
organizations that promote the future of hunting and individuals or organizations that 
promote the preservation of wildlife in the State, with geographical distribution being a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 188/ Page 2 
prime consideration for filling vacancies. The commission must also have representation 
from the farming community. The term of a member is four years, and a member may not 
serve more than two terms on the commission. At the end of a term, a member continues 
to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 320 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2