START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

Chapter 263

(House Bill 121)

AN ACT concerning

Mental Health – Treatment Plans for Individuals in Facilities ~~–~~ ~~Requirements~~
and Resident Grievance System

FOR the purpose of requiring that a plan of treatment for an individual with a mental
disorder admitted to a certain health care facility include a certain discharge goal
and an estimate of the probable length of inpatient stay the individual requires
before transfer to a certain setting; requiring certain facility staff to review and
reassess a plan of treatment within certain time periods; establishing certain rights
and requirements relating to the participation of certain family members and other
individuals in the development, review, and reassessment of a plan of treatment;
establishing an appeals process for individuals admitted to a State facility relating
to the review and reassessment of a plan of treatment; requiring the Maryland
Department of Health to adopt certain regulations relating to the appeals process;
requiring a ~~certain~~ State health care facility to take certain actions if the facility is
unable to address certain needs under a plan of treatment; requiring the Department
to report certain information related to the Resident Grievance System to the
General Assembly on or before a certain date each year; and generally relating to
~~treatment~~ ~~plans~~ ~~for~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~with~~ ~~mental~~ ~~disorders~~ ~~admitted~~ ~~to~~ mental health
care facilities.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 10–706
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 10–908 to be under the new part “Part II. Resident Grievance System Report”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

10–706.

(a) (1) Except as provided by paragraph (2) of this subsection, promptly after
admission of an individual, a facility shall make and periodically update a written plan of
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 263 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

treatment for the individual in the facility, in accordance with the provisions of this
subtitle.

(2) Promptly after admission of an individual to a psychosocial center, the
center shall make and periodically update a written plan of rehabilitation for the individual
in the facility, in accordance with the provisions of this subtitle.

(b) The Director shall adopt rules and regulations under this section that include:

(1) [A] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A description
of the nature and content of plans of treatment; and

(2) [Appropriate] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION,
APPROPRIATE time periods for the development, implementation, and review of each plan.

(c) An individual shall:

(1) Participate, in a manner appropriate to the individual’s condition, in
the development and periodic updating of the plan of treatment; and

(2) Be told, in appropriate terms and language, of:

(i) The content and objectives of the plan of treatment;

(ii) The nature and significant possible adverse effects of
recommended treatments;

(iii) The name, title, and role of personnel directly responsible for
carrying out the treatment for the individual; and

(iv) When appropriate, other available alternative treatments,
services, or providers of mental health services.

(D) A PLAN OF TREATMENT SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A LONG–RANGE DISCHARGE GOAL; AND

(2) AN ESTIMATE OF THE PROBABLE LENGTH OF INPATIENT STAY
THE INDIVIDUAL REQUIRES BEFORE TRANSFER TO A LESS RESTRICTIVE OR
INTENSIVE TREATMENT SETTING.

(E) FACILITY STAFF WHO WORK DIRECTLY WITH AND PROVIDE TREATMENT
TO AN INDIVIDUAL SHALL REVIEW AND REASSESS THE PLAN OF TREATMENT FOR
THE INDIVIDUAL TO DETERMINE THE INDIVIDUAL’S PROGRESS AND ANY NEED FOR
ADJUSTMENTS TO THE PLAN NOT LESS THAN:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

(1) ONCE EVERY 15 DAYS FOR THE FIRST 2 MONTHS AFTER
ADMISSION OF THE INDIVIDUAL TO THE FACILITY; AND

(2) ONCE EVERY 60 DAYS FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE INPATIENT
STAY OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN THE FACILITY.

(F) (1) ON THE ADMISSION OF AN INDIVIDUAL TO A FACILITY AND AT
EACH REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S PLAN OF TREATMENT, THE
FACILITY SHALL ASK:

(I) ASK THE INDIVIDUAL WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL
CONSENTS TO ~~THE~~ ~~INCLUSION~~ ~~OF~~ FAMILY MEMBERS OR ANY OTHER INDIVIDUALS ~~IN~~
BEING INFORMED OF AND GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO PARTICIPATE IN MEETINGS
WITH THE TREATMENT TEAM REGARDING THE DEVELOPMENT, REVIEW, AND
REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF TREATMENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL; AND

(II) IF CONSENT IS GIVEN UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
AT LEAST EVERY 7 DAYS AFTER CONSENT IS GIVEN, RECONFIRM THE CONSENT AND
PROVIDE THE INDIVIDUAL AT A CLINICAL VISIT WITH AN OPPORTUNITY TO CONSENT
TO ADDITIONAL INDIVIDUALS BEING INFORMED OF AND GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY
TO PARTICIPATE IN MEETINGS WITH THE TREATMENT TEAM.

(2) IF AN INDIVIDUAL AGREES TO HAVE FAMILY MEMBERS OR OTHER
INDIVIDUALS PARTICIPATE IN THE DEVELOPMENT, REVIEW, AND REASSESSMENT OF
THE INDIVIDUAL’S PLAN OF TREATMENT, THE FACILITY SHALL:

(I) INCLUDE THE FAMILY MEMBERS AND OTHER INDIVIDUALS
AUTHORIZED BY THE INDIVIDUAL IN:

1. EACH STAGE OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PLAN OF
~~TREATMENT;~~

2. ANY REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF
TREATMENT; AND

3. ANY MEETING OF FACILITY STAFF THAT HAS A
PURPOSE OF DEVELOPING, REVIEWING, OR REASSESSING THE PLAN OF
TREATMENT; AND PROVIDE A SCHEDULE OF ROUTINE TREATMENT TEAM MEETINGS
WHERE THE PLAN OF TREATMENT IS DISCUSSED;

(II) PROVIDE NOTICE TO THE FAMILY MEMBERS AND OTHER
INDIVIDUALS OF A TREATMENT TEAM MEETING:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 263 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. AT LEAST 7 DAYS IN ADVANCE OF THE MEETING; OR

2. IF THE TREATMENT TEAM MEETING IS BEING HELD
DUE TO AN EMERGENCY, AS SOON AS THE MEETING IS SCHEDULED ESTABLISH A
PROCESS FOR THE AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS TO PARTICIPATE IN TREATMENT
TEAM MEETINGS;

(III) IF THE TREATMENT TEAM MEETING IS BEING HELD
OUTSIDE THE REGULAR SCHEDULE, INFORM THE AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS AS
SOON AS THE MEETING IS SCHEDULED; AND

(IV) IF THE TREATMENT TEAM MEETING IS BEING HELD DUE TO
AN EMERGENCY, INFORM THE AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS OF THE OUTCOME OF THE
MEETING AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE.

(3) THE INDIVIDUAL MAY WITHDRAW THE CONSENT GIVEN UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION AT ANY TIME ORALLY OR IN WRITING.

(4) A TREATING PROVIDER MAY WITHHOLD INFORMATION ON AN
INDIVIDUAL PLAN OF TREATMENT FROM A FAMILY MEMBER OR OTHER AUTHORIZED
INDIVIDUAL IF:

(I) IN THE TREATING PROVIDER’S CLINICAL JUDGMENT, THE
CONSENT GIVEN UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION WAS PROVIDED
THROUGH COERCIVE MEANS;

(II) THE TREATING PROVIDER BELIEVES IT IS IN THE BEST
CLINICAL INTEREST OF THE INDIVIDUAL; OR

(III) THE INDIVIDUAL REQUESTS THAT A SPECIFIC PIECE OF THE
PLAN OF TREATMENT BE WITHHELD.

(G) (1) IF AN INDIVIDUAL ADMITTED TO A FACILITY OR ANY FAMILY
MEMBER OR OTHER INDIVIDUAL AUTHORIZED BY THE INDIVIDUAL TO PARTICIPATE
IN THE REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF TREATMENT FOR THE
INDIVIDUAL UNDER SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION BELIEVES THAT THE PLAN OF
TREATMENT IS NOT MEETING THE NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL, THE INDIVIDUAL,
FAMILY MEMBER, OR OTHER AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUAL HAS THE RIGHT TO REQUEST
THAT THE FACILITY REVIEW AND REASSESS THE PLAN OF TREATMENT.

(2) ON RECEIPT OF A REQUEST UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE FACILITY STAFF WHO WORK DIRECTLY WITH AND PROVIDE
TREATMENT TO THE INDIVIDUAL SHALL CONDUCT:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

(I) CONDUCT A REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF
TREATMENT ~~THAT~~ ~~INCLUDES~~ ~~A~~ ~~WRITTEN~~ ~~EXPLANATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~HOW~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~ISSUES~~ ~~RAISED~~
~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~WERE~~ ~~CONSIDERED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REVIEW~~ ~~AND~~ ~~REASSESSMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
PLAN OF TREATMENT;

(II) COMMUNICATE THE RESULTS OF THE REVIEW AND
REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF TREATMENT TO THE PATIENT AND INDIVIDUAL
WHO REQUESTED THE REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT, INCLUDING AN EXPLANATION
OF HOW ALL ISSUES RAISED IN THE REQUEST WERE CONSIDERED; AND

(III) INCLUDE THE REQUEST FOR THE REVIEW AND
REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF TREATMENT AND THE OUTCOME OF THE REVIEW
AND ASSESSMENT, INCLUDING THE EXPLANATION OF THE OUTCOME, IN THE
MEDICAL RECORDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

(3) IF THE FACILITY DOES NOT MAKE ANY CHANGES TO THE PLAN OF
TREATMENT FOR THE INDIVIDUAL, THE FACILITY SHALL:

(I) PROVIDE A DETAILED WRITTEN EXPLANATION FOR THE
~~DECISION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~MEMBER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~
~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PARTICIPATE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REVIEW~~ ~~AND~~
REASSESSMENT OF THE PLAN OF TREATMENT; AND

(II) INCLUDE THE EXPLANATION IN THE MEDICAL RECORDS OF
THE INDIVIDUAL IF A STATE FACILITY DOES NOT MAKE ANY CHANGES TO THE PLAN
OF TREATMENT FOR THE INDIVIDUAL, THE STATE FACILITY SHALL PROVIDE
REFERRAL INFORMATION FOR THE RESIDENT GRIEVANCE SYSTEM ESTABLISHED
UNDER COMAR 10.21.14.

(H) (1) AN INDIVIDUAL ADMITTED TO A STATE FACILITY MAY REQUEST
~~AN~~ ~~ADMINISTRATIVE~~ ~~HEARING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~RECONSIDERATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REVIEW~~ ~~AND~~
REASSESSMENT COMPLETED UNDER SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION BY FILING A
REQUEST FOR HEARING WITH THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE STATE
FACILITY OR THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER’S DESIGNEE WITHIN 7 DAYS AFTER
RECEIPT OF THE WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF THE REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT.

(2) WITHIN 72 HOURS AFTER RECEIPT OF A REQUEST FOR A
HEARING, THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE STATE FACILITY OR THE CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER’S DESIGNEE SHALL FORWARD THE REQUEST TO THE OFFICE
OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.

(3) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE OFFICE
OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS SHALL CONDUCT A HEARING AND ISSUE A DECISION
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 263 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

WITHIN 15 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST FORWARDED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(4) THE INDIVIDUAL ADMITTED TO A STATE FACILITY IS ENTITLED TO
BE REPRESENTED BY COUNSEL AT THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.

(5) THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING MAY BE POSTPONED BY
AGREEMENT OF THE PARTIES OR FOR GOOD CAUSE SHOWN.

(6) THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE SHALL CONDUCT A DE NOVO
~~HEARING~~ ~~TO~~ ~~DETERMINE~~ ~~WHETHER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PLAN~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~MEETING~~ ~~THE~~
NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

(7) AT THE HEARING, THE INDIVIDUAL REPRESENTING THE STATE
~~FACILITY:~~

(I) MAY INTRODUCE THE WRITTEN EXPLANATION RELATING
TO THE PLAN OF TREATMENT AS EVIDENCE; AND

(II) SHALL PROVE, BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE,
THAT THE PLAN OF TREATMENT IS MEETING THE NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

(8) (I) THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE SHALL STATE ON THE
RECORD THE FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW.

(II) THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE SHALL DETERMINE
~~THAT:~~

1. BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE, THE PLAN OF
TREATMENT IS MEETING THE NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL; OR

2. THE PLAN OF TREATMENT IS NOT MEETING THE
NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

(III) IF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE DETERMINES THAT
THE PLAN OF TREATMENT IS NOT MEETING THE NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL, THE
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE SHALL ORDER THE STATE FACILITY TO MAKE
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE INDIVIDUAL TO RECEIVE NECESSARY TREATMENT, WHICH
~~MAY~~ ~~INCLUDE~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~ANOTHER~~ ~~FACILITY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ANOTHER~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~
PROVIDER OUTSIDE THE STATE FACILITY.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

(9) THE DETERMINATION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE IS A
~~FINAL~~ ~~DECISION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURPOSE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~JUDICIAL~~ ~~REVIEW~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~FINAL~~ ~~DECISION~~
UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT.

(I) (1) WITHIN 14 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
JUDGE ISSUES A DECISION UNDER SUBSECTION (H) OF THIS SECTION, THE
INDIVIDUAL OR THE STATE FACILITY MAY APPEAL THE DECISION TO THE CIRCUIT
COURT ON THE RECORD FROM THE HEARING CONDUCTED BY THE OFFICE OF
~~ADMINISTRATIVE~~ ~~HEARINGS.~~

(2) THE SCOPE OF REVIEW SHALL BE AS A CONTESTED CASE UNDER
THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT.

(3) (I) REVIEW SHALL BE ON THE RECORD MADE BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS, UNLESS EITHER PARTY TO THE APPEAL
REQUESTS TRANSCRIPTION OF THE TAPE.

(II) A REQUEST FOR TRANSCRIPTION OF THE TAPE SHALL BE
MADE AT THE TIME THE APPEAL IS FILED.

(III) 1. THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS SHALL
PREPARE THE TRANSCRIPTION BEFORE THE APPEAL HEARING.

2. THE PARTY REQUESTING THE TRANSCRIPTION SHALL
BEAR THE COST OF TRANSCRIPTION.

(4) THE CIRCUIT COURT SHALL HEAR AND ISSUE A DECISION ON AN
APPEAL WITHIN 30 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE APPEAL WAS FILED AN
INDIVIDUAL ADMITTED TO A STATE FACILITY OR ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL
AUTHORIZED BY THE ADMITTED INDIVIDUAL MAY REQUEST A RECONSIDERATION OF
THE REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT COMPLETED UNDER SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS
SECTION BY FILING A GRIEVANCE WITH THE RESIDENT GRIEVANCE SYSTEM UNDER
COMAR ~~12.21.14~~ 10.21.14.

(I) (1) AN INDIVIDUAL ADMITTED TO A STATE FACILITY OR ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL AUTHORIZED BY THE ADMITTED INDIVIDUAL MAY APPEAL THE
RECONSIDERATION OF THE REVIEW AND REASSESSMENT COMPLETED UNDER
SUBSECTION (H) OF THIS SECTION BY FILING A REQUEST WITH THE DEPARTMENT’S
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM’S CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH A
PROCESS FOR THE APPEAL OF THE RECONSIDERATION OF THE REVIEW AND
REASSESSMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 263 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(J) IF A AN INDIVIDUAL IS ADMITTED TO A STATE FACILITY AND THE STATE
FACILITY IS UNABLE TO PROVIDE THE TREATMENT NECESSARY TO ADDRESS THE
REHABILITATION NEEDS OF AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER A PLAN OF TREATMENT FOR THE
INDIVIDUAL, THE STATE FACILITY SHALL:

(1) MAKE ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE INDIVIDUAL TO RECEIVE
NECESSARY TREATMENT FROM ANOTHER FACILITY OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER OUTSIDE THE STATE FACILITY; AND

(2) ENSURE THAT TREATMENT FOR THE INDIVIDUAL IS
COORDINATED BETWEEN THE STATE FACILITY AND THE OTHER FACILITY OR
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER.

PART II. RESIDENT GRIEVANCE SYSTEM REPORT.

10–908.

ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
§ 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON:

(1) THE RESIDENT GRIEVANCE SYSTEM ESTABLISHED UNDER
COMAR 12.21.14 10.21.14; AND

(2) THE GRIEVANCES THAT WERE RECEIVED BY THE RESIDENT
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM RELATED TO STATE FACILITIES DURING THE IMMEDIATELY
PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8