START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 172 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 172 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Licensed Athletic Trainers - Dry Needling Approval 
 
 
This bill authorizes a licensed athletic trainer to perform dry needling as a specialized task 
if the athletic trainer is approved by the Maryland Board of Physicians (MBP). MBP must 
issue an approval to perform dry needling to a licensed athletic trainer who meets specified 
requirements.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $31,900 in FY 2024 for contractual 
staff and one-time licensure system changes; future years reflect termination of the position 
after one year and elimination of one-time costs. Special fund revenues may increase to the 
extent MBP charges an application fee for issuing an approval (not reflected below).  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
31,900 
6,400 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($31,900) 
($6,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Dry needling” means an intramuscular manual therapy that (1) involves 
the insertion of one or more solid needles into the muscle and related tissues to effect 
change in the muscle and related tissues; (2) requires ongoing evaluation, assessment, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 172/ Page 2 
reevaluation of an impairment; (3) is used only in parts of the body with neuromuscular or 
musculoskeletal links to an impairment; and (4) is not performed for the purposes of 
acupuncture or any purpose outside the scope of practice of athletic trainers. 
 
Requirements for Approval 
 
MBP must issue an approval to perform dry needling to a licensed athletic trainer who 
provides proof of completion of at least 80 hours of instruction in a continuing education 
course that is approved by (1) the National Athletic Trainers’ Association; (2) the Board of 
Certification for the Athletic Trainer; or (3) the U.S. Armed Forces. The continuing 
education course must include (1) at least 40 hours of instruction related to dry needling, 
as specified, and (2) at least 40 hours of practical, hands-on instruction in the application 
and technique of dry needling that is completed under the guidance of a licensed health 
care practitioner who is approved to perform dry needling and has practiced dry needling 
for at least five years. The course must include an assessment of the licensed athletic trainer 
that is performed by the instructor of the course. 
 
Disciplinary Actions for Performing Dry Needling without Approval 
 
An applicant or licensee who performs dry needling without the approval of MBP is subject 
to licensure denial, reprimand, probation, suspension, or revocation by a disciplinary panel 
subject to existing hearing provisions. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Athletic Training 
 
In general, an individual must be licensed by MBP before the individual may practice 
athletic training in the State (subject to specified exceptions). “Practice athletic training” 
means application of the following principles and methods for managing athletic injuries 
for athletes in good overall health under the supervision of a licensed physician: 
(1) prevention and wellness promotion; (2) clinical evaluation, examination, assessment, 
and determination of a plan of care, including appropriate referrals; (3) immediate care and 
emergency care; and (4) treatment, rehabilitation, and reconditioning. The definition 
includes the organization and administration of an athletic training program; instruction to 
coaches, athletes, parents, medical personnel, and community members regarding the care 
and prevention of athletic injuries; and recognition and management of a concussion, 
including management of an athletic individual’s progressive return to activity.    
 
“Practice athletic training” does not include specified chiropractic actions, massage 
therapy, medicine, occupational therapy, physical therapy, or podiatry; reconditioning of 
systemic neurologic injuries, conditions, or disease; or the treatment of disease.   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 172/ Page 3 
MBP oversees the issuance and renewal of licenses for athletic trainers and may set 
reasonable fees for licensure, renewal, and other services it provides to athletic trainers. 
The Athletic Trainer Advisory Committee within MBP must make specified 
recommendations to and submit an annual report to MBP regarding the practice of licensed 
athletic trainers, and MBP must report any disciplinary matters regarding licensed athletic 
trainers to the committee. 
 
State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners – Dry Needling 
 
“Dry needling” means a physical therapy intervention, also known as intramuscular manual 
therapy, that (1) involves the insertion of one or more solid needles, a mechanical device, 
into the muscle and related tissues to affect change in muscle and related tissues; 
(2) requires ongoing evaluation, assessment, and reevaluation of the impairments; (3) is 
only utilized in parts of the body with neuromuscular or musculoskeletal links to the 
impairments; and (4) is not performed for the purposes of acupuncture or any purpose 
outside the scope of physical therapy. 
 
To perform dry needling, a physical therapist must register with the State Board of 
Physician Therapy Examiners as having the appropriate education and training, including 
80 hours of total specified instruction, 40 hours of which must be practical hands-on 
instruction.  
 
State Board of Chiropractic Examiners – Dry Needling 
 
“Dry needling” means a chiropractic intervention, also known as intramuscular manual 
therapy, that (1) is performed only by chiropractors with physical therapy privileges; 
(2) involves the insertion of one or more solid needles, a mechanical device, into the muscle 
and related tissues to affect change in muscle and related tissues; (3) requires ongoing 
evaluation, assessment, and reevaluation of the impairments; (4) is only utilized in parts of 
the body with neuromuscular or musculoskeletal links to the impairments; and (5) is not 
performed for the purposes of acupuncture or any purpose outside the scope of chiropractic.  
 
A chiropractor with physical therapy privileges must be registered with the State Board of 
Chiropractic Examiners to perform dry needling by submitting (1) evidence of completing 
the required education and training, including 80 hours of specified coursework, 20 hours 
of which must consist of hands-on classroom work; (2) a registration application; and 
(3) evidence of continuing education coursework in dry needing completed before 
May 18, 2020. 
 
State Revenues:  MBP advises that licensed athletic trainers will register to perform dry 
needling by completing a new section of the existing evaluation and treatment protocol 
application. There is currently no application fee associated with modifying or amending 
previously approved applications. However, MBP is authorized to set reasonable fees for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 172/ Page 4 
licensure, renewal, and other services it provides to athletic trainers. Although not specified 
under the bill, MBP may charge a fee for issuing an approval to perform dry needling to 
cover any administrative costs incurred by MBP. To the extent MBP elects to charge such 
a fee, special fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2024.  
 
State Expenditures:  MBP’s fiscal 2022 annual report indicates there are 720 licensed 
athletic trainers in the State. MBP advises that it would need to hire one part-time (50%) 
contractual licensure analyst for an indefinite period at an annual salary of $24,702. The 
Department of Legislative Services agrees there may be a need for part-time contractual 
staff but advises that a one-year duration to handle initial implementation is likely sufficient 
due to the overall number of licensed athletic trainers.  
 
Thus, special fund expenditures increase by $31,893 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time 
(50%) contractual licensure analyst to handle the initial influx of dry needling approval 
requests, including ensuring applicants meet minimum qualifications and notifying athletic 
trainers and supervising physicians of decisions. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and a one-time contractual expense 
of $5,000 for MBP to modify its licensing system to include the new approval.   
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$19,881 
Contractual Expense 
5,000 
Operating Expenses 
7,012 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$31,893 
 
Future year expenditures reflect termination of the contractual position after one year 
(September 30, 2024) and elimination of one-time costs. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Licensed athletic trainers practicing as small businesses can apply 
for approval to perform dry needling as an additional service. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 711 and HB 1016 of 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 172/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 232 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - July 14, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5