START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 146

Chapter 146

(House Bill 151)

AN ACT concerning

Real Property – Residential Leases – Notification of Rent Increases

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a landlord from including a certain term in a lease
pertaining to electronic delivery of the notice of a rent increase; requiring a landlord
to notify a tenant a certain number of days before increasing the tenant’s rent ~~by~~
~~more~~ ~~than~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~percentage;~~ requiring a county or municipality that adopts a
certain local law related to limitations on rent increase to report certain information
on building permits issued for multifamily dwellings intended to be used as rental
housing on or before a certain date annually; and generally relating to residential
leases and rent increases.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 8–208(d)(7) and (8)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section ~~8–209~~ 8–208(d)(9), 8–209, and 8–209.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

8–208.

(d) A landlord may not use a lease or form of lease containing any provision that:

(7) Is against public policy and void pursuant to § 8–105 of this title; [or]

(8) Permits a landlord to commence an eviction proceeding or issue a notice
to quit solely as retaliation against any tenant for planning, organizing, or joining a tenant
organization with the purpose of negotiating collectively with the landlord; OR

(9) REQUIRES THE TENANT TO ACCEPT NOTICE OF RENT INCREASES
UNDER § 8–209 BY ELECTRONIC DELIVERY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 146 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

8–209.

(A) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A RESIDENTIAL LEASE FOR A
TERM OF AT LEAST 1 YEAR.

(2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A LANDLORD WHO HAS
PROVIDED WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE INTENT TO TERMINATE A TENANCY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 8–402(C)(2) OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) A LANDLORD SHALL NOTIFY A TENANT IN WRITING OR THROUGH
E–MAIL AT LEAST 120 DAYS BEFORE INCREASING THE TENANT’S RENT BY MORE
THAN 4%.

(2) (I) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL:

1. BE SENT BY FIRST–CLASS MAIL WITH A CERTIFICATE
OF MAILING; OR

2. IF ELECTED BY THE TENANT, SENT BY ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY IN AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING FORMS:

A. AN E–MAIL MESSAGE;

B. A TEXT MESSAGE; OR

C. THROUGH AN ELECTRONIC TENANT PORTAL.

(II) THE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY METHOD SHALL PROVIDE THE
LANDLORD WITH PROOF OF TRANSMISSION OF THE NOTICE.

(III) A LANDLORD MAY NOT CONDITION THE ACCEPTANCE OF A
LEASE APPLICATION ON THE TENANT’S ELECTION TO RECEIVE NOTICE UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION BY ELECTRONIC DELIVERY.

(3) A LANDLORD SHALL PROVIDE THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) FOR TENANCIES FOR A TERM OF MORE THAN 1 MONTH, AT
LEAST 90 DAYS IN ADVANCE OF THE RENT INCREASE;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 146

(II) FOR TENANCIES FOR A TERM OF MORE THAN 1 WEEK, BUT
NOT MORE THAN 1 MONTH, AT LEAST 60 DAYS IN ADVANCE OF THE RENT INCREASE;
AND

(III) FOR TENANCIES FOR A TERM OF 1 WEEK OR LESS:

1. AT LEAST 7 DAYS IN ADVANCE OF THE RENT
INCREASE IF THE PARTIES HAVE A WRITTEN LEASE; OR

2. AT LEAST 21 DAYS IN ADVANCE OF THE RENT
INCREASE IF THE PARTIES DO NOT HAVE A WRITTEN LEASE.

(C) THIS SECTION DOES NOT AFFECT OR SUPERSEDE ANY LOCAL LAW OR
ORDINANCE THAT REQUIRES ADDITIONAL NOTICE OR PROVIDES ADDITIONAL
TENANT PROTECTIONS.

8–209.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “LOCAL JURISDICTION” MEANS A COUNTY OR
MUNICIPALITY.

(B) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO A LOCAL JURISDICTION THAT ADOPTS
A LOCAL LAW TO LIMIT THE RENT INCREASE THAT A LANDLORD MAY CHARGE A
CURRENT TENANT FOR A SUBSEQUENT TERM WITHOUT A GAP IN TENANCY.

(2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A LOCAL JURISDICTION THAT
ADOPTS A LOCAL LAW FOR THE PURPOSE IDENTIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION IF THE LIMITATION ON RENT INCREASES APPLIES ONLY:

(I) DURING:

1. A DESIGNATED STATE OF EMERGENCY OR
CATASTROPHIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ISSUED BY THE GOVERNOR; OR

2. AN EMERGENCY ORDER ISSUED BY THE HEAD OF THE
EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION;

(II) TO HOUSING OWNED BY THE LOCAL JURISDICTION AND
OPERATED BY THE LOCAL JURISDICTION OR A THIRD PARTY; OR

(III) TO HOUSING FUNDED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, BY THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 146 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) ON ADOPTION OF A LOCAL LAW DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF
THIS SECTION, THE LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE:

(1) THAT THE LOCAL JURISDICTION HAS ADOPTED A LOCAL LAW TO
LIMIT THE RENT INCREASE THAT A LANDLORD MAY CHARGE;

(2) THE TEXT OF THE BILL, AS ADOPTED BY THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION; AND

(3) THE DATE THE LOCAL LAW WILL GO INTO EFFECT.

(D) (1) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31 OF THE SECOND CALENDAR YEAR
AFTER A LOCAL JURISDICTION ADOPTS A LOCAL LAW FOR THE PURPOSE IDENTIFIED
IN SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL REPORT
TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE NUMBER OF NEW BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED BY
THE LOCAL JURISDICTION, BY YEAR, FOR MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS INTENDED TO
BE USED AS RENTAL PROPERTIES:

(I) FOR THE 2 YEARS PRIOR TO ENACTING THE LOCAL LAW;
AND

(II) SINCE ENACTMENT OF THE LOCAL LAW.

(2) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31 OF EACH YEAR AFTER THE INITIAL
REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION SHALL SUBMIT AN UPDATED REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE
NUMBER OF NEW BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED BY THE LOCAL JURISDICTION, BY
YEAR, FOR MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS INTENDED TO BE USED AS RENTAL
PROPERTIES SINCE THE DATE THE LOCAL LAW WAS ENACTED.

(E) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO AUTHORIZE A LOCAL
JURISDICTION TO ADOPT A LOCAL LAW TO LIMIT RENT INCREASES THAT MAY BE
CHARGED TO A CURRENT TENANT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4