START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 166

Chapter 166

(House Bill 192)

AN ACT concerning

~~Cryptocurrency~~ Currency – Campaign Finance Prohibitions – Disclosures by
Financial Institutions

FOR the purpose of ~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~from~~ ~~depositing~~ ~~funds~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~
~~cryptocurrency~~ ~~account;~~ prohibiting certain persons subject to campaign finance
regulation from making or accepting monetary contributions or monetary donations
using ~~cryptocurrency~~ any currency other than United States currency; prohibiting a
campaign finance entity or a person acting on behalf of a campaign finance entity
from making ~~an~~ a monetary expenditure using ~~cryptocurrency~~ any currency other
than United States currency; authorizing the State Administrator of Elections to
investigate certain potential violations of this Act and issue a subpoena in
furtherance of an investigation; altering the definition of financial institution for
purposes of certain provisions of law authorizing the Comptroller to request certain
information and assistance to include a virtual currency money transmitter; and
generally relating to ~~cryptocurrency~~ currency.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~1–101(a)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – Election Law
Section ~~1–101(p–1),~~ 13–238, 13–250, 13–604.1(b)(11), and (12), ~~and~~ ~~(13),~~ and
13–604.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section ~~13–220(a)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(d),~~ ~~13–234,~~ ~~and~~ 13–604.1(b)(9) and (10)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 13–804(a)(1) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 166 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 13–804(a)(2) and (4)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

~~1–101.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated~~ ~~unless~~ ~~a~~
~~different~~ ~~meaning~~ ~~is~~ ~~clearly~~ ~~intended~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~context.~~

(P–1) “CRYPTOCURRENCY” MEANS DIGITAL OR VIRTUAL CURRENCY THAT
~~RELIES~~ ~~ON~~ ~~CRYPTOGRAPHY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~EFFECT~~ ~~TRANSFERS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~DECENTRALIZED~~
NETWORK TO RECORD TRANSACTIONS.

~~13–220.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~shall~~ ~~designate~~ ~~one~~ ~~or~~ ~~more~~ ~~campaign~~
~~accounts.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~designated~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~account~~ ~~shall:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~be~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~financial~~ ~~institution;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~be~~ ~~registered~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~manner~~ ~~that~~ ~~identifies~~ ~~it~~ ~~as~~ ~~the~~ ~~account~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~
~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~A~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~shall~~ ~~deposit~~ ~~all~~ ~~funds~~ ~~received~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~
~~designated~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~account.~~

(4) A CAMPAIGN FINANCE ENTITY MAY NOT DEPOSIT ANY FUNDS
RECEIVED IN A CRYPTOCURRENCY ACCOUNT.

~~(d)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection,~~ ~~a~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~
~~may~~ ~~make~~ ~~a~~ ~~disbursement~~ ~~only~~ ~~by:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~check;~~ ~~or~~

(ii) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, an
~~electronic~~ ~~method~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~authorizes~~ ~~by~~ ~~regulation.~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 166

~~(2)~~ ~~An~~ ~~electronic~~ ~~method~~ ~~of~~ ~~making~~ ~~a~~ ~~disbursement~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~
~~authorizes~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~shall~~ ~~ensure~~ ~~that:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~the~~ ~~identity~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~person~~ ~~making~~ ~~the~~ ~~disbursement~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~
~~verified;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~the~~ ~~transaction~~ ~~is~~ ~~secure;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~there~~ ~~is~~ ~~an~~ ~~adequate~~ ~~record~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~transaction.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~A~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~may~~ ~~make~~ ~~a~~ ~~disbursement~~ ~~to~~ ~~compensate~~ ~~a~~
~~responsible~~ ~~officer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~only~~ ~~by~~ ~~check.~~

(4) THE STATE BOARD MAY NOT AUTHORIZE A CAMPAIGN FINANCE
ENTITY TO MAKE A DISBURSEMENT USING CRYPTOCURRENCY.

~~13–234.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~A~~ ~~contribution~~ ~~of~~ ~~money~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~made~~ ~~only~~ ~~by:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~check;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~credit~~ ~~card;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~cash,~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~contribution~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~exceed~~ ~~$100~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~election~~ ~~cycle;~~ ~~or~~

(4) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, an electronic
~~method~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~authorizes~~ ~~by~~ ~~regulation.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~An~~ ~~electronic~~ ~~method~~ ~~of~~ ~~making~~ ~~a~~ ~~contribution~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~
~~authorizes~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~shall~~ ~~ensure~~ ~~that:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~identity~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~person~~ ~~making~~ ~~the~~ ~~contribution~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~verified;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~transaction~~ ~~is~~ ~~secure;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~there~~ ~~is~~ ~~an~~ ~~adequate~~ ~~record~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~transaction.~~

(C) THE STATE BOARD MAY NOT AUTHORIZE A CONTRIBUTION TO BE MADE
USING CRYPTOCURRENCY.

13–238.

(A) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT MAKE A MONETARY CONTRIBUTION USING
CRYPTOCURRENCY ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 166 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A PERSON MAY NOT MAKE A MONETARY DONATION USING
CRYPTOCURRENCY ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY TO A
PERSON REQUIRED TO REGISTER UNDER § 13–306 OR § 13–307 OF THIS TITLE.

(B) (1) A CAMPAIGN FINANCE ENTITY MAY NOT ACCEPT A MONETARY
CONTRIBUTION MADE USING ~~CRYPTOCURRENCY~~ ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN
UNITED STATES CURRENCY.

(2) A PERSON REQUIRED TO REGISTER UNDER § 13–306 OR § 13–307
OF THIS TITLE MAY NOT ACCEPT A MONETARY DONATION MADE USING
CRYPTOCURRENCY ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY.

13–250.

A CAMPAIGN FINANCE ENTITY, OR A PERSON ACTING ON ITS BEHALF, MAY NOT
MAKE ~~AN~~ A MONETARY EXPENDITURE USING ~~CRYPTOCURRENCY~~ ANY CURRENCY
OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY.

13–604.1.

(b) The State Board may impose a civil penalty in accordance with this section for
the following violations:

(9) failure to include a disclosure on online campaign material as required
in § 13–401.1(b) of this title; [and]

(10) soliciting a recurring contribution or donation without the affirmative
consent of the contributor or donor as required in § 13–244 of this title;

(11) DEPOSITING FUNDS IN A CRYPTOCURRENCY ACCOUNT IN
VIOLATION OF § 13–220(A)(4) OF THIS TITLE;

(12) MAKING A MONETARY CONTRIBUTION OR MONETARY DONATION
USING CRYPTOCURRENCY ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY
OR ACCEPTING A MONETARY CONTRIBUTION OR MONETARY DONATION MADE USING
CRYPTOCURRENCY ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY IN
VIOLATION OF § 13–238 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(13) (12) MAKING AN A MONETARY EXPENDITURE USING
CRYPTOCURRENCY ANY CURRENCY OTHER THAN UNITED STATES CURRENCY IN
VIOLATION OF § 13–250 OF THIS TITLE.

13–604.3.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 166

(A) THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR OR THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR’S
DESIGNEE MAY INVESTIGATE A POTENTIAL VIOLATION OF § 13–220(A)(4), § 13–238,
OR § 13–250 OF THIS TITLE.

(B) THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR OR THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR’S
DESIGNEE SHALL:

(1) NOTIFY A PERSON THAT IS SUBJECT TO AN INVESTIGATION UNDER
THIS SECTION OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES THAT GAVE RISE TO THE INVESTIGATION;
AND

(2) PROVIDE THE PERSON AMPLE OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD AT A
PUBLIC MEETING OF THE STATE BOARD.

(C) (1) IN FURTHERANCE OF AN INVESTIGATION UNDER THIS SECTION,
THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR OR THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE MAY
ISSUE A SUBPOENA FOR THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS TO TESTIFY OR THE
PRODUCTION OF RECORDS.

(2) A SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE SERVED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MARYLAND RULES.

(3) IN ORDER FOR A SUBPOENA TO BE ISSUED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR SHALL MAKE A FINDING THAT THE
SUBPOENA IS NECESSARY TO AND IN FURTHERANCE OF AN INVESTIGATION BEING
CONDUCTED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(4) ANY FILING SUBMITTED TO A COURT WITH RESPECT TO A
SUBPOENA UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE SEALED ON FILING.

(5) IF A PERSON FAILS TO COMPLY WITH A SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER
THIS SUBSECTION, ON PETITION OF THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR, A CIRCUIT COURT
OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION MAY COMPEL COMPLIANCE WITH THE SUBPOENA.

(D) AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE INVESTIGATION AND FOLLOWING THE
HEARING UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(2) OF THIS SECTION, THE STATE BOARD SHALL
ISSUE A PUBLIC REPORT OF ITS FINDINGS AND MAY:

(1) IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY IN THE AMOUNT AND MANNER
SPECIFIED IN § 13–604.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(2) REFER THE MATTER FOR FURTHER INVESTIGATION BY THE STATE
PROSECUTOR IF THE STATE BOARD HAS REASONABLE CAUSE TO BELIEVE THAT A

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 166 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

PERSON HAS WILLFULLY AND KNOWINGLY VIOLATED § 13–220(A)(4),
§ 13–238, OR § 13–250 OF THIS TITLE.

Article – Tax – General

13–804.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Account” means:

1. any funds from a demand deposit account, checking
account, negotiable order of withdrawal account, savings account, time deposit account,
money market mutual fund account, or certificate of deposit account;

2. any funds paid towards the purchase of shares or other
interest in a financial institution, as defined in paragraph (4)(ii) and (iii) of this subsection;
and

3. any funds or property held by a financial institution, as
defined in paragraph (4)(iv) OR (V) of this subsection.

(ii) “Account” does not include:

1. an account or portion of an account to which an obligor
does not have access due to the pledge of the funds as security for a loan or other obligation;

2. funds or property deposited to an account after the time
that the financial institution initially attaches the account;

3. an account or portion of an account to which the financial
institution has a present right to exercise a right of setoff;

4. an account or portion of an account that has an account
holder of interest named as an owner on the account; or

5. an account or portion of an account to which the obligor
does not have an unconditional right of access.

(4) “Financial institution” means:

(i) a depository institution, as defined in the Federal Deposit
Insurance Act under 12 U.S.C. § 1813(c);

(ii) a federal credit union or State credit union, as defined in the
Federal Credit Union Act under 12 U.S.C. § 1752;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 166

(iii) a State credit union regulated under Title 6 of the Financial
Institutions Article; [or]

(iv) A VIRTUAL CURRENCY MONEY TRANSMITTER THAT IS
REGULATED UNDER TITLE 12 OF THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ARTICLE; OR

(V) a benefit association, insurance company, safe deposit company,
money market mutual fund, or similar entity doing business in the State that holds
property or maintains accounts reflecting property belonging to others.

(b) The Comptroller may request from a financial institution information and
assistance to enable the Comptroller to enforce the tax laws of the State.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7