START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 309

Chapter 309

(House Bill 178)

AN ACT concerning

State Designations – State Spirit – Maryland Rye

FOR the purpose of designating Maryland Rye or Maryland Rye Whiskey as the State
spirit; and generally relating to the State spirit.

BY renumbering
Article – General Provisions
Section 7–318
to be Section 7–319
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – General Provisions
Section 7–318
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Maryland has had a long history and tradition of distilling various forms
of whiskey since before the American Revolution; and

WHEREAS, Maryland Rye Whiskey is a distinct and notable spirit unique from
other distilled whiskey; and

WHEREAS, Maryland Rye Whiskey demanded national respect as one of the best
whiskeys in the United States in the 19th and early 20th centuries; and

WHEREAS, Rye is a plentiful, locally grown cover crop affording an opportunity to
highlight local agriculture and support local spirits production; and

WHEREAS, The Maryland distillery industry, once a robust and significant producer
of spirits, is again growing and contributing to the economy and prominence of the State;
now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 7–318 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland
be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–319.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 309 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – General Provisions

7–318.

MARYLAND RYE OR MARYLAND RYE WHISKEY IS THE STATE SPIRIT.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2