START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 785

Chapter 785

(House Bill 175)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore County Board of Education – Student Member – Voting and Training

FOR the purpose of authorizing the student member of the Baltimore County Board of
Education to vote on capital and operating budget matters; requiring certain
members of the county board and the executive leadership of the Baltimore County
public school system to develop a certain draft curriculum for budget training for
student members of the county board and submit the draft curriculum to the county
board for review; requiring each student member of the county board to complete the
budget training within a certain time period after being elected in order to vote
on certain matters; and generally relating to the Baltimore County Board of
Education.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–2B–05
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–2B–05.

(a) The student member shall:

(1) Be an 11th or a 12th grade student in the Baltimore County public
school system elected by the middle school and high school students of the county in
accordance with procedures established by the Baltimore County student councils;

(2) Serve for 1 year; and

(3) Advise the county board on the thoughts and feelings of students.

(b) Unless invited to attend by an affirmative vote of a majority of the county
board, the student member may not attend an executive session that relates to:

(1) Hearings on appeals of special education placements;

(2) Hearings held under § 6–202(a) of this article; or
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 785 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Collective bargaining.

(c) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, the student member may vote on all
matters except those relating to:

(1) § 6–202(a) of this article;

(2) Collective bargaining; AND

(3) [Capital and operating budgets; and

(4)] School closings, reopenings, and boundaries.

(d) On a majority vote of the nonstudent members, the county board may
determine, on a case–by–case basis, whether a matter under consideration is covered by
the exclusionary provisions listed in subsection (c) of this section.

(E) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2023, A WORKGROUP COMPOSED
OF SEVERAL MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP
OF THE BALTIMORE COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL DEVELOP A DRAFT
CURRICULUM FOR BUDGET TRAINING FOR STUDENT MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY
BOARD AND SUBMIT THE DRAFT CURRICULUM TO THE COUNTY BOARD FOR REVIEW.

(2) THE TRAINING FOR STUDENT MEMBERS SHALL:

(I) FOCUS ON THE OPERATING AND CAPITAL BUDGET PROCESS
OF THE COUNTY BOARD; AND

(II) BE FACILITATED BY REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
BALTIMORE COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM’S DIVISION OF BUSINESS SERVICES.

(3) EACH STUDENT MEMBER SHALL BE REQUIRED TO COMPLETE THE
BUDGET TRAINING:

(I) WITHIN 2 MONTHS OF THE STUDENT MEMBER’S ELECTION
TO THE COUNTY BOARD; AND

(II) IN ORDER TO BE ELIGIBLE TO VOTE ON BUDGETARY
MATTERS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 785

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3