START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 185 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 185 
(Delegate Ebersole, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Nonpublic Schools and Child Care Providers - Corporal Punishment - 
Prohibition 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Education, as part of the overall plan it is required 
under existing statute to develop and periodically update in consultation with the State 
Superintendent of Schools, to identify methods to find and eliminate any instance of 
corporal punishment administered to discipline any student in the State. The bill prohibits 
the State board from issuing a certificate of approval to any noncollegiate educational 
institution that does not have a policy prohibiting a principal, vice principal, or any other 
employee from administering corporal punishment to discipline a student. Regulations 
adopted by the State board must prohibit the administration of corporal punishment in a 
family child care home, large family child care home, or child care center. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Education and MSDE can comply with the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 185/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Corporal Punishment in Public Schools (Generally) 
 
A principal, vice principal, or other public school employee may not administer corporal 
punishment to a public school student in the State. The State Board of Education must 
establish guidelines that define a State code of discipline for all public schools with 
standards of conduct and consequences for violations of the standards and assist each local 
school system with implementing the guidelines. 
 
Each local board of education must adopt regulations designed to create and maintain an 
atmosphere of order and discipline necessary for effective learning in public schools. These 
regulations must provide for educational and behavioral interventions, restorative 
approaches, counseling, and student and parent conferencing; provide alternative 
programs, which may include in-school suspension, suspension, expulsion, or other 
necessary disciplinary measures deemed appropriate; and state that the primary purpose of 
any disciplinary measure is rehabilitative, restorative, and educational. 
 
Certificates of Approval for Noncollegiate Institutions 
 
Generally, the State board must issue a certificate of approval to a noncollegiate 
educational institution (i.e., a school or other institution that offers an educational program 
but is not an institution of postsecondary education) if certain requirements are satisfied. 
However, the board is prohibited from issuing a certificate to a school/institution that 
practices discrimination based on race, color, or national origin. 
 
Discipline in Child Care Facilities 
 
The State Board of Education is required to adopt regulations that relate to the registration 
of family child care homes and large family child care homes and the licensing and 
operation of child care centers. A family child care home is a residence in which family 
child care is provided for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in 
which family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children. 
A child care center is an agency, institution, or establishment that, for part or all of a day, 
or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, and at least twice a week, offers or provides 
child care to children who do not have the same parentage except as otherwise provided 
for in law or regulation. 
 
State regulations specify that child care providers, substitutes, employees, and volunteers 
may not spank, hit, shake, or use any other means of physical discipline. Additionally, child 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 185/ Page 3 
care facilities are subject to a prohibition on abuse, neglect, and “injurious treatment,” 
which is defined to include physical discipline. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - February 24, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3