START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 765

Chapter 765

(House Bill 153)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners – Student Members and Task
Force to Study Compensation and Student Members

FOR the purpose of altering the voting rights of and the process for selecting a student
member of the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners; establishing the Task
Force to Study Compensation and Student Members of the Baltimore City Board of
School Commissioners; and generally relating to the Baltimore City Board of School
Commissioners.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–108.1(c) and (n)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–108.1(d) and (m)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–108.1.

(c) There is a Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners of the Baltimore
City Public School System.

(d) (1) The board consists of:

(i) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, nine
voting members appointed by the Mayor from a list of qualified individuals submitted to
the Mayor by the panel;

(ii) Two elected voting members; and

(iii) One voting student member [appointed] ELECTED as provided
in subsection (m) of this section.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 765 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) If the Mayor elects not to appoint a member from a list submitted by
the panel under paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection, the Mayor shall reconvene the panel to
submit additional names of qualified candidates.

(m) (1) The student member shall be a student REGULARLY enrolled IN THE
STUDENT’S JUNIOR OR SENIOR YEAR OF HIGH SCHOOL in the Baltimore City Public
School System who shall be [selected by the Associated Student Congress of Baltimore
City] ELECTED BY THE MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS OF THE BALTIMORE
CITY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED
BY THE BOARD IN COLLABORATION WITH THE ASSOCIATED STUDENT CONGRESS OF
BALTIMORE CITY.

(2) The term of a student member is 1 year.

(3) A student member may not serve more than two consecutive full terms.

(4) The student member may vote on [all] matters before the board
[except], INCLUDING those relating to:

[(i) Personnel;]

[(ii)] (I) Capital and operating budgets;

[(iii)] (II) School closings, reopenings, and boundaries; AND

[(iv) Collective bargaining decisions;]

[(v)] (III) Student disciplinary matters[; and

(vi) Appeals to the board as provided under §§ 4–205 and 6–202 of
this article].

(5) THE STUDENT MEMBER MAY NOT VOTE ON MATTERS BEFORE THE
BOARD RELATING TO PERSONNEL AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING DECISIONS.

(6) The student member may [not] attend or participate in an executive or
special session of the board.

(n) Any action by the board shall require:

(1) A quorum of a majority of the voting members then serving; and

(2) The affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members then serving.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 765

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) There is a Task Force to Study Compensation and Student Members of the
Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners.

(b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Baltimore City Senate Delegation, appointed by the
President of the Senate;

(2) one member of the Baltimore City House Delegation, appointed by the
Speaker of the House;

(3) three members, appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore City, of whom one
member shall be a resident of Baltimore City who is not employed by the City, the State,
or the federal government;

(4) two members, appointed by the Chair of the Baltimore City Board of
School Commissioners; and

(5) two members, appointed by the President of the City Council of
Baltimore City, of whom one member shall be a resident of Baltimore City who is not
employed by the City, the State, or the federal government.

(c) The Mayor of Baltimore City shall designate the chair of the Task Force.

(d) The Office of the Mayor of Baltimore City shall provide staff for the Task
Force.

(e) A member of the Task Force:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Task Force shall:

(1) study the compensation of members of the Baltimore City Board of
School Commissioners, including the student members;

(2) study the possibility and effect of adding a second student member to
the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners; and

(3) make recommendations regarding the amount of and revenue stream
for any proposed compensation to begin with the Baltimore City budget for fiscal year 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 765 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(g) On or before April 1, 2024, the Task Force shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the end of
June 30, 2024, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4