START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 102 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 102 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Actions for Possession - Pet Protections 
 
 
This bill establishes procedures to protect specified pets (domesticated cats and dogs) when 
property is repossessed in failure to pay rent, breach of lease, tenant holding over, and 
wrongful detainer actions. The procedures are applicable to actions filed on or after 
November 1, 2023. By October 1, 2023, the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) 
must develop and publish a fact sheet on the care and protection of pets in the event of an 
eviction or loss of possession of property. The bill also directs sheriffs, constables, or other 
officials to take specific actions regarding pets when restoring possession of a premises to 
a landlord or complainant. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDA and the Judiciary can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fact sheet developed by MDA must be published on its website and 
provide information about how a person may care for and protect any pets in the event the 
person is evicted or loses possession of the person’s property. The fact sheet, which must 
be updated on a regular basis, must include information on State and local resources, 
including animal shelters and animal rescue organizations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 102/ Page 2 
On or after November 1, 2023, when executing a lease with a tenant, a landlord must 
include with the lease a link to the fact sheet published under the bill if the landlord knows 
that a tenant possesses a pet. The Judiciary must provide the link to the fact sheet with any 
warrant issued under failure to pay rent, tenant holding over, breach of lease, and wrongful 
detainer actions, as specified. 
 
When possession of real property is delivered to a landlord/complainant following one of 
the above actions, the sheriff, constable, or other official is required to immediately inspect 
the premises for any pet and provide to the tenant or person who was holding possession 
of the real property any pet on the premises belonging to the tenant or person. 
 
If the tenant or person who was holding possession of real property is not present at the 
time the real property is delivered to a landlord or complainant, the sheriff, constable, or 
other official must:   
 
 
contact an animal shelter or animal rescue organization to take custody of the pet; 
 
provide the tenant or person who was holding possession of the real property with 
the name and contact information of the animal shelter or animal rescue 
organization where the pet is taken; and 
 
provide the animal shelter or animal rescue organization with the name and contact 
information, including the telephone number if available, of the tenant or person 
who was holding possession of the real property from which the pet was taken. 
 
The bill prohibits a person from removing a pet from real property delivered to a landlord 
or complainant following one of the aforementioned actions and leaving the pet on public 
property or a public right‐of‐way. 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions do not specifically address the protection of pets in 
landlord‐tenant or wrongful detainer actions. 
 
In general, a landlord seeking to evict a tenant must file the appropriate action (e.g., failure 
to pay rent, breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. If awarded a judgment by the court, 
the landlord files a warrant of restitution, which, once reviewed and signed by the court, 
authorizes an eviction. The warrants of restitution are forwarded to the local sheriff’s office 
who is then authorized to carry out the evictions. Statute sets forth numerous specific 
requirements for such actions, including those related to written notice prior to filing 
certain actions. This includes specific requirements for written notice prior to initiating a 
failure to pay rent action. 
 
“Wrongful detainer” means to hold possession of real property without the right to do so. 
A wrongful detainer action is not available if (1) the person in actual possession of the 
property has been granted possession under a court order; (2) a remedy is available under 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 102/ Page 3 
general landlord/tenant law; or (3) any other exclusive means to recover possession is 
provided by statute or rule. If a person holds possession of a property to which he or she is 
not entitled, a person claiming possession may file a complaint, in writing, with the 
District Court of the county in which the property is located. Once the court receives a 
complaint, the court must immediately summon the person in possession of the property to 
appear before the court on the day specified in the summons to show why the court should 
not restore possession of the property to the person who filed the complaint (the plaintiff). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1064 and SB 816 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 279 (Senator Waldstreicher, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3