START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 182 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 182 
(Delegate Reznik, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Unlawfully Restrictive Covenants - Modification by Counties or 
Municipalities 
 
 
This bill authorizes a county or municipality to execute and record a restrictive covenant 
modification to an unlawfully restrictive covenant if the subject property is within the 
boundaries of the county or municipality and specified notice requirements are satisfied. A 
person with an ownership interest in the property may decline to have the modification 
executed and recorded by notifying the county or municipality within 30 days after the date 
of the required notice. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Any operational or fiscal impact for local governments is anticipated to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A county or municipality may execute and record a restrictive covenant 
modification to an unlawfully restrictive covenant if (1) the property the county or 
municipality believes is subject to an unlawfully restrictive covenant is within the 
boundaries of the county or municipality and (2) at least 30 days before executing and 
recording the restrictive covenant modification, the county or municipality provides 
written notice of its intent to all persons with an ownership interest in the property. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 182/ Page 2 
The notice must (1) be sent by first-class mail and (2) provide information on how a person 
with an ownership interest in the property may decline to have the restrictive covenant 
modification executed and recorded by the county or municipality. 
 
Current Law:  An unlawfully restrictive covenant is any recorded covenant or restriction 
that restricts ownership based on race, religious belief, or national origin. A person holding 
an ownership interest in property that the person believes is subject to an unlawfully 
restrictive covenant or a nonprofit entity required to enforce covenants within a defined 
residential neighborhood may execute and record a modification to an unlawfully 
restrictive covenant. The modification must (1) consist of a complete copy of the original 
instrument with the language of the unlawfully restrictive covenant stricken and (2) be 
accompanied by a complete restrictive covenant modification intake sheet (on a form 
provided by the Administrative Office of the Courts, as specified). 
 
The clerk of the circuit court must submit the modification and a copy of the original 
instrument to the county attorney, who must review the documentation and return it to the 
clerk with a determination on its appropriateness. The clerk of the circuit court is prohibited 
from recording the modification unless it is deemed appropriate. Once recorded, the 
restrictions contained in the modification are the only restrictions based on the original 
instrument that apply to the property (subject to all covenants, conditions, and restrictions 
that were recorded after the recording of the original instrument), and terms and conditions 
have the same effective date as the original instrument. If an unauthorized modification is 
recorded, the person who executed it is responsible for any subsequent liability. Neither 
the clerk of the circuit court nor the county may incur any liability, as specified under 
existing statutory provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 335 (Senator King) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel and Montgomery counties; City of Annapolis; 
Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 182/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3