START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 161 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 161 
(Delegates Korman and Szeliga) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority - Evaluation, Termination of 
Bond Authority, and Assumption of Functions, Employees, and Contracts 
(Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority Sunset Act) 
 
 
This bill terminates the Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority’s (NMWDA) bond 
authority beginning June 1, 2023. The bill also requires the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) to conduct a specified evaluation, and the Maryland Environmental Service 
(MES) to conduct a specified review and analysis, of NMWDA. NMWDA must provide 
information to those entities and cooperate, as specified. By December 1, 2024, DLS and 
MES must submit reports on their evaluation/review to specified legislative committees 
and the Maryland General Assembly (MGA), respectively. Among other things, the DLS 
report must include draft legislation to merge NMWDA into MES. The bill further requires 
(1) MES to temporarily assume the functions, employees, and contracts of NMWDA 
during any merger until the entity with which NMWDA merges is prepared and ready to 
assume those functions, employees, and contracts and (2) an entity that assumes a portion 
or all of the functions, employees, or contracts to establish a system for maintaining 
stakeholder engagement. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. Nonbudgeted expenditures increase by $100,000 in 
FY 2024 for MES to conduct the required review; nonbudgeted revenues increase 
correspondingly. Potential increase in general fund expenditures in FY 2024 and 2025 for 
DLS to conduct the required evaluation. Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures may 
increase (potentially significantly), likely not before FY 2026, to the extent MES 
temporarily assumes aspects of NMWDA, as discussed below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
NonBud Rev. 
$100,000 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
NonBud Exp. 
$100,000 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0 
(-) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 161/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in local expenditures for NMWDA member jurisdictions 
in FY 2024 and/or 2025. Potential effect on local finances for member jurisdictions from 
the termination of NMWDA’s bond authority. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Bond Authority of the Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority 
 
The bill prohibits NMWDA from issuing bonds beginning June 1, 2023. However, this 
prohibition does not impair NMWDA’s powers and authority regarding any bonds that are 
outstanding and unpaid as of June 1, 2023, or any contracts that, as of June 1, 2023, rely 
on NMWDA’s bonding authority. 
 
The bill explicitly states that any presently existing obligation or contract may not be 
impaired in any way by the bill. 
 
Department of Legislative Services Evaluation and Report 
 
DLS must conduct an evaluation of NMWDA, including a review of several specified 
items, including (1) the statutes related to NMWDA and whether NMWDA is fulfilling its 
statutory purpose, as specified; (2) whether continuing NMWDA is necessary for the public 
interest, including whether NMWDA’s statutory purpose serves the needs of the State; 
(3) whether NMWDA’s systems for procurements and contract awards have created any 
conflicts of interests; (4) whether NMWDA and its operations have led to a reduction in 
waste sent to incinerators and landfills, higher recycling rates, and cost savings, as 
specified; (5) what impact discontinuation of NMWDA would have on the State 
Retirement and Pension System and the retirement and pension of NMWDA employees; 
(6) how to dispose of cash reserves and other holdings if NMWDA is discontinued; 
(7) whether another entity, such as MES, is better able to perform NMWDA’s duties and 
functions; and (8) any legislative or nonlegislative changes that should be recommended 
to MGA to improve NMWDA operations and merge NMWDA into MES or other 
appropriate entity. 
 
DLS must submit a report of its evaluation to specified legislative committees by 
December 1, 2024. The report must address NMWDA’s efficiency, effectiveness, and 
technical abilities, as specified. It also must include draft legislation to merge NMWDA 
into MES and implement any other statutory changes recommended in the report. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 161/ Page 3 
During the evaluation conducted by DLS, NMWDA must promptly provide any 
information that DLS requests, as specified, and otherwise cooperate. The bill establishes 
provisions governing confidentiality of information. 
 
Maryland Environmental Service Review and Report 
 
MES must (1) review NMWDA’s functions, current employees, and active contracts and 
(2) analyze whether MES is able to assume all or a portion of NMWDA’s functions, current 
employees, and active contracts. 
 
By December 1, 2024, MES must submit a report to MGA on the review and analysis 
conducted. The report must specify, for each of NMWDA’s active contracts, whether 
(1) the contract is necessary and if MES has the technical ability to assume the contract; 
(2) the purpose of the contract can be achieved in another manner, as specified; and 
(3) MES could legally assume the contract. The report must also specify whether current 
NMWDA employees could be legally reassigned to MES. In addition, the report must 
include enough detail for MGA to determine whether NMWDA should continue in its 
current form. 
 
During the review and analysis, NMWDA must promptly provide any information that 
MES requests, as specified, and otherwise cooperate. The bill establishes provisions 
governing confidentiality of information obtained during the review and analysis. 
 
Assumption of Functions, Employees, and Contracts from the Northeast Maryland Waste 
Disposal Authority  
 
During any merger of NWMDA with another entity, MES must temporarily assume all of 
NMWDA’s functions, current employees, and active contracts. MES must maintain the 
assumption of these functions, employees, and contracts until the entity with which 
NMWDA merges is prepared and ready to assume those functions, employees, and 
contracts.  
 
An entity that assumes a portion or all of NMWDA’s functions, current employees, or 
active contracts must establish a system for maintaining stakeholder engagement.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority 
 
Chapter 871 of 1980 established NMWDA and codified MGA’s statement of purpose 
regarding NMWDA. This statement includes the mission for NMWDA to improve health 
and living conditions in the State through the efficient collection and disposal of waste on 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 161/ Page 4 
a regional basis and the generation of energy and recovery of useable resources from such 
waste to the extent practicable. NMWDA assists member jurisdictions with the planning 
and development of waste management and waste-to-energy systems by serving as a 
regional coordinating agency and a financing vehicle for facilities. Member jurisdictions 
include Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Frederick, Harford, Howard, and Montgomery 
counties and Baltimore City. 
 
Among other things, NMWDA has the authority to borrow money and issue bonds for 
specified purposes and to enter into and make contracts or agreements as it determines 
necessary or incidental to the performance of NMWDA’s duties and to the execution of 
the purpose of and powers granted by statute. NMWDA is required to submit an annual 
report to the Governor, the chief executive officer, and the legislative body of each 
participating county of its activities for the preceding fiscal year. Each report must include 
the full operating and financial statement of its operations during the year. Additionally, 
NMWDA is subject to an annual audit at the end of each fiscal year. 
 
Statute specifies that, upon making adequate provision for the payment of all outstanding 
bonds, NMWDA is authorized to merge into MES with the consent of MES and the 
Governor’s approval. Upon termination of its existence, all NMWDA’s rights and 
properties must pass to and be vested in the State for distribution as may be provided for 
in contracts between NMWDA and participating counties and in the statement of merger. 
 
Maryland Environmental Service 
 
MES was established by MGA in 1970 as an instrumentality of the State and a 
self-supporting, not-for-profit public corporation that serves State, local, and federal 
agencies and the private sector through designing, planning, financing, constructing, 
operating, and monitoring projects for water and wastewater treatment, solid waste 
management, composting, recycling, dredged material management, hazardous materials 
cleanup, stormwater services, and renewable energy. Among other things, MES has the 
authority to issue bonds and notes. 
 
Pursuant to the MES Reform Act of 2021 (Chapter 72), MES is required to obtain an 
assessment of its operations by an independent consultant or accountant every five years, 
beginning in 2021. The assessment must include an evaluation of specified structures and 
processes, including the structure and dynamics of the board and its role in various aspects 
of MES’s operations. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA) is used by the General Assembly as a 
mechanism to monitor and evaluate approximately 60 regulatory boards, commissions, and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 161/ Page 5 
other activities and units of the Executive Branch of State government. DLS may evaluate 
entities subject to MPEA as directed by the Legislative Policy Committee, the Joint Audit 
and Evaluation Committee, the Executive Director of Legislative Services, the Director of 
the Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability, or by legislation. Most 
such entities are subject to termination. Accordingly, the evaluation process is better known 
as “sunset review.” 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Environmental Service 
 
Nonbudgeted expenditures for MES increase by approximately $100,000 in fiscal 2024 to 
hire a consultant to conduct the required review and analysis and complete the required 
report of NMWDA’s functions, current employees, and active contracts. Since MES is a 
fee-for-service entity, any costs incurred by MES resulting from the bill are ultimately 
borne by the entities that contract for MES services through an increase in fees. As a result, 
MES nonbudgeted revenues increase correspondingly in fiscal 2024. 
 
MES finances (nonbudgeted expenditures and revenues) may be affected – potentially 
significantly – due to the temporary assumption of the functions, current employees, and 
active contracts of NMWDA during any merger of NMWDA with another entity. Given 
the December 1, 2024 deadlines for both the MES and DLS reports required by the bill, 
any legislation to effectuate a merger would likely be introduced during the 2025 session. 
As a result, it is unlikely that any merger would occur prior to the beginning of fiscal 2026. 
Actual impacts on MES finances will depend on a number of unknown factors, including 
the state of any contracts that are assumed and the number of employees that are working 
at NMWDA at the time. Therefore, a reliable estimate of the potential impact related to the 
temporary assumption of NMWDA duties cannot be made at this time. In any event, to the 
extent the increase in MES expenditures is higher than the increase in revenues it collects 
from NMWDA contracts, it is assumed that MES recoups the difference through an 
increase in fees. 
 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
DLS anticipates being able to conduct the required review and prepare and present the 
required report with existing budgeted resources. However, to the extent that the bill’s 
requirements cannot be absorbed by existing DLS staff, general fund expenditures for 
DLS increase in fiscal 2024 and 2025 for DLS to hire additional staff and/or obtain 
contractual assistance. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  NMWDA estimates that the cost for existing staff to respond to 
inquiries and otherwise cooperate with DLS and MES during the required reviews is 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 161/ Page 6 
approximately $50,000. NMWDA also estimates that it may incur legal and accounting 
costs of approximately $50,000 in support of the reviews. NMWDA is funded by 
membership fees from its member jurisdictions through an annual budget process. Thus, 
local expenditures for member jurisdictions increase in fiscal 2024 and/or 2025, in the form 
of membership fees, for any expenditures that are not able to be absorbed with existing 
resources. 
 
NMWDA member jurisdictions (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Frederick, Harford, 
Howard, and Montgomery counties and Baltimore City) may also be affected by the 
prohibition against NMWDA issuing bonds beginning June 1, 2023. According to 
Montgomery County, absent additional authority being provided through another entity, 
this reduces options for member jurisdictions to finance qualified projects in the future. 
 
Any other impacts on member jurisdictions ultimately depend on the findings and 
recommendations included in the required reports and any actions taken in response, which 
cannot be predicted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Harford and Montgomery 
counties; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; University System of Maryland; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6