START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 193 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 193 
(Delegate Moon, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Probation Before Judgment - Probation Agreements 
 
 
This bill authorizes a court to place a defendant on probation before judgment if the 
defendant pleads not guilty, the court finds facts justifying a finding of guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt, and specified conditions are met. The bill makes corresponding statutory 
changes and establishes procedures and requirements for a probation before judgment 
granted under this circumstance. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $33,400 in FY 2024 
only for programming changes. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
State finances or operations. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
33,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($33,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  When a defendant pleads not guilty, the defendant may, with the consent 
of the State, enter into an agreement with the State and the court may find facts justifying 
a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, defer entry of a conviction, and place the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 193/ Page 2 
defendant on probation before judgment subject to reasonable conditions only if (1) the 
court finds that the best interests of the defendant and the public welfare would be served 
and (2) the defendant consents in writing to the probation before judgment. If the defendant 
violates the terms of the probation agreement, the court may enter a finding of guilt and 
impose a sentence. 
 
The agreement must specify that:   
 
 
the defendant does not admit to the facts offered by the State and pleads not guilty; 
 
the defendant accepts probation in exchange for the court expressly withholding a 
finding of guilt; 
 
the defendant knowingly and voluntarily waives the right to a trial and the right to 
appeal the probation agreement; 
 
if the court finds the defendant has violated the terms of the probation agreement 
(1) the court may find the defendant guilty of the underlying crime as a result of the 
violation and (2) on a finding of guilt, the court may sentence the defendant for up 
to the maximum penalty for the underlying crime; and 
 
the defendant agrees to these specified provisions and the terms and conditions of 
probation ordered by the court. 
 
After an agreement is placed on the record, the court must make a finding that there are 
sufficient facts to support a finding of the defendant’s guilt but that the court does not do 
so and instead defers judgment and imposes probation before judgment. The consent of a 
defendant to and the receipt of such a disposition by the defendant must be considered as 
a probation before judgment for all other purposes under State law. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Probation Before Judgment 
 
Probation before judgment requires a finding of guilt by a judge or jury – either after trial 
or after a guilty plea by the defendant. When a defendant pleads guilty or nolo contendere 
or is found guilty of a crime, a court may stay the entering of judgment, defer further 
proceedings, and place the defendant on probation subject to reasonable conditions if 
(1) the court finds that the best interests of the defendant and the public welfare would be 
served and (2) the defendant gives written consent after determination of guilt or 
acceptance of a nolo contendere plea. Statutory provisions prohibit probation before 
judgment in specified types of cases. 
 
The conditions a court may place on a defendant include ordering the defendant to (1) pay 
a fine or monetary penalty to the State or make restitution or (2) participate in various 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 193/ Page 3 
programs. Also, as a condition of probation, the court may order a person to a term of 
custodial confinement or imprisonment. For purposes of probation before judgment, 
“custodial confinement” means home detention, a corrections options program meeting 
specified criteria, or inpatient drug or alcohol treatment. 
 
A defendant who consents to and receives probation before judgement waives the right to 
appeal at any time from the judgment of guilt. Before granting a stay of the judgment, the 
court must notify the defendant of the consequences of consenting to and receiving 
probation before judgment. On violation of a condition of probation, the court may enter 
judgment and proceed as if the defendant had not been placed on probation. 
 
Upon fulfilling the conditions of probation before judgment, the defendant is discharged 
from probation by the court. The discharge is a final disposition of the matter and is 
“without judgment of conviction and is not a conviction for the purpose of any 
disqualification or disability imposed by law because of conviction of a crime.” Under 
certain circumstances, a defendant who fulfills the conditions of probation before judgment 
may file a petition for expungement of the police record, court record, or other record 
maintained by the State or political subdivision relating to the defendant. 
 
Immigration and Nationality Act and Maryland Rules 
 
While probation before judgment is not considered a conviction under Maryland law, it is 
considered a conviction under federal immigration law. Under the Immigration and 
Nationality Act, the term “conviction” means, with respect to an alien, a formal judgment 
of guilt of the alien entered by a court or, if adjudication of guilt has been withheld, where 
(1) a judge or jury has found the alien guilty or the alien has entered a plea of guilty or 
nolo contendere or has admitted sufficient facts to warrant a finding of guilt and (2) the 
judge has ordered some form of punishment, penalty, or restraint on the alien’s liberty to 
be imposed. 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(48)(A). 
 
Pursuant to Maryland Rule 4-242, before a court accepts specified pleas, the court, the 
State’s Attorney, and/or defense counsel must advise the defendant of the potential 
immigration consequences of the plea and advise the defendant to consult with defense 
counsel if the defendant is represented and needs additional information concerning the 
potential consequences. The omission of advice concerning the collateral consequences of 
a plea does not itself mandate that the plea be declared invalid. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 265 and HB 559 of 2022.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 193/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 211 (Senator West, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4