START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 488

Chapter 488

(House Bill 102)

AN ACT concerning

Real Property – Actions for Possession – Pet Protections

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Agriculture to develop, publish, and
regularly update a fact sheet on the care and protection of pets in the event of an
eviction or any other loss of possession of real property; requiring the fact sheet to be
published in a certain manner; requiring a landlord to provide ~~information~~ ~~about~~ a
link to the fact sheet at the execution of a lease under certain circumstances;
requiring the Maryland Judiciary to provide ~~information~~ ~~about~~ a link to the fact
sheet when issuing certain warrants; requiring a sheriff, a constable, or any other
official, under certain circumstances, to return a pet to a tenant or certain other
person or to contact an animal shelter or a rescue organization and provide certain
notice; prohibiting the leaving of a pet on public property; and generally relating to
actions for possession of real property and pet protections.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Agriculture
Section 2–1701 and 15–101(a)(1) and (2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 14–801 through 14–806 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 8. Pet
Protections”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

2–1701.

In this subtitle, “animal shelter” means:

(1) A county or municipal animal control facility;

(2) An organization that contracts with a county or municipality for animal
control; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 488 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) An organization that shelters animals and has received a grant from
the Spay/Neuter Fund under Subtitle 16 of this title during the previous year.

15–101.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Animal rescue organization” includes:

(i) A nonprofit organization incorporated for the purpose of rescuing
animals in need and finding permanent adoptive homes for the animals; and

(ii) A government–operated animal control unit that provides
animals for adoption.

Article – Real Property

SUBTITLE 8. PET PROTECTIONS.

14–801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
15–101 OF THE AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

(C) “ANIMAL SHELTER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–1701 OF THE
AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

(D) “PET” MEANS A DOMESTICATED DOG OR CAT.

14–802.

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES TO AN ACTION FOR POSSESSION OF REAL PROPERTY
FILED ON OR AFTER NOVEMBER 1, 2023, BY:

(1) A LANDLORD AGAINST A TENANT UNDER § 8–401, § 8–402, OR §
8–402.1 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

(2) A COMPLAINANT AGAINST A PERSON HOLDING POSSESSION OF
REAL PROPERTY UNDER § 14–132 OF THIS TITLE.

14–803.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 488

(A) BY OCTOBER 1, 2023, THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE SHALL
DEVELOP AND PUBLISH ON ITS WEBSITE A FACT SHEET THAT PROVIDES
INFORMATION ABOUT HOW A PERSON MAY CARE FOR AND PROTECT ANY PETS IN
THE EVENT THE PERSON IS EVICTED OR LOSES POSSESSION OF THE PERSON’S
PROPERTY.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE SHALL:

(1) INCLUDE IN THE FACT SHEET INFORMATION ON STATE AND
LOCAL RESOURCES, INCLUDING ANIMAL SHELTERS AND ANIMAL RESCUE
ORGANIZATIONS; AND

(2) UPDATE THE FACT SHEET ON A REGULAR BASIS.

14–804.

ON OR AFTER NOVEMBER 1, 2023, AT THE EXECUTION OF A LEASE, THE
LANDLORD SHALL INCLUDE WITH THE LEASE A ~~DESCRIPTION~~ ~~OF~~ LINK TO THE FACT
SHEET PUBLISHED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE’S WEBSITE UNDER §
14–803 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND WHERE THE FACT SHEET IS LOCATED ON THE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE’S WEBSITE IF THE LANDLORD KNOWS THAT A
TENANT POSSESSES A PET.

14–805.

BEGINNING NOVEMBER 1, 2023, THE MARYLAND JUDICIARY SHALL INCLUDE
A DESCRIPTION OF LINK TO THE FACT SHEET PUBLISHED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE’S WEBSITE UNDER § 14–803 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND WHERE THE
FACT SHEET IS LOCATED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE’S WEBSITE WITH
ANY WARRANT ISSUED UNDER § 8–401(F)(1)(I), § 8–402(B)(2)(I) OR (V), OR §
8–402.1(B) OF THIS ARTICLE OR § 14–132(F) OR (I) OF THIS TITLE.

14–806.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, WHEN
POSSESSION OF REAL PROPERTY IS DELIVERED TO A LANDLORD OR COMPLAINANT
FOLLOWING AN ACTION UNDER § 8–401, § 8–402, OR § 8–402.1 OF THIS ARTICLE OR
§ 14–132 OF THIS TITLE, THE SHERIFF, CONSTABLE, OR OTHER OFFICIAL SHALL:

(I) IMMEDIATELY INSPECT THE PREMISES FOR ANY PET; AND

(II) PROVIDE TO THE TENANT OR PERSON WHO WAS HOLDING
POSSESSION OF THE REAL PROPERTY ANY PET ON THE PREMISES BELONGING TO
THE TENANT OR PERSON WHO WAS HOLDING POSSESSION OF THE REAL PROPERTY.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 488 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IF THE TENANT OR PERSON WHO WAS HOLDING POSSESSION OF
REAL PROPERTY IS NOT PRESENT AT THE TIME THE REAL PROPERTY IS DELIVERED
TO A LANDLORD OR COMPLAINANT, THE SHERIFF, CONSTABLE, OR OTHER OFFICIAL
SHALL:

(I) CONTACT AN ANIMAL SHELTER OR ANIMAL RESCUE
ORGANIZATION TO TAKE CUSTODY OF THE PET;

(II) PROVIDE THE TENANT OR PERSON WHO WAS HOLDING
POSSESSION OF THE REAL PROPERTY WITH THE NAME AND CONTACT INFORMATION
OF THE ANIMAL SHELTER OR ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION WHERE THE PET IS
TAKEN; AND

(III) PROVIDE THE ANIMAL SHELTER OR ANIMAL RESCUE
ORGANIZATION WITH THE NAME AND CONTACT INFORMATION, INCLUDING THE
TELEPHONE NUMBER IF AVAILABLE, OF THE TENANT OR PERSON WHO WAS
HOLDING POSSESSION OF THE REAL PROPERTY FROM WHICH THE PET WAS TAKEN.

(B) A PERSON MAY NOT REMOVE A PET FROM REAL PROPERTY DELIVERED
TO A LANDLORD OR COMPLAINANT FOLLOWING AN ACTION UNDER § 8–401, § 8–402,
OR § 8–402.1 OF THIS ARTICLE OR § 14–132 OF THIS TITLE AND LEAVE THE PET ON
PUBLIC PROPERTY OR A PUBLIC RIGHT–OF–WAY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4