START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

Chapter 572

(House Bill 169)

AN ACT concerning

Public Utilities – Energy Efficiency and Conservation Programs – Energy
Performance Targets and Low–Income Housing

FOR the purpose of requiring the Public Service Commission to include certain information
on low–income energy efficiency and conservation programs in a certain annual
report to the General Assembly; requiring the Department of Housing and
Community Development to procure or provide for electricity customers energy
efficiency and conservation programs and services designed to achieve certain target
annual incremental gross energy savings in certain years; requiring certain
contractors used for the programs under this Act to meet certain job requirements;
requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development to update the
weather–normalized gross retail sales against which savings are measured for
certain plans; requiring the target annual incremental gross energy savings to be
achieved based on an average of certain Department of Housing and Community
Development plans; requiring the Department of Housing and Community
Development, on or before certain dates and with a certain frequency, to submit a
plan to the Commission for achieving the electricity savings and demand reduction
target; requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development to
~~develop~~ ~~a~~ ~~plan~~ ~~to~~ ~~coordinate~~ ~~and~~ ~~leverage~~ ~~funding~~ ~~sources~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ coordinate with
the Department of Budget and Management to identify additional funding sources to
support a possible expansion of programs that support a whole–home approach by
addressing certain energy efficiency and other home upgrades ~~and;~~ requiring the
Department of Housing and Community Development to collaborate with members of
the Green and Healthy Task Force to develop a plan to provide energy efficiency
retrofits to all low–income households by a certain date; establishing the Green and
Healthy Task Force to analyze and advance the coordination of resources to address
the housing needs of low–income communities; requiring a certain certification
agency to initiate a certain study regarding energy efficiency and conservation
services and certain remedial measures; and generally relating to energy
performance targets and low–income housing.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–211(k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–211.1 and 7–211.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 572 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

7–211.

(k) On or before May 1 of each year, the Commission, in consultation with the
Maryland Energy Administration, shall report, subject to § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, to the General Assembly on:

(1) the status of programs and services to encourage and promote the
efficient use and conservation of energy, including an evaluation of the impact of the
programs and services that are directed to low–income communities, low– to
moderate–income communities to the extent possible, and other particular classes of
ratepayers;

(2) a recommendation for the appropriate funding level to adequately fund
these programs and services; [and]

(3) FOR THE LOW–INCOME PROGRAMS UNDER § 7–211.1 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, INFORMATION THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT PROVIDES TO THE COMMISSION UNDER § 7–211.1(H) OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

[(3)] (4) in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the per capita
electricity consumption and the peak demand for the previous calendar year.

7–211.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.

(3) “LOW–INCOME PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM THAT DELIVERS
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION MEASURES TO REDUCE UTILITY
EXPENSES FOR BUILDING OWNERS, MANAGERS, AND TENANTS OF HOUSING WITH
RESIDENTS WHO QUALIFY FOR THE DEPARTMENT’S LOW–INCOME ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS, INCLUDING:

(I) THE EMPOWER MARYLAND PROGRAM;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

(II) THE MULTIFAMILY ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM; AND

(III) THE WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

(4) “LOW–INCOME RESIDENTIAL” MEANS A COMMUNITY, BUILDING,
OR HOUSEHOLD WITH RESIDENTS WHO QUALIFY FOR THE DEPARTMENT’S
LOW–INCOME PROGRAMS.

(5) “TASK FORCE” MEANS THE GREEN AND HEALTHY TASK FORCE
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–211.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) FOR THE 2024–2026 PROGRAM CYCLE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
PROCURE OR PROVIDE FOR ELECTRICITY CUSTOMERS ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND
CONSERVATION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL BE DESIGNED TO ACHIEVE TARGET ANNUAL INCREMENTAL GROSS ENERGY
SAVINGS OF:

1. 0.53% IN 2024;

2. 0.72% IN 2025; AND

3. 1% IN 2026.

(II) THE DEPARTMENT MAY USE THE SAVINGS ACHIEVED
~~THROUGH~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~FUNDING~~ ~~SOURCES~~ ~~TOWARD~~ ~~CALCULATING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TARGET~~ ~~ANNUAL~~
INCREMENTAL GROSS ENERGY SAVINGS, IF THE FUNDING SOURCES MEET THE
STANDARDS OF PROGRAMS FUNDED THROUGH:

1. THE EMPOWER SURCHARGE; OR

2. THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY, WHEN
CALCULATING THE ANNUAL INCREMENTAL GROSS ENERGY SAVINGS UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, INCLUDE SAVINGS ACHIEVED THROUGH
ALL FUNDING SOURCES TO THE EXTENT CONSISTENT WITH FEDERAL LAW OR
REGULATIONS GOVERNING THOSE FUNDING SOURCES.

(3) (I) THE ENERGY SAVINGS DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CALCULATED AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE 2016

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 572 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

WEATHER–NORMALIZED GROSS LOW–INCOME RESIDENTIAL RETAIL SALES FOR ALL
ELECTRIC COMPANIES.

(II) THE 2016 WEATHER–NORMALIZED GROSS LOW–INCOME
RESIDENTIAL RETAIL SALES FOR ALL ELECTRIC COMPANIES SHALL BE
DETERMINED BY MULTIPLYING THE AVERAGE 2016 RESIDENTIAL HOUSEHOLD
ELECTRICITY USAGE FOR ALL ELECTRIC COMPANIES BY THE NUMBER OF
HOUSEHOLDS:

1. WITH INCOMES BELOW 250% OF THE FEDERAL
POVERTY LEVEL AS DETERMINED BY THE FEDERAL CENSUS; OR

2. THAT MEET THE ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA APPROVED BY
THE COMMISSION FOR LOW–INCOME PROGRAMS.

(III) THE TARGET ANNUAL INCREMENTAL GROSS ENERGY
SAVINGS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO
ALL ENERGY TYPES SUBJECT TO THE TARGETED ANNUAL INCREMENTAL GROSS
ENERGY SAVINGS REQUIRED UNDER § 7–211(G) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) FOR WEATHERIZATION OF LEASED OR RENTED RESIDENCES, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT:

(I) THE BENEFITS OF WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE,
INCLUDING UTILITY BILL REDUCTION AND PRESERVATION OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING STOCK, ACCRUE PRIMARILY TO LOW–INCOME TENANTS OCCUPYING A
LEASED OR RENTED RESIDENCE; AND

(II) THE RENT ON THE RESIDENCE IS NOT INCREASED AND THE
TENANT IS NOT EVICTED AS A RESULT OF WEATHERIZATION PROVIDED UNDER THIS
SECTION.

(5) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
MAY NOT USE THERMAL INSULATING MATERIALS FOR BUILDING ELEMENTS,
INCLUDING WALLS, FLOORS, CEILINGS, ATTICS, AND ROOF INSULATION, THAT
CONTAIN FORMALDEHYDE.

(II) THERMAL INSULATING MATERIALS FOR BUILDING
ELEMENTS MAY NOT CONTAIN FORMALDEHYDE IF THE FORMALDEHYDE:

1. WAS INTENTIONALLY ADDED; OR

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

2. IS PRESENT IN THE PRODUCT AT GREATER THAN 0.1%
BY WEIGHT.

(6) (I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL GIVE PREFERENCE TO
CONTRACTORS THAT ARE MINORITY–OWNED, WOMEN–OWNED, OR
VETERAN–OWNED BUSINESSES IN THE STATE FOR PROCUREMENT PROCESSES
RELATED TO EMPOWER PROGRAMS.

(II) THE DEPARTMENT’S APPROVED CONTRACTORS USED FOR
THE PROGRAMS UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL MEET THE FOLLOWING JOB
REQUIREMENTS:

1. (I) PAY AT LEAST 150% OF THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE;

2. (II) PROVIDE CAREER ADVANCEMENT TRAINING;

3. (III) AFFORD EMPLOYEES THE RIGHT TO BARGAIN
COLLECTIVELY FOR WAGES AND BENEFITS;

4. (IV) PROVIDE PAID LEAVE;

5. (V) BE CONSIDERED COVERED EMPLOYMENT FOR
PURPOSES OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BENEFITS IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE
8 OF THE LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE;

6. (VI) ENTITLE THE EMPLOYEE TO WORKERS’
COMPENSATION BENEFITS IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 9 OF THE LABOR AND
EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE;

7. (VII) BE COMPLIANT WITH FEDERAL AND STATE
WAGE AND HOUR LAWS FOR THE PREVIOUS 3 YEARS;

8. (VIII) OFFER EMPLOYER–PROVIDED HEALTH
INSURANCE BENEFITS WITH MONTHLY PREMIUMS THAT DO NOT EXCEED 8.5% OF
THE EMPLOYEE’S NET MONTHLY EARNINGS; AND

9. (IX) OFFER RETIREMENT BENEFITS.

(C) THE WEATHER–NORMALIZED GROSS RETAIL SALES AGAINST WHICH
THE SAVINGS ARE MEASURED SHALL:

(1) REFLECT SALES ASSOCIATED WITH THE LOW–INCOME
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER CLASS SERVED BY PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT; AND
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 572 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) BE UPDATED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR EACH PLAN SUBMITTED
UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) THE TARGET ANNUAL INCREMENTAL GROSS ENERGY SAVINGS SHALL BE
ACHIEVED BASED ON THE 3–YEAR AVERAGE OF DEPARTMENT PLANS SUBMITTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) (1) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2023, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
SUBMIT A PLAN TO THE COMMISSION THAT DETAILS PROPOSALS FOR ACHIEVING
THE ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGET UNDER SUBSECTION
(B) OF THIS SECTION FOR 2024.

(2) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2024, AND EVERY 3 YEARS
THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A PLAN TO THE COMMISSION THAT
DETAILS PROPOSALS FOR ACHIEVING THE ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND
REDUCTION TARGET UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION FOR THE 3
SUBSEQUENT CALENDAR YEARS.

(3) THE PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND CONSERVATION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES;

(II) A DESCRIPTION OF THE STEPS PROPOSED TO ENSURE
INSULATION MATERIALS MEET THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
THIS SECTION;

(III) ANTICIPATED COSTS;

(IV) PROJECTED ELECTRICITY SAVINGS;

(V) A PROPOSED AVERAGE LIFETIME MEASURE THRESHOLD
THAT ENCOURAGES THE DELIVERY OF INSULATION AND WEATHERIZATION
MEASURES, DEVELOPED THROUGH A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROCESS; AND

(VI) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT THE COMMISSION
REQUESTS.

(4) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE THE COMMISSION WITH AN
UPDATE EVERY 6 MONTHS ON PLAN IMPLEMENTATION AND PROGRESS TOWARD
ACHIEVING THE ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGET UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

(5) THE COMMISSION SHALL REVIEW A PLAN TO DETERMINE
WHETHER THE PLAN IS ADEQUATE FOR ACHIEVING THE TARGET.

(F) THE COMMISSION SHALL WORK WITH THE DEPARTMENT TO ESTABLISH
ANY PROCEDURES NECESSARY TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A PLAN FOR
ACHIEVING THE ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGET UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, INCLUDING SECURING COOPERATION FROM
ELECTRIC COMPANIES RELATED TO:

(1) FUNDING;

(2) COMMUNICATIONS;

(3) REFERRALS;

(4) DATA SHARING; AND

(5) ANY OTHER COOPERATION THAT THE COMMISSION DETERMINES
IS NECESSARY TO ACHIEVE THE ELECTRICITY SAVINGS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
THIS SECTION.

(G) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP A PLAN TO COORDINATE
~~FUNDING~~ ~~SOURCES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LEVERAGE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GREATEST~~ ~~FUNDING~~ ~~POSSIBLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~SUPPORT~~
COORDINATE WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT TO IDENTIFY
ADDITIONAL FUNDING SOURCES TO SUPPORT A POSSIBLE EXPANSION OF PROGRAMS
THAT SUPPORT A WHOLE–HOME APPROACH BY ADDRESSING:

(I) HEALTH AND SAFETY UPGRADES;

(II) WEATHERIZATION;

(III) ENERGY EFFICIENCY; AND

(IV) OTHER GENERAL MAINTENANCE FOR LOW–INCOME
HOUSING.

(2) THE PLAN SHALL COORDINATE FUNDING AMONG COORDINATION
SHALL INCLUDE FUNDING AVAILABLE THROUGH:

(I) THE STRATEGIC ENERGY INVESTMENT FUND;

(II) FEDERAL WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 572 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) RATEPAYER CONTRIBUTIONS TO:

1. THE EMPOWER MARYLAND LIMITED INCOME
ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAM; AND

2. THE MULTIFAMILY ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM;

(IV) THE MARYLAND AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND;

(V) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS, INCLUDING:

1. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANTS;

2. THE HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP GRANTS
PROGRAM; AND

3. LEAD HAZARD CONTROL AND HEALTHY HOMES
GRANTS;

(VI) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE PROGRAMS,
INCLUDING THE HOME REPAIR PROGRAM;

(VII) THE HEALTHY HOMES FOR HEALTHY KIDS PROGRAM;

(VIII) THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION BLOCK
GRANT PROGRAM;

(IX) STATE APPROPRIATIONS; AND

(X) ANY OTHER SOURCE OF FUNDING THAT THE DEPARTMENT
OR THE TASK FORCE IDENTIFIES.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLABORATE WITH THE MEMBERS OF
THE TASK FORCE AND IDENTIFY OTHER INTERESTED STAKEHOLDERS TO DEVELOP
THE PLAN.

(4) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2023, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
SUBMIT THE PLAN TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(H) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE COMMISSION EACH
YEAR ON:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

(I) FOR THE PROGRAMS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO ENERGY
EFFICIENCY AND WEATHERIZATION, DISAGGREGATED BY FUEL SOURCE AND
FUNDING SOURCE OR DEVELOPMENT FINANCE EFFORTS:

1. THE NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS SERVED; AND

2. THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY SAVINGS; AND

(II) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDING THAT THE DEPARTMENT
RECEIVES, AND IS PROJECTED TO RECEIVE, FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND
WEATHERIZATION FROM THE FUNDING SOURCES UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY SATISFY THE REPORTING REQUIREMENT
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION BY INCLUDING THE REQUIRED INFORMATION IN THE
6–MONTH STATUS REPORTS TO THE COMMISSION.

(I) THE DEPARTMENT, THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, AND
OTHER STATE AGENCIES SHALL APPLY FOR ALL FEDERAL FUNDING THAT MAY
BECOME AVAILABLE TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(J) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLABORATE WITH THE MEMBERS OF
THE TASK FORCE TO DEVELOP A PLAN, INCLUDING A BUDGET, A TIMELINE, AND
POTENTIAL FUNDING SOURCES, TO PROVIDE ENERGY EFFICIENCY RETROFITS TO
ALL LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS BY 2031.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE TASK FORCE,
SHALL SUBMIT THE PLAN TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2023.

7–211.2.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “LOW–EMISSIONS HOUSING” MEANS HOUSING THAT IS
ENGINEERED TO OR USES MEASURES THAT REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS.

(B) THERE IS A GREEN AND HEALTHY TASK FORCE.

(B) (C) THE TASK FORCE CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) TWO MEMBERS OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) TWO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 572 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT,
OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE SECRETARY OF HUMAN SERVICES, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(5) THE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION,
OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(6) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL;
AND

(7) AS APPOINTED BY THE CHAIR OF THE TASK FORCE:

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND AFFORDABLE
HOUSING TRUST;

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE GREEN AND HEALTHY
HOMES INITIATIVE;

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF MARYLAND ENERGY
EFFICIENCY ADVOCATES;

(IV) ONE MEMBER WHO IS AN EXPERT IN PUBLIC HEALTH;

(V) ONE MEMBER FROM A COMMUNITY CONCERNED WITH
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE;

(VI) ONE MEMBER WHO OWNS OR DEVELOPS AFFORDABLE
HOUSING;

(VII) ONE MEMBER WHO HAS RECEIVED ASSISTANCE FROM A
LOW–INCOME PROGRAM THAT DELIVERS ENERGY EFFICIENCY MEASURES; AND

(VIII) OTHER MEMBERS AS DETERMINED BY THE CHAIR OF THE
TASK FORCE.

(C) (D) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT,
OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE, SHALL SERVE AS CHAIR OF THE TASK FORCE.

(D) (E) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE TASK FORCE.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

(E) (F) A MEMBER OF THE TASK FORCE:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE TASK
FORCE; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

~~(F)~~ (G) THE TASK FORCE SHALL:

(1) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2023, MEET QUARTERLY FOR A PERIOD OF 3
YEARS;

(2) ADVANCE THE ALIGNMENT, BRANDING, AND COORDINATION OF
RESOURCES TO MORE EFFECTIVELY DELIVER GREEN AND HEALTHY HOUSING FOR
LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS IN THE STATE;

(3) EXAMINE THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESOURCES NEEDED TO
ADDRESS THE HOUSING NEEDS OF LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES;

(4) DEVELOP POLICY AND STATUTORY RECOMMENDATIONS TO
ELIMINATE BARRIERS TO LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS ACHIEVING HEALTHY,
ENERGY–EFFICIENT, AND AFFORDABLE, AND LOW–EMISSIONS HOUSING; AND

(5) ENGAGE WITH INTERESTED PARTIES AND COLLABORATE WITH
OTHER ENTITIES THAT CAN HELP ADVANCE THE GOALS OF THE TASK FORCE,
INCLUDING EXPERTS IN THE FIELD OF HEALTHY AND, ENERGY–EFFICIENT, AND
LOW–EMISSIONS HOUSING.

(G) (H) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, AND EACH JULY 1 THROUGH 2027,
THE TASK FORCE SHALL REPORT ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
SECRETARY OF HEALTH, THE SECRETARY OF THE ENVIRONMENT, THE
COMMISSION, THE GOVERNOR, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The certification agency designated by the Board of Public Works under §
14–303(b) of the State Finance and Procurement Article and the Governor’s Office of Small,
Minority, and Women Business Affairs, in consultation with the Department of Housing
and Community Development, the Office of the Attorney General, and the General
Assembly, shall initiate a study regarding the energy efficiency and conservation services
used by the Department of Housing and Community Development to evaluate whether the
enactment of remedial measures to assist minority and women–owned businesses in the

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 572 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

energy efficiency and conservation services industry and market would comply with the
U.S. Supreme Court decision in City of Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, and any
subsequent federal or constitutional requirements.

(b) The certification agency and the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and
Women Business Affairs shall submit the findings of the study required under subsection
(a) of this section to the Legislative Policy Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, on or before December 31, 2025, so that the General Assembly
may review the findings before the 2026 session.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12