START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 692

Chapter 692

(House Bill 164)

AN ACT concerning

Sexual Offenses – Crime of Violence and Lifetime Supervision

FOR the purpose of altering a certain definition of “crime of violence” as it relates to the
age of victims of certain offenses; requiring a sentence for certain persons convicted
of certain sexual abuse crimes to include a term of lifetime sexual offender
supervision; and generally relating to sexual offenses.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 14–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–723
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

3–602.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Family member” has the meaning stated in § 3–601 of this subtitle.

(3) “Household member” has the meaning stated in § 3–601 of this subtitle.

(4) (i) “Sexual abuse” means an act that involves sexual molestation or
exploitation of a minor, whether physical injuries are sustained or not.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 692 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) “Sexual abuse” includes:

1. incest;

2. rape;

3. sexual offense in any degree; and

4. unnatural or perverted sexual practices.

(b) (1) A parent or other person who has permanent or temporary care or
custody or responsibility for the supervision of a minor may not cause sexual abuse to the
minor.

(2) A household member or family member may not cause sexual abuse to
a minor.

(c) A person who violates this section is guilty of a felony and on conviction is
subject to imprisonment not exceeding 25 years.

(d) A sentence imposed under this section may be separate from and consecutive
to or concurrent with a sentence for:

(1) any crime based on the act establishing the violation of this section; or

(2) a violation of § 3–601 of this subtitle involving an act of abuse separate
from sexual abuse under this section.

14–101.

(a) In this section, “crime of violence” means:

(1) abduction;

(2) arson in the first degree;

(3) kidnapping;

(4) manslaughter, except involuntary manslaughter;

(5) mayhem;

(6) maiming, as previously proscribed under former Article 27, §§ 385 and
386 of the Code;

(7) murder;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 692

(8) rape;

(9) robbery under § 3–402 or § 3–403 of this article;

(10) carjacking;

(11) armed carjacking;

(12) sexual offense in the first degree;

(13) sexual offense in the second degree;

(14) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony except possession with
intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance under § 5–602(2) of this article, or
other crime of violence;

(15) child abuse in the first degree under § 3–601 of this article;

(16) sexual abuse of a minor under § 3–602 of this article if:

(i) 1. the victim is under the age of 13 years and the offender is
an adult at the time of the offense; OR

2. THE OFFENDER IS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD AND THE
VICTIM IS UNDER THE AGE OF 16 YEARS; and

(ii) the offense involved:

1. vaginal intercourse, as defined in § 3–301 of this article;

2. a sexual act, as defined in § 3–301 of this article;

3. an act in which a part of the offender’s body penetrates,
however slightly, into the victim’s genital opening or anus; or

4. the intentional touching of the victim’s or the offender’s
genital, anal, or other intimate area for sexual arousal, gratification, or abuse;

(17) home invasion under § 6–202(b) of this article;

(18) a felony offense under Title 3, Subtitle 11 of this article;

(19) an attempt to commit any of the crimes described in items (1) through
(18) of this subsection;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 692 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(20) continuing course of conduct with a child under § 3–315 of this article;

(21) assault in the first degree;

(22) assault with intent to murder;

(23) assault with intent to rape;

(24) assault with intent to rob;

(25) assault with intent to commit a sexual offense in the first degree; and

(26) assault with intent to commit a sexual offense in the second degree.

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–723.

(a) Except where a term of natural life without the possibility of parole is imposed,
a sentence for the following persons shall include a term of lifetime sexual offender
supervision:

(1) a person who is a sexually violent predator;

(2) a person who has been convicted of a violation of:

(i) § 3–303 or § 3–304 of the Criminal Law Article; or

(ii) § 3–305 or [§ 3–306(a)(1) or (2)] § 3–306 of the Criminal Law
Article as the sections existed before October 1, 2017, IF THE PERSON WAS AN ADULT AT
THE TIME OF THE OFFENSE;

(3) a person who has been convicted of a violation of § 3–309 or § 3–310 of
the Criminal Law Article, § 3–311 of the Criminal Law Article as the section existed before
October 1, 2017, or, IF THE PERSON WAS AN ADULT AT THE TIME OF THE OFFENSE, an
attempt to commit a violation of [§ 3–306(a)(1) or (2)] § 3–306 of the Criminal Law Article
as the section existed before October 1, 2017;

(4) a person who has been convicted of a violation of § 3–602 of the Criminal
Law Article:

(I) involving THAT WAS COMMITTED WHEN THE PERSON WAS AN
ADULT AGAINST a child under the age of [12] 13 years; OR

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 692

(II) THAT WAS COMMITTED WHEN THE PERSON WAS AT LEAST 21
YEARS OLD AGAINST A CHILD UNDER THE AGE OF 16 YEARS;

(5) a person who is required to register under § 11–704(c) of this subtitle;
and

(6) a person who has been convicted more than once arising out of separate
incidents of a crime that requires registration under this subtitle.

(b) Except where a term of natural life without the possibility of parole is imposed,
a sentence for a violation of § 3–307(a)(1) or (2) of the Criminal Law Article may include a
term of lifetime sexual offender supervision.

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the term of
lifetime sexual offender supervision imposed on a person for a crime committed on or after
October 1, 2010, shall:

(i) be a term of life; and

(ii) commence on the expiration of the later of any term of
imprisonment, probation, parole, or mandatory supervision.

(2) For a person who is required to register under § 11–704(c) of this
subtitle, the term of lifetime sexual offender supervision imposed for an act committed on
or after October 1, 2010, shall:

(i) commence when the person’s obligation to register commences;
and

(ii) expire when the person’s obligation to register expires, unless the
juvenile court:

1. finds after a hearing that there is a compelling reason for
the supervision to continue; and

2. orders the supervision to continue for a specified period of
time.

(d) (1) For a sentence that includes a term of lifetime sexual offender
supervision, the sentencing court, or juvenile court in the case of a person who is required
to register under § 11–704(c) of this subtitle, shall impose special conditions of lifetime
sexual offender supervision on the person at the time of sentencing, or imposition of the
registration requirement in juvenile court, and advise the person of the length, conditions,
and consecutive nature of that supervision.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 692 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Before imposing special conditions, the sentencing court or juvenile
court shall order:

(i) a presentence investigation in accordance with § 6–112 of the
Correctional Services Article; and

(ii) for a sentence for a violation of § 3–307(a)(1) or (2) of the Criminal
Law Article, a risk assessment of the person conducted by a sexual offender treatment
provider.

(3) The conditions of lifetime sexual offender supervision may include:

(i) monitoring through global positioning satellite tracking or
equivalent technology;

(ii) where appropriate and feasible, restricting a person from living
in proximity to or loitering near schools, family child care homes, child care centers, and
other places used primarily by minors;

(iii) restricting a person from obtaining employment or from
participating in an activity that would bring the person into contact with minors;

(iv) requiring a person to participate in a sexual offender treatment
program;

(v) prohibiting a person from using illicit drugs or alcohol;

(vi) authorizing a parole and probation agent to access the person’s
personal computer to check for material relating to sexual relations with minors;

(vii) requiring a person to take regular polygraph examinations;

(viii) prohibiting a person from contacting specific individuals or
categories of individuals; and

(ix) any other conditions deemed appropriate by the sentencing court
or juvenile court.

(4) The sentencing court or juvenile court may adjust the special conditions
of lifetime sexual offender supervision, in consultation with the person’s sexual offender
management team.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
application to any conviction before the effective date of this Act.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 692

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7