START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 140 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 140 
(Delegates Palakovich Carr and Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Unemployment Insurance - Recovery of Benefits - Limitation and Methods 
 
 
This bill limits the amount that the Secretary of Labor may deduct from weekly benefits 
payable to an unemployment insurance (UI) claimant when recovering UI benefit 
overpayments that are unrelated to fraud. Specifically, the Secretary may deduct up to 50%, 
from the weekly benefits payable to the claimant in the future, or, if the weekly benefit 
amount is $100 or less, up to 25%. Other overpayment collection options – both for those 
related to fraud and those unrelated to fraud – remain unchanged. The bill takes effect 
April 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) can implement the bill with 
existing budgeted resources. Nonbudgeted Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
expenditures increase (due to a reduction in allowable offsets) beginning in FY 2024. 
UITF revenues increase beginning in FY 2024 as other collection methods are used. The 
bill does not otherwise materially affect State finances or operations. The cumulative effect 
of the bill over time on the applicable rate table is discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Secretary is authorized to recover benefits paid to a UI claimant if the 
Secretary finds that the claimant was not entitled to the benefits because (1) the claimant 
was not unemployed; (2) the claimant received or retroactively was awarded wages; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 140/ Page 2 
(3) due to a redetermination of an original claim, the claimant is disqualified or otherwise 
ineligible for benefits. Additionally, if a claimant knowingly made a false statement or 
representation or knowingly failed to disclose a material fact to obtain or increase a benefit 
or other payment, the Secretary may recover (1) all benefits paid to the claimant for each 
affected week; (2) a monetary penalty of 15%; and (3) interest. The Secretary must adhere 
to various processes and timelines related to appeals made by a claimant and the 
Secretary’s recovery of the benefits. 
 
For overpayment recoveries not related to fraud, the Secretary may recover amounts (1) by 
deduction from benefits payable to the claimant in the future; (2) through civil suit; (3) by 
assessment; or (4) through other reasonable means of collection, including those permitted 
under State law for the collection of debts owed to the State or under federal law. For 
overpayment recoveries related to fraud, the Secretary may recover amounts (1) through 
civil suit; (2) through other reasonable means of collection; or (3) if the deduction is made 
by another jurisdiction under an intergovernmental agreement providing for the recovery 
of overpaid benefits, by deduction from future benefits (excluding the monetary penalty 
and interest). 
 
Statute does not specify the amount that may be deducted from future Maryland benefits 
payable. MDL regulations specify that the amount may be 100% of future weekly benefit 
entitlements. 
 
For general information on the State’s UI program, including information on the 
weekly benefit amount, the experience rating process, and recently enacted legislation, see 
the Appendix – Unemployment Insurance. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Administrative Expenses 
 
MDL advises that administrative costs associated with the changes in the bill are 
approximately $16,400 in fiscal 2024 for a one-time programming expense. This estimate 
assumes existing federal funding is sufficient for implementation; if not, additional 
above-base federal funding will be provided for any allowable expense. Absent federal 
funding, general funds are required. 
 
Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund 
 
Generally, UITF expenditures increase (due to a reduction in allowable offsets from 
100% to 50% or 25%) beginning in fiscal 2024. The amount in any year is unknown, but 
it could be significant. For context, MDL advises that reducing benefit offsets by 50% and 
75%, as applicable, in 2022 would have resulted in the department being unable to recoup 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 140/ Page 3 
approximately $9.0 million in overpayments. However, the Department of Legislative 
Services advises this is more appropriately considered a maximum amount for that year, as 
at least some claimants should have had additional remaining weeks of benefit eligibility 
that could be used to recoup the total amount owed, albeit at a slower rate. 
 
Presumably, UITF revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2024, as some unrecouped 
amounts are recovered through other legal means under current law, although MDL advises 
that benefit offsets, along with tax intercepts, are the most effective methods of collection. 
Therefore, the overall effect on UITF is likely negative. 
 
Additional Comments:  While not part of this estimate, if the cumulative effect of the 
bill’s changes over time leads to a change in the applicable rate table in a given year, then 
UITF revenues are further affected, although such an effect is likewise unknown. For 
example, a deep recession may move the State to Table F, even without this bill, but the 
bill may keep the State in Table F longer – increasing revenues in subsequent year(s) from 
what they would otherwise have been. The effect is mostly at the margins in the first several 
years. The earliest potential rate table change would be based on the UITF balance on 
September 30, 2024, which would affect the tax table in effect in 2025 (fiscal 2025 and 
2026). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 136 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
Enrolled - April 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 140/ Page 4 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. State 
UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly; however, Chapter 39 of 
2021 allows employers with fewer than 50 employees to defer 2021 State UI tax payments 
or reimbursements until January 31, 2022, and authorized the Secretary of Labor to offer a 
similar deferment in 2022. The Act, in conjunction with a 2020 executive order, also 
prevented UI claims made during the COVID-19 pandemic from increasing an employer’s 
taxes, although employers still paid broadly higher rates under Table F in 2021 and Table C 
in 2022 and will continue to do so under Table C in 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 140/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from… 
Annual Tax Per Employee  
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
N/A 
$1,038.2 
N/A 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
934.4 
$1,038.2 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
830.5 
934.4 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
726.7 
830.5 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
622.9 
726.7 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
622.9 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2021 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with 
nonzero (.0001 to .0027) benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; 
compensation less than that amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C is in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. A preexisting State law requiring a federal solvency goal to be met prior 
to moving to a tax table with lower rates will again apply beginning in 2024. The federal solvency goal, which is 
designed to ensure the State’s ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately 
$1.4 billion. 
 
As of January 1, 2023, the trust fund balance was $1.5 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the 
first four of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the 
benefit year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most 
recently completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 
 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 140/ Page 6 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MDL-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 
Broadly, the new laws (1) required Table C to apply in 2022 and 2023; (2) made 
administrative changes to assist employers in paying their taxes, specifically allowing them 
to defer payments under certain circumstances; (3) exempted certain UI benefit payments 
from being subject to the State income tax; (4) temporarily modified benefit calculations 
to assist claimants working on a part-time basis; (5) made system administrative changes 
that must be implemented by MDL; and (6) enhanced the State’s work sharing program, 
which allows an employee to continue working at reduced hours and obtain UI benefits 
under certain circumstances. 
 

END OF PAGE 6