START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 104 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 104 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Municipalities - Charter Amendments - Notice 
 
 
This bill modifies the manner in which a chief executive officer of a municipality may 
deliver charter amendment notices by authorizing the publishing of a fair summary of the 
proposed amendment in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least once 
and delivering a copy of a fair summary of the proposed charter amendment by hand or by 
mail once to every residence in the municipality, as specified. 
 
The fair summary of the proposed charter amendment, which is delivered by hand or by 
mail, may be included in a printed newsletter or other regular municipal publication. The 
bill requires a municipality to maintain records in accordance with the municipality’s 
record retention policies and make these records available to the general public in 
accordance with the Maryland Public Information Act. 
 
The bill also requires notice of a municipal charter amendment initiated by a petition of 
qualified voters to be posted at the main municipal building or other public place for at 
least 40 days, instead of four weeks, immediately before a charter amendment referendum  
is held. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect municipal expenditures. Municipal 
revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 104/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Title 4, Subtitle 3 of the Local Government Article describes the powers 
granted to municipalities to amend or repeal their charters under Article XI-E of the 
Maryland Constitution and establishes the requirements that municipal government 
officials must adhere to in notifying the public of a proposed charter amendment. 
 
Municipal charter amendments may be initiated by the legislative body of a municipality 
or by a petition of qualified voters, as specified. 
 
Notification of Charter Amendments Initiated by Legislative Body 
 
The chief executive officer of a municipality must provide notice of a resolution that 
proposes a municipal charter amendment by posting an exact copy of the resolution at the 
main municipal building or other public place for 40 days after the resolution is adopted 
and by publishing a fair summary of the proposed amendment in a newspaper, as specified. 
 
Notification of Charter Amendments Initiated by a Petition of Qualified Voters 
 
The chief executive officer of a municipality must provide notice of a municipal charter 
amendment by posting an exact copy of the proposed amendment at the main municipal 
building or other public place for at least four weeks immediately preceding the referendum 
at which the question is to be submitted and on the day of the referendum by posting a copy 
of the amendment at the voting place. The chief executive officer must also publish notice 
of the referendum and a fair summary of the proposed amendment in a newspaper, as 
specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 381 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 157 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  City of Laurel; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 104/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3