START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 128 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 128 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Private Passenger Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance - Enhanced Underinsured 
Motorist Coverage - Opt-Out Option 
 
 
This bill requires a person who obtains a new private passenger motor vehicle insurance 
policy issued on or after July 1, 2024, at the time the policy is purchased, to opt out of 
obtaining enhanced underinsured motorist (EUIM) coverage through a waiver process 
instead of opting in to EUIM coverage under current law. The bill makes a series of 
conforming changes related to the purchase, renewal, and maintenance of EUIM coverage. 
The bill also requires the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) to conduct a study on 
the impact of converting EUIM coverage under a private passenger motor vehicle liability 
insurance from an opt-in coverage option to an opt-out coverage option. The bill’s 
provisions related to EUIM coverage apply to each policy of private passenger motor 
vehicle insurance issued, sold, or delivered in the State on or after July 1, 2024. The bill 
terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for MIA from the $125 rate and form 
filing fee in FY 2024. MIA can review filings, complete the required reports, and meet the 
bill’s other requirements using existing budgeted resources. Potential minimal increase in 
general fund revenues from the premium tax, as discussed below. 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) Effect:  MAIF advises that the bill is 
not anticipated to affect its operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 128/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Enhanced Underinsured Motorist Coverage 
 
Maryland law requires an owner of a motor vehicle that is required to be registered in the 
State to maintain insurance for the vehicle during the registration period. The security 
required must provide at least the payment of claims:   
 
 
for bodily injury or death arising from an accident of up to $30,000 for any 
one person and up to $60,000 for any two or more persons; 
 
for property of others damaged or destroyed in an accident of up to $15,000; 
 
unless waived or exempt under Chapters 425 and 426 of 2016, for personal injury 
protection coverage of $2,500 per person; and 
 
for uninsured motorist (UIM) or EUIM coverage under Chapters 20 and 815 of 2017 
(unless waived, the amount equals the amount of liability coverage provided under 
the policy; if waived, the amount equals the minimum required insurance for 
liability coverage). 
 
Under current law, an insurer must offer EUIM coverage when an insurance policy is 
purchased, and the insured must choose to obtain the EUIM coverage. If the insured does 
not do so, then the policy must contain UIM coverage. Essentially, an insured must opt in 
to EUIM coverage under current law. 
 
Conversely, under the bill, an insurer must provide EUIM coverage to an insured when an 
insurance policy is purchased; to obtain UIM coverage instead, the insured must make an 
affirmative written statement waiving the EUIM coverage. Essentially, an insured must 
opt out of EUIM coverage using the process established under the bill. A waiver made 
under the bill is not effective unless, before the waiver, the insurer provides a written notice 
of the nature, extent, benefit, and cost of the level of the EUIM coverage being waived. 
The waiver must be made on a form that the Insurance Commissioner requires, meet 
specified criteria, and include specified information. If the first named insured does not 
make an affirmative written statement waiving EUIM coverage, the insurer must provide 
EUIM coverage for the policy. 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration Study 
 
By December 31, 2026, MIA must submit an interim report and by December 31, 2028, 
MIA must submit a final report to the Governor and specified committees of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 128/ Page 3 
General Assembly. Each report must include any findings and recommendations from the 
required study. The study conducted by MIA must include:   
 
 
a comparison of the rate of selection of EUIM coverage before and after 
implementation of the bill; 
 
an analysis of the impact on premiums from EUIM coverage being offered as a 
default selection for coverage, as specified; 
 
to the extent information is available, an analysis of the impact of offering EUIM 
coverage as a default option on compensation for damages resulting from motor 
vehicle accidents, as specified; 
 
a review of notice and waiver procedures relating to the offering of EUIM coverage 
as a default coverage option, as specified; and 
 
any other relevant matters relating to the offering of UIM coverage and EUIM 
coverage by private passenger motor vehicle liability insurers. 
 
State Revenues:  Title 6 of the Insurance Article imposes a 2% premium tax on each 
authorized insurance company, surplus lines broker, or unauthorized insurance company 
that sells, or an individual who independently procures, any type of insurance coverage 
upon a risk that is located in the State. Revenues accrue to the general fund. 
 
By requiring private passenger automobile insurance policyholders to opt out rather than 
opt in to EUIM coverage, the bill likely results in additional EUIM policies being issued 
and fewer UIM policies being issued. As EUIM coverage is more expensive than UIM 
coverage due to the higher limits of liability discussed below, total premiums paid in the 
State (and corresponding premium tax revenues) may increase. Even so, any such revenue 
is anticipated to be minimal. 
 
Additional Comments:  EUIM coverage differs from UIM coverage as UIM coverage 
does not pay unless the limits of liability under all valid and collectible liability insurance 
policies are less than the UIM coverage. Conversely, EUIM coverage pays in addition to 
the limits of liability under all other valid and collectible liability insurance policies. EUIM 
is more expensive than UIM due to the increased benefits it may provide. 
 
The following example illustrates the difference in the total amount a driver may recover 
if the driver has UIM coverage or EUIM coverage. Under both types of coverage, a driver 
may only receive up to the total amount of the driver’s injuries. In the example, Driver A 
(the at-fault driver) hits Driver B’s vehicle, which causes Driver B to have $80,000 in 
injuries. Driver A only has $30,000 in liability coverage, while Driver B has $50,000 in 
either UIM or EUIM coverage. In this circumstance, Driver B receives the following 
payments from Driver A’s liability coverage and Driver B’s own coverage. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 128/ Page 4 
Driver B:  UIM Coverage 
 
Driver B:  EUIM Coverage 
 
$30,000 
from 
the 
at-fault 
driver’s liability coverage 
 
$20,000 from Driver B’s own UIM 
coverage (reflecting $50,000 of own 
coverage – $30,000 from at-fault 
driver) 
 
 
$30,000 from the at-fault driver’s 
liability coverage 
 
$50,000 from Driver B’s own EUIM 
coverage (paid up to the limit of own 
coverage) 
Total Recovered by Driver B:  $50,000 
Total Recovered by Driver B:  $80,000 
(Cannot receive, in total, more than the 
limit of any policy) 
(May use full amount of own coverage to 
cover injuries sustained) 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 266 and SB 301 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 171 (Senators Feldman and Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Automobile 
Insurance Fund; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4