START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 150 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 150 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Adaptive Reuse 
 
 
This bill establishes that adaptive reuse of a property to develop affordable multifamily 
housing is an eligible use of the proceeds of a loan for specified housing programs 
administered by the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). The 
bill requires DHCD to notify applicants to those programs that adaptive reuse of a property 
to develop affordable multifamily housing is an eligible use of loan proceeds; however, the 
notification requirement does not apply to loan applications for any DHCD program that 
does not focus on housing (including programs within the Division of Neighborhood 
Revitalization). The bill’s provisions apply to any program operated by DHCD that awards 
loans that may be used to develop affordable multifamily housing. However, if the laws or 
regulations governing a particular program establish more specific rules regarding the use 
of a loan for adaptive reuse, the more specific rules must apply. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
DHCD advises that the department already issues loans for projects for the adaptive reuse 
of properties for multifamily housing and that statute does not prohibit such projects from 
consideration for a loan under any program administered by the department. DHCD further 
advises that the department can notify applicants to relevant programs using existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 150/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Adaptive reuse” means the retrofitting and repurposing of an existing 
building to develop new dwelling units. “Affordable multifamily housing” means a 
multifamily dwelling where all or a portion of the dwelling units are reserved for 
individuals whose household income is less than or equal to a certain limit on maximum 
household income. 
 
Current Law:  The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report required DHCD to study the feasibility 
and limitations of an adaptive reuse program and to submit a report on those findings. 
DHCD submitted its findings to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House 
Appropriations Committee on December 15, 2022. Among other things, DHCD reported 
that existing departmental programs already issue loans for projects engaging in adaptive 
reuse. As introduced, the fiscal 2024 capital budget includes a mixture of general funds, 
special funds, and federal funds for those programs:   
 
 
Strategic Demolition Fund ($25.0 million); 
 
Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative ($12.0 million); 
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program ($7.0 million); 
 
Special Loan Programs ($10.4 million); 
 
Seed Community Development Anchor Institution Fund ($10.0 million); and 
 
Community Legacy Program ($6.0 million). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 166 (Senators Waldstreicher and Hettleman) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2