START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 158 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 158 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Residency Requirements  
Ho. Co. 11-23 
 
 
This bill allows an individual who is a resident of the State to meet the residency 
requirements for an alcoholic beverages license application in Howard County. The bill 
also makes related conforming changes including changes to the required information on 
a license application. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Howard County 
finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. Any resident of the State will be able to apply for an 
alcoholic beverages license in Howard County. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an applicant for an alcoholic beverages license must include 
certain specified information on an application including that the applicant is a resident of 
the jurisdiction in which the applicant proposes to operate under the license for which the 
applicant is applying, among other requirements. Generally, applications must include a 
petition of support signed by at least 10 residents who are owners of real estate and 
registered voters of the precinct in which the business is to be conducted with specified 
information. In Howard County, this information must include that at least one of the 
applicants for a license be a resident of the county. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 158/ Page 2 
When an application for an alcoholic beverages license is made on behalf of a partnership, 
each of the partners must (1) reside in the county or city where the business is located at 
the time the application is filed and (2) remain a resident of the county or city where the 
business is located for the duration of time the license is in effect. 
 
When an application for an alcoholic beverages license is made on behalf of a corporation 
or club (whether incorporated or unincorporated), the license must be applied for and 
issued to three officers of the corporation or club as individuals. At least one of the 
three officers must (1) be a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality at the time the 
application is filed and (2) remain a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality for the 
duration of the time the license is in effect.  
 
When an application for an alcoholic beverages license is made on behalf of a limited 
liability company (LLC), the license must be applied for and issued to authorized persons 
of the LLC as individuals. At least one of the authorized individuals must (1) be a resident 
of the jurisdiction or municipality at the time the application is filed and (2) remain a 
resident of the jurisdiction or municipality for the duration of time the license is in effect. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the past three years. 
See House Bill 1212 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2