START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 189 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 189 
(Delegate Moon, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Automatic Expungement - Clarification 
 
 
This bill clarifies language enacted under Chapter 680 of 2021 regarding automatic 
expungements of records pertaining to charges in cases meeting specified criteria. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations. 
The Judiciary advises that the bill rearranges existing statutory language and does not have 
a fiscal or operational impact. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Pursuant to Chapter 680, beginning October 1, 2021, any 
police record, court record, or other record maintained by the State or a political 
subdivision of the State relating to the charging of a crime or a civil offense under 
§ 5-601 (c)(2)(ii) of the Criminal Law Article, including a must-appear violation of the 
Transportation Article, must be expunged three years after a disposition of the charge if no 
charge in the case resulted in a disposition other than acquittal; dismissal; not guilty; or 
nolle prosequi, other than nolle prosequi with a requirement of drug or alcohol treatment. 
 
The bill clarifies that these provisions apply to a civil offense under § 5-601(c)(2)(ii) of the 
Criminal Law Article or a crime other than a violation of the Transportation Article for 
which the defendant is not required to appear. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 189/ Page 2 
The bill makes corresponding changes to specified notice requirements regarding these 
expungements, which were also enacted under Chapter 680. 
 
Prior to January 1, 2023, § 5-601(c)(2)(ii) of the Criminal Law Article referred to the 
possession of less than 10 grams of marijuana. From January 1, 2023, through 
June 30, 2023, § 5-601(c)(2)(ii) refers to possession of the personal use amount of cannabis 
and possession of the civil use amount of cannabis. Effective July 1, 2023, § 5-601(c)(2)(ii) 
will refer to possession of the personal use amount of cannabis by an individual younger 
than age 21 and possession of the civil use amount of cannabis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 26 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 173 (Senators Waldstreicher and Muse) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2