START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 118 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 118 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Ground Leases – Notices and Billing – Forms and Requirements 
 
 
This bill enhances notice and billing requirements, as applicable, when (1) a ground lease 
holder brings an action for possession for nonpayment of ground rent; (2) a ground lease 
holder seeks payment of ground rent; and (3) a ground lease is transferred. To facilitate 
these requirements, the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) must 
develop (and make available online) specific documents that must be used by ground lease 
holders. A ground lease holder may not require the leasehold tenant to reimburse the holder 
for costs incurred in providing a notice or bill, as specified. The bill also establishes 
additional prohibitions regarding unregistered ground leases and expresses a specified 
declaration and intent of the General Assembly about ground rent redemptions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SDAT can comply with the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted 
resources. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or 
operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 118/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Ground Leases – In General 
 
Generally, a ground lease creates a leasehold estate in the grantee that is personal – not 
real – property. The grantor retains a reversion in the ground lease property and fee simple 
title to the land. Ground rent is paid to the grantor (the ground lease holder) for the use of 
the property for the term of the lease in annual or semiannual installments. Under a typical 
ground lease contract, the tenant agrees to pay all fees, taxes, and other costs associated 
with ownership of the property. 
 
Under the Real Property Article, an irredeemable ground rent is a ground rent created under 
a ground lease executed before April 9, 1884, that does not contain a provision allowing 
the leasehold tenant to redeem the ground rent. However, statutory provisions require any 
ground lease holder of an irredeemable ground rent to take specified actions (e.g., record a 
renewal notice of intention to preserve irredeemability) in order to protect this status. 
 
SDAT is required to maintain an online registry of all properties that are subject to ground 
leases. If a ground lease is not registered in accordance with statutory provisions, the 
ground lease holder may not (1) collect any ground rent payments under the ground lease; 
(2) bring a civil action against the leasehold tenant to enforce any applicable rights; or 
(3) bring an action against the leasehold tenant under Subtitle 8 of the Real Property 
Article. The bill prohibits a leasehold tenant of an unregistered ground lease from being 
required to hold more than three years of ground rent in escrow for the unregistered ground 
lease. 
 
The bill includes a declaration by the General Assembly that it is in the public interest for 
ground rents to be redeemed. It also expresses the intent of the General Assembly that 
SDAT use its ground rent redemption program to assist in the redemption of ground rents. 
 
Notice Requirements for Actions for Possession 
 
Generally, under current law, prior to filing an action for possession for nonpayment of 
ground rent, the ground lease holder must send a notice at least 60 days in advance to the 
leasehold tenant's last known address (as shown in SDAT’s records) by first-class mail and 
certified mail, return receipt requested. After such notice has been sent and no fewer than 
30 days before filing an action for possession, the ground lease holder must send a 
second notice in the same manner. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 118/ Page 3 
The bill adds that in both instances (1) the holder must also send the notice to the 
premises (property) address and (2) if the leasehold tenant’s last known mailing address 
and the premises address are different, the holder must mail one copy of the notice by 
first-class mail and one copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to 
each address, respectively. 
 
Under current law, the initial notice referenced above must be in substantially the same 
form as the notice contained on SDAT’s website. The bill repeals this provision and instead 
requires SDAT to develop and make available on its website a form for use by a ground 
lease holder. Statute currently includes specific requirements regarding the second notice, 
such as that it must include, among other items, an itemized bill for the payment due and a 
statement that unless the default is cured in 30 days, the ground lease holder intends to file 
an action for possession. The bill similarly requires SDAT to develop and make available 
on its website a form for use by a ground lease holder that requires the items currently 
specified in statute. 
 
Under current law, if authorized under the ground lease, a ground lease holder may be 
reimbursed for reasonable late fees, interest, collection costs, and expenses, as specified. 
However, as previously stated, the bill prohibits a ground lease holder from requiring a 
leasehold tenant to reimburse the holder for costs incurred in providing the aforementioned 
notices. 
 
Ground Rent Billing Requirements 
 
Under current law, a ground lease holder may only collect ground rent installment 
payments if (1) the lease is registered with SDAT and (2) a bill – that includes a notice 
meeting requirements specified in statute – is sent to the tenant and the property address at 
least 60 days before the payment is due. 
 
The bill requires that:   
 
 
if the leasehold tenant’s last known mailing address and the premises address listed 
in the records of SDAT are identical, the holder must mail one copy of the bill to 
the address by first‐class mail and one copy of the bill to the address by certified 
mail, return receipt requested and 
 
if the leasehold tenant’s last known mailing address and the premises address are 
different, the holder must mail one copy of the bill by first-class mail and one copy 
of the bill by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each address, respectively. 
 
SDAT must develop and make available on its website a form for use by a ground lease 
holder (that includes a notice meeting the requirements specified in existing statutory 
provisions). 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 118/ Page 4 
Transfer of Ground Leases 
 
Under current law, within 30 days after the transfer of any ground lease, the transferee must 
notify the leasehold tenant of the transfer. The notification must generally include the new 
ground lease holder’s name and address, the date of the transfer, and, if the property is 
subject to a redeemable ground rent, notice that the tenant has the right to redeem or 
purchase the ground lease from the ground lease holder. The ground lease holder must send 
this notice to the tenant's last known address.  
 
The bill adds that the holder must also send the notice to the premises address (as listed in 
SDAT’s records) and specifies that notice must be sent by first‐class mail and certified 
mail, return receipt requested. Additionally, if the leasehold tenant’s last known mailing 
address and the premises address are different, the holder must mail one copy of the notice 
by first-class mail and one copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to 
each address, respectively. The bill also requires a notice to be sent to SDAT. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 194 (Senators Sydnor and Hayes) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4