START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 144 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 144 
(Delegate Qi) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Real Estate Brokers - Inactive Licenses - Requirements After Expiration 
 
 
This bill requires a licensee of the Maryland Real Estate Commission who fails to 
reactivate a license on inactive status within three years to comply with specified licensing 
requirements under current law in order to obtain a license. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. The 
Maryland Real Estate Commission can implement procedural changes with existing 
budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Real Estate Commission issues licenses to qualified real estate 
brokers, associate brokers, and salespersons. In general, to obtain a real estate broker or 
associate broker license, an applicant must successfully complete 135 classroom hours of 
prelicensing broker courses, pass the required examination, and have been a licensed 
salesperson for at least three years. The biennial licensing fee for a real estate broker’s 
license is $190 for an initial license. Associate brokers must pay a licensing fee of $130. 
For both license types, renewal fees are $20 less.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 144/ Page 2 
To become licensed as a real estate salesperson, an individual must successfully complete 
a basic course in real estate or, if approved by the commission, college-level courses in real 
estate subjects. In addition, an applicant must pass the examination required for a 
salesperson license and obtain a commitment from a licensed real estate broker that the 
applicant will become affiliated with the broker after receiving a real estate salesperson 
license. The biennial licensing fee for a salesperson is $90; a renewal license is $70. 
 
A licensee may apply for reinstatement of an expired license without reexamination if the 
licensee: 
 
 
applies within three years after the license expires;  
 
meets the requirements of good character and reputation;  
 
complies with the applicable continuing education requirement for the period during 
which the individual was not licensed; and 
 
pays to the commission a reinstatement fee, currently set in regulation at $150.  
 
A license holder may apply for inactive status with the commission, provided the applicant 
qualifies for an active license and continues to pay the biennial license renewal fee, as 
needed. Additionally, a licensee may renew a license that is on inactive status only if the 
licensee complies with the commission’s continuing education requirements. Unless a 
license on inactive status is reactivated, the license expires three years after the date it is 
placed on inactive status. The fee to reactivate an inactive license is $25.  
 
All persons licensed with the commission, either as an associate real estate broker, real 
estate broker, or real estate salesperson must meet certain continuing education 
requirements in order to qualify for license renewal every two years. In general, to qualify 
for renewal of a license, a licensee must complete at least 15 hours of continuing education 
during the preceding two-year license term.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Real Estate Commission advises that the bill closes 
a loophole allowing an inactive licensee to reinstate and renew a license for up to six years 
after expiration. Conversely, an active licensee (i.e., a licensee currently performing real 
estate brokerage services) only has three years after a license expires to reinstate and renew.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 144/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3