START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 179 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 179 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Estate Tax - Portability - Time Period for Election 
 
 
This bill alters the period of time within which a person is required to file a Maryland estate 
tax return for the purpose of allowing a surviving spouse to take into account the deceased 
spousal unused exclusion amount to be consistent with the time for making a federal 
election. The Comptroller must adopt regulations necessary to ensure that the time period 
for making the election on a Maryland estate tax return is identical to a similarly situated 
federal estate tax return. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies retroactively to 
decedents dying on or after January 1, 2019. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential general fund revenue decrease beginning in FY 2024. Expenditures 
for administrative updates can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the federal and State estate tax, an estate may exclude a certain 
amount of the estate from taxation. Under the federal estate tax, the estates of decedents 
may elect to transfer any unused exclusion to the surviving spouse. The amount received 
by the surviving spouse is called the DSUE amount. If the executor of the decedent’s estate 
elects transfer, or portability, of the DSUE amount, the surviving spouse can apply the 
DSUE amount received from the estate of his or her last deceased spouse. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 179/ Page 2 
Chapters 15 and 21 of 2018 established portability under the State estate tax by allowing, 
under specified circumstances, the estate of a married taxpayer to pass along the 
DSUE amount to the surviving spouse. A surviving spouse may subsequently elect to claim 
the unused portion of the estate tax exclusion amount of the predeceased spouse. 
 
Chapter 111 of 2020 conformed State law to federal law by requiring an individual to file 
a Maryland estate tax return within two years after the date of death of a decedent if the 
return is filed solely for the purpose of making a DSUE election and clarifies the calculation 
of the DSUE amount in the event that the last predeceased spouse was a Maryland resident 
who died before January 1, 2019. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill conforms State law to federal law by requiring an individual 
to file a Maryland estate tax return within the same time period as allowed under federal 
law after the date of death of a decedent if the return is filed solely for the purpose of 
making a DSUE election. Federal law currently allows an individual to file a federal estate 
tax return five years after the date of death of a decedent if the return is filed solely for the 
purpose of making a DSUE election. As a result, general fund revenues may decrease to 
the extent that the extended time period allowed for filing a State estate tax return enables 
more individuals to use the DSUE election. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office advises that the agency will incur additional expenditures to 
update forms and instructions, issue regulations, and process the returns filed for the 
DSUE election. However, the agency reports that this can be accomplished with existing 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 55 (Senator West) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Register of Wills; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 179/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3