START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 180 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 180 
(Delegate Reznik, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification for Adoption Expenses - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the value of the subtraction modification under the Maryland income tax for 
the adoption of a child. Specifically, for a taxpayer who adopts a child with a special need, 
the value of the subtraction increases to $12,000, regardless of whether the child is a State 
resident at the time of adoption. For a taxpayer who adopts a child without a special need, 
the value of the subtraction increases to $10,000, regardless of whether the child is a State 
resident at the time of adoption. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 
2023 and beyond.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $91,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2024. General fund expenditures increase by $43,000 in FY 2024 only.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($91,000) 
($91,000) 
($91,000) 
($91,000) 
($91,000) 
GF Expenditure 
$43,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($134,000) 
($91,000) 
($91,000) 
($91,000) 
($91,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by an estimated $54,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2024. Local expenditures are not affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 180/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A taxpayer may claim a subtraction modification against Maryland income 
tax for adoption expenses, including reasonable and necessary adoption fees, court costs, 
attorney costs, and other expenses, up to specified maximum dollar amounts. The value of 
the credit is higher for a taxpayer who adopts a child who the State determines is a child 
with a special need, as specified, and the adoption is made through a private, nonprofit, 
licensed adoption agency or a public child welfare agency. In addition, the value of the 
credit is higher for a taxpayer who adopts a child who is a State resident at the time of 
adoption.  
 
Exhibit 1 shows a comparison of the value of the subtraction under current law and under 
the bill.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Value of State Subtraction Modification for Adoption Expenses  
Current Law vs. the Bill  
 
 
Under Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Adoption of a Child with a Special Need 
 
 
Child is a State resident at time of adoption 
Up to $6,000 of 
qualified expenses 
$12,000 
Child is not a State resident at time of adoption 
Up to $3,000 of 
qualified expenses 
$12,000 
Adoption of a Child without a Special Need 
 
 
Child is a State resident at time of adoption 
Up to $5,000 of 
qualified expenses 
$10,000 
Child is not a State resident at time of adoption 
Up to $2,000 of 
qualified expenses 
$10,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services  
   
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $91,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2024 due to increases in the value of subtraction modifications claimed 
against Maryland income tax. This estimate is based on historic claims for the existing 
subtraction modification and assumes that the number of claimants remains consistent with 
historic levels. According to the Comptroller’s Office, utilization of the subtraction 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 180/ Page 3 
modification for adoption expenses has remained relatively stable since 2013, with a 
historic average of about 300 claimants per year and an average claim of approximately 
$5,000.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
$43,000 in fiscal 2024 only for one-time changes to the Comptroller’s tax systems.         
 
Local Revenues:  Local revenues decrease by an estimated $54,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2024 due to increases in the value of subtraction modifications claimed against the 
personal income tax.           
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 141 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3