START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 771

Chapter 771

(House Bill 174)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Victims of Sexually Assaultive Behavior

FOR the purpose of requiring a certain assistant State’s Attorney to meet with a victim of
sexually assaultive behavior if the Office of the State’s Attorney has elected to
dismiss charges or not to file charges against an alleged suspect; and generally
relating to victims’ rights.

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–1009
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–1009.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “SEXUALLY ASSAULTIVE BEHAVIOR” HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 10–923 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE.

(B) FOR AN INVESTIGATION OR A CASE INVOLVING A VICTIM OF SEXUALLY
ASSAULTIVE BEHAVIOR, AN ASSISTANT STATE’S ATTORNEY WITH KNOWLEDGE OF
THE CASE SHALL MEET WITH THE VICTIM OR A REPRESENTATIVE DESIGNATED BY
THE VICTIM WITHIN 20 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A REQUEST FROM THE VICTIM TO
MEET REGARDING A DECISION BY THE OFFICE OF THE STATE’S ATTORNEY:

(1) NOT TO FILE A CHARGING DOCUMENT AGAINST AN ALLEGED
SUSPECT; OR

(2) TO DISMISS CHARGES AGAINST AN ALLEGED SUSPECT.

(C) AT THE MEETING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION, THE ASSISTANT
STATE’S ATTORNEY SHALL EXPLAIN THE JUSTIFICATION FOR NOT FILING A
CHARGING DOCUMENT OR FOR DISMISSING THE CHARGES.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 771 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) THE MEETING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE CONDUCTED IN
PERSON, BY PHONE, OR BY OTHER MEANS MUTUALLY AGREED ON.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2