START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 127 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 127 
(Delegates Moon and Clippinger) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
District Court - Small Claims - Enforcement of Money Judgments 
 
 
This bill prohibits the District Court, in a small claims action, from (1) ordering the 
appearance of an individual for an examination in aid of enforcement of a money judgment 
or (2) ordering an individual to answer interrogatories in aid of execution of a money 
judgment. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill affects operations in the District Court, it is not expected to 
materially affect State finances or otherwise materially affect State operations, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Small Claims Actions 
 
The District Court has exclusive jurisdiction over a small claim action, which is (1) a civil 
action for money in which the amount in controversy does not exceed $5,000, exclusive of 
interest, costs, and attorney’s fees or (2) specified landlord tenant actions (failure to pay 
rent or tenant holding over) involving up to $5,000 in rent claimed, exclusive of interest 
and costs. Pretrial discovery is not permitted in a small claim action. The court must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 127/ Page 2 
conduct the trial of a small claim action in an informal manner, and the rules of evidence 
generally do not apply. 
 
Enforcement of a Judgment – Obtaining Information about the Debtor’s Assets 
 
A creditor who has secured a judgment against a debtor often needs to obtain more 
information about the debtor’s assets in order to collect on the judgment. A judgment 
creditor can do this in a variety of ways, including the Judgment Debtor Information Sheet, 
written interrogatories in aid of execution (up to 15 written questions sent to the debtor 
about the debtor’s assets and income with responses to be made under oath), or an 
examination in aid of enforcement of a money judgment (court hearing). The Maryland 
Rules contain specified provisions regarding procedures for these options. 
 
In general, if the creditor chooses to send the debtor a Judgment Debtor Information Sheet 
and the debtor does not complete and return the form by the legal deadline, the creditor 
may obtain information from the debtor through written interrogatories or an in-court 
examination. A judgment creditor who decides not to use the information sheet may also 
pursue written interrogatories or an in‐court examination.  
 
A judgment creditor may request a show cause order when the judgment debtor has 
(1) ignored written interrogatories and an order from the judge compelling the defendant’s 
answers to the interrogatories or (2) failed to appear for an examination ordered by the 
court. If the judgment debtor fails to appear in court for the show cause hearing, the judge 
may issue a body attachment (Attachment for Contempt). If the court orders a body 
attachment but it is not issued on the day of the hearing, the judgment creditor may file a 
request for a body attachment. Before the court can issue a body attachment, the judgment 
creditor must provide proof of proper service on the judgment debtor or willful evasion of 
service by the judgment debtor. If the court issues a body attachment, the judgment debtor 
is taken into custody by the sheriff’s office and brought before the court to explain the 
failure to appear. 
 
Under § 6-411 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, an individual arrested for 
failure to appear in court to show cause why the individual should not be found in contempt 
for failure to answer interrogatories or to appear for an examination in aid of enforcement 
of a money judgment must be taken immediately (1) if the court is in session, before the 
court that issued the order that resulted in the arrest or (2) if the court is not in session, 
before a judicial officer of the District Court for a determination of appropriate conditions 
of release to ensure the individual’s appearance at the next session of the court that issued 
the order that resulted in the arrest. If a judicial officer determines that the individual should 
be released on a status other than personal recognizance without any additional conditions, 
the judicial officer must impose on the individual the least onerous condition or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 127/ Page 3 
combination of conditions that will reasonably ensure the appearance of the individual as 
required. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  While the Judiciary cannot reliably estimate the overall effect on 
District Court caseloads and workloads, the Judiciary advises that the bill impacts the ways 
in which civil small claims are enforced. Additionally, District Court forms, brochures, and 
webpages involving small claims actions need to be altered to reflect the bill’s provisions. 
These alterations to District Court procedures and operations can be handled with existing 
budgeted resources. With respect to identical legislation, the Central Collections 
Unit (CCU) has previously advised that the bill does not affect CCU operations. 
 
The bill limits the methods judgment creditors/plaintiffs in small claims actions may use 
to obtain information about a judgment debtor/defendant in order to collect on a judgment. 
Absent information about the judgment debtor’s income or assets, a judgment creditor is 
unable to file an accurate petition to garnish the judgment debtor’s wages, assets, or 
property. Thus, judgment creditors may file inaccurate garnishment petitions based on their 
own knowledge, which may result in garnishments that cannot be completed, delayed 
collections of judgments, and additional petitions. Also, small claims litigants are often 
self-represented and may be discouraged from filing petitions to collect on a judgment. 
Exhibit 1 contains statistics regarding small claims civil actions in the District Court. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
District Court Small Claims Civil Actions 
Fiscal 2019-2021 
 
 
FY 2019 
FY 2020 
FY 2021 
Small Claims Civil Actions Filed 
96,535 
105,334 
95,071 
Small Claims Cases Involving a Request for 
Interrogatories 
1,113 
1,798 
526 
Small Claims Cases Involving an Order to Appear for 
an Examination in Aid of Enforcement of a Money 
Judgment  
212 
133 
25 
Small Claims Cases – Show Cause Order Issued 
1,455 
1,514 
1,530 
Small Claims Cases – Body Attachment Issued 
116 
78 
27 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City and Caroline, Howard, and Prince George’s counties 
advise that the bill is not expected to fiscally impact their jurisdictions. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 127/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  The bill limits the ways in which judgment creditors can obtain 
information to collect on a judgment and judicial recourse if a judgment debtor fails to 
respond to post-judgment inquiries in a small claims action. 
 
Data is not available on the extent to which small businesses use interrogatories or 
examinations in order to collect on a judgment in a small claims action. Regardless, the bill 
may have a meaningful effect on small businesses that are unable to collect on a judgment 
as a result of the bill’s provisions.  
 
Additional Comments:  Although the General Assembly passed similar legislation in the 
2022 session (Senate Bill 452 and House Bill 349), the Governor vetoed the bills. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 452 and HB 349 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 594 (Senator Smith, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Caroline, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4