START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 184 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 184 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Personnel - Education and Transportation - Grievance Procedures 
 
   
This bill requires the grievance policies and procedures of the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT) and public State institutions of higher education to be consistent 
with those that apply for other State employees and to include a redress of any violation of 
an employee’s rights related to wages and payroll, including the award and payment of 
damages. The bill also expressly authorizes a grievance to be filed by an employee of 
MDOT or of a public State institution of higher education (or the employee’s exclusive 
representative) when payroll information is not reported in a timely or accurate manner to 
the Central Payroll Bureau (CPB). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) and higher education expenditures increase 
to the extent that the bill results in additional grievances filed and related damages paid. 
Any such impact cannot be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill but 
is anticipated to be minimal, as discussed below. Reimbursable expenditures and 
reimbursable revenues increase to the extent that additional grievance cases are referred to 
and adjudicated by the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill:   
 
 
expressly applies the right of an employee or an employee’s exclusive 
representative to initiate a grievance procedure related to payment of wages for 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 184/ Page 2 
employees of the University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University 
(MSU), St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), Baltimore City Community 
College (BCCC), and MDOT; 
 
generally requires the personnel systems and/or grievance policies and procedures 
for the aforementioned agencies to include provisions for the redress of any 
violation of an employee’s wage and pay rights, as specified, including the award 
and payment of damages; 
 
requires that grievances concerning wages be filed within 20 days after the failure 
to pay; and 
 
requires MDOT regulatory procedures related to the redress of grievances 
concerning wages to be consistent with those that apply for other State employees. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Payment of State Employee Wages 
 
CPB, within the Office of the State Comptroller, is responsible for the payment of all wages 
to each officer and employee of the State who is paid from funds appropriated by the 
General Assembly and each officer and employee of BCCC, MSU, SMCM, and USM. 
“Wage” means all compensation that is due to an employee; it includes a bonus, 
commission, fringe benefit, overtime wages, premium pay, or any other remuneration 
promised for service. 
 
Each appointing authority must accurately and timely calculate and report to CPB the 
payroll information for each employee. If an appointing authority does not report the 
payroll information in the manner required, (often resulting in a failure to pay or incorrect 
pay of the employee) the employee or employee’s exclusive representative may initiate a 
grievance with the deadlines and procedures established by State law. 
 
Grievance Procedures 
 
Title 12 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article establishes grievance procedures that 
apply to State employees in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS) within the 
Executive Branch and independent personnel systems, subject to specified exemptions. 
Agencies with independent personnel systems, such as MDOT and the various institutions 
of higher education, generally have their own grievance procedures as well. The following 
provisions relate to the grievance procedures for SPMS employees. 
 
A grievance is a dispute between an employee and the employee’s employer about the 
interpretation of and application to the employee of (1) a personnel policy or regulation 
adopted by the Secretary of Budget and Management; (2) any other policy or regulation 
over which management has control; or (3) any term or condition of a memorandum of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 184/ Page 3 
understanding between the State and the exclusive representative. State law specifies that 
a grievance is not a dispute about a pay grade or range for a class, the amount or effective 
date of statewide pay increase, the establishment of a class or assignment of a class to a 
service category, the establishment of classification standards, a mid-year performance 
appraisal, or an oral reprimand or counseling. 
 
Resolution of a grievance is a three-step process consisting of (1) initiation of the 
grievance; (2) an appeal to the head of the principal unit; and (3) an appeal to the Secretary 
of Budget and Management. If the Secretary does not resolve the grievance, it is referred 
to OAH for a final administrative decision. Any costs incurred by OAH for the appeal of a 
grievance to OAH must be paid by the principal unit that employs the grievant. 
 
Generally, a grievance must be initiated by an employee or the employee’s exclusive 
representative within 20 days after a failure to pay occurred. However, if the failure to pay 
is not known to, or discovered by, the employee within 20 days after the failure to pay 
occurs, a grievance may be initiated no later than six months after the date on which the 
failure to pay occurred. An employee is entitled to wages and damages if a grievance is 
initiated, unless the wage is withheld due to a bona fide dispute. Damages may not begin 
until at least one regular pay period has elapsed since the employee was not paid, and they 
increase 30% of the unpaid wage each pay period. Even so, total damages may not exceed 
three times the amount of the unpaid wage. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  TTF and higher education expenditures increase to the extent that the 
bill results in additional grievances filed by the employees of MDOT and public State 
institutions of higher education related to the timely and accurate payment of wages and as 
any subsequent damages are paid. However, any financial impact depends wholly on how 
many additional grievances are filed and the ultimate disposition of any future grievances, 
which cannot be reliably estimated or predicted in the absence of actual experience. Under 
the assumption that most affected agencies regularly provide accurate and timely payroll 
information to CPB, the impact is generally anticipated to be minimal. However, if an error 
occurs that affects many employees’ wages, the cost to the affected agency could be 
significant. 
 
Reimbursable revenues and expenditures for OAH increase correspondingly as additional 
cases are referred and adjudicated. As noted above, agencies pay OAH on a per-case basis 
to cover the costs associated with adjudication. Any such impact, however, depends on the 
number of referred cases under the bill and cannot be reliably estimated at this time. The 
Department of Budget and Management estimates that it costs approximately $227,800 for 
OAH to hear 50 cases, averaging $4,556 per case. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 184/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 79 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Baltimore City Community 
College; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; State Labor Relations Board; State Higher Education Labor Relations 
Board; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4