START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 121 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 121 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Mental Health - Treatment Plans for Individuals in Facilities and Resident 
Grievance System 
 
 
This bill codifies existing regulatory requirements, including time periods for, and who 
must participate in, the development, review, and reassessment of a patient’s plan of 
treatment. The bill also establishes new requirements relating to a patient’s plan of 
treatment, including an opportunity to involve family members or other individuals and a 
process to request that a health care facility review and reassess the plan. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must adopt regulations to establish a process for appeals and 
reconsideration of reviews and reassessments for patients admitted at State facilities and, 
beginning in 2024, submit a specified report by January 1 each year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can adopt regulations and issue the annual report within existing 
budgeted resources, but general fund expenditures may increase, as discussed below, for 
additional staff as well as costs associated with treatment outside a State facility. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 121/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Plan of Treatment 
 
The bill codifies existing regulatory requirements that a plan of treatment must include a 
long-range discharge goal and an estimate of the probable length of inpatient stay the 
patient requires before becoming eligible for transfer to a less restrictive or less intensive 
setting. 
 
The bill also codifies the regulatory requirement that facility staff who work directly with 
and provide treatment to a patient must review and reassess the plan of treatment for the 
patient to determine progress and any need for plan adjustments at least (1) once every 
15 days during the first two months of the inpatient stay and (2) once every 60 days for the 
remainder of the inpatient stay. 
 
On admission to a facility, a facility must ask whether the patient consents to family or any 
other individuals being informed of and given the opportunity to participate in meetings 
with the treatment team regarding the development, review, and reassessment of the 
patient’s plan of treatment. If consent is given, at least every seven days afterward, the 
facility must reconfirm the consent and provide the patient at a clinical visit with an 
opportunity to consent to additional individuals being informed of and given the 
opportunity to participate in meetings with the treatment team. If a patient agrees to have 
others participate, the facility must (1) provide a schedule of routine treatment team 
meetings where the plan of treatment is discussed; (2) establish a process for the authorized 
individuals to participate in treatment team meetings; (3) inform the authorized individuals 
as soon as a treatment team meeting is scheduled if the meeting is being held outside the 
regular schedule; and (4) inform the authorized individuals of the outcome of an emergency 
treatment team meeting as soon as practicable. A patient can withdraw consent to have 
others participate at any time either orally or in writing. 
 
A treating provider may withhold information on a patient’s plan of treatment from a 
family member or other authorized individual if (1) in the treating provider’s clinical 
judgment, the given consent was provided through coercive means; (2) the treating 
provider believes it is in the best clinical interest of the patient; or (3) the patient requests 
that a specific piece of the plan of treatment be withheld. 
 
Review and Reassessment of a Plan of Treatment 
 
The bill establishes a process by which a patient or an authorized individual may request 
that a facility review and reassess the plan of treatment if it is believed that the plan is not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 121/ Page 3 
meeting the needs of the patient. Upon the receipt of a request for review and reassessment, 
specified facility staff must (1) conduct a review and reassessment of the plan of treatment; 
(2) communicate the results of the review and reassessment of the plan of treatment to the 
patient and individual who requested the review and reassessment (including an 
explanation of how all issues raised in the request were considered); and (3) include the 
request for the review and reassessment of the plan of treatment and the outcome of the 
review and assessment (including the explanation for that outcome) in the patient’s medical 
records. 
 
Reconsideration and Appeals for Patients Admitted to State Facilities 
 
If a State facility does not change a plan of treatment following a request for review and 
reassessment, the State facility must provide referral information for the Resident 
Grievance System. The patient or an authorized individual may (1) request a 
reconsideration of the review and reassessment by filing a grievance with the Resident 
Grievance System and (2) may appeal the reconsideration by filing a request with MDH’s 
Healthcare System’s Chief Medical Officer. 
 
State Facility Requirements 
 
If a State facility is unable to provide the treatment necessary to address the rehabilitation 
needs of a patient pursuant to a plan of treatment, the State facility must make arrangements 
for the patient to receive necessary treatment from another facility or health care provider 
outside the State facility and ensure that treatment for the patient is coordinated between 
the State facility and any other provider. 
 
Resident Grievance System Report 
 
By January 1 each year beginning in 2024, MDH must report on the Resident Grievance 
System and the grievances that were received by the system related to State facilities during 
the immediately preceding fiscal year. 
 
Current Law:  Upon admission to a State facility, the facility must make and periodically 
update an individual treatment plan for the patient. Pursuant to § 10-706 of the 
Health-General Article, each patient must be told, in appropriate terms and language:  
(1) the content and objectives of the plan of treatment; (2) the nature and significant 
possible adverse effects of recommended treatments; (3) specified information about those 
directly responsible for carrying out a patient’s treatment; and (4) when appropriate, other 
available alternative treatments, services, or providers of mental health services. 
 
Pursuant to regulations (COMAR 10.21.03.03), an individual treatment plan is a 
comprehensive and thoughtfully written plan based on an initial diagnostic impression and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 121/ Page 4 
an overall evaluation of the patient’s specific needs and problems. It includes an inventory 
of the patient’s strengths and weaknesses and sets forth short-term, measurable goals and 
behaviorally stated objectives aimed at maximal restoration of the patient’s adaptive 
capacity and return to the community as soon as possible. A plan of active treatment must 
also endeavor the arrest, reversal, and amelioration of the patient’s illness symptoms. A 
treatment plan must include a long-range discharge goal, as well as an estimate of the 
probable length of inpatient stay needed before transfer to a less restrictive or intensive 
treatment. 
 
Members of the mental health professional treatment team who are directly involved in the 
patient’s care must participate in the development of the patient’s treatment plan and must 
periodically reassess the treatment plan at least once every 15 days for the first two months 
of the inpatient stay and, after that, once every 60 days. When feasible, the individual 
treatment plan must include patient participation. 
 
COMAR 10.21.03.03 also specifies that the confidentiality of a patient’s individual 
treatment plan must be preserved. The treatment plan may not be disclosed without a court 
order or the written consent of the patient (or the patient’s parent or legally appointed 
representative). The initial treatment plan and all subsequent reassessments must be 
included in the patient’s permanent medical record on a separate form that is easily 
identifiable, comprehensively written, and includes the names and/or signatures of the 
treatment team, as specified.  
 
The Resident Grievance System established in COMAR 10.21.14 is an administrative 
process to be used to ensure the rights of residents in Behavioral Health Administration 
facilities are protected. It is the intent that the Resident Grievance System provide a fair, 
efficient, and complete mechanism for receiving, investigating, and resolving resident 
complaints in a timely manner. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that additional staff are needed to manage the review 
of treatment plans upon a review and reassessment request and any further request for 
reconsideration of the reassessment. The Department of Legislative Services agrees that 
additional staff may be necessary but advises that the level of additional staffing required 
is dependent upon the number of treatment plan review and reassessment requests that 
MDH receives, which cannot be reliably estimated without actual experience under the 
bill. Thus, MDH general fund expenditures may increase to the extent that individuals take 
advantage of the bill’s provisions and request treatment plan reviews and reassessments as 
well as reconsiderations and potential appeals thereafter. 
 
MDH further advises that additional State expenditures may be incurred due to the bill’s 
requirement that a State facility make arrangements for a patient to receive necessary 
treatment from another facility or health care provider outside the State facility and ensure 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 121/ Page 5 
that treatment for the patient is coordinated between the State facility and any other 
provider. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 8 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5