START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 113 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 113 
(Delegate Hartman) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Worcester County - Alcoholic Beverages - Ocean City Promoter's License 
 
   
This bill establishes an Ocean City promoter’s license in Worcester County and authorizes 
the Worcester County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to a for-profit 
organization to sell beer, wine, and liquor at entertainment events held in Ocean City, as 
specified. The license fee is $5,000 per entertainment event. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Worcester County revenues increase by $25,000 in FY 2024 from 
Ocean City promoter’s licenses issued under the bill. Worcester County can handle any 
additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact for any small 
business that obtains a promoter’s license under the bill.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board may issue an Ocean City promoter’s license to a for-profit 
organization to sell beer, wine, and liquor at an entertainment event held on a premises that 
is (1) located within the corporate limits of the town of Ocean City; (2) owned by the town 
of Ocean City; and (3) approved in writing by the Ocean City Police Department. The 
board may adopt regulations to restrict the number of licenses issued each year and 
establish requirements to govern the sale and service of beer, wine, and liquor at specified 
entertainment events. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 113/ Page 2 
Current Law:  In Maryland, alcoholic beverages licenses are granted by each 
jurisdiction’s board of license commissioners to permit the sale and consumption of alcohol 
at specified places such as restaurants, taverns, hotels, clubs, or places of public 
entertainment. Other types of establishments or organizations cannot normally acquire a 
license but may be granted eligibility to apply. 
 
The Worcester County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to issue a license to 
the Ocean City Convention Hall Commission that allows the commission to approve 
vendors to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises of the Ocean City Convention Hall. 
Additionally, the board may issue Class D licenses to Ocean City municipal golf courses 
for the on-premises sale and consumption of beer, wine, and liquor, as specified. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Worcester County revenues increase by $5,000 for each Ocean City 
promoter’s license issued under the bill. Worcester County estimates that it will issue 
five Ocean City promoter’s licenses in fiscal 2024; therefore, Worcester County revenues 
increase by approximately $25,000 in fiscal 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 135 (Senator Carozza) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Worcester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2