START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 149 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 149 
(Delegate Hornberger) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Electricians Act - Revisions 
 
 
This emergency bill makes several changes to the Maryland Electricians Act. Specifically, 
the bill (1) clarifies the entity that must approve a registered apprenticeship program for 
electricians; (2) substitutes the term “uninsured” for “inactive” in provisions of law relating 
to liability insurance requirements for master electricians; (3) prohibits certain persons 
from contracting to provide electrical services unless the work is covered by specified 
insurance; (4) delineates who is authorized and required to purchase insurance when 
providing electrical services; and (5) requires the State Board of Electricians to specify on 
each license whether the license holder meets the relevant insurance requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s provisions are generally technical or procedural in nature and are 
not expected to have any material impact on licensing activities. The State Board of 
Electricians can handle the bill’s administrative changes with existing resources. No effect 
on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 149/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Approval of Apprenticeship Program for Electricians 
 
Chapter 257 of 2017 designated the Division of Workforce Development and Adult 
Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) as the State 
Apprenticeship Agency under federal law, making it the sole entity authorized to approve 
registered apprenticeships in the State. Under current law, the Maryland Apprenticeship 
and Training Council (MATC), which previously authorized apprenticeship programs, 
currently serves in an advisory capacity to DWDAL. The change in status enacted by 
Chapter 257 was made to bring State law into conformity with federal regulations that 
require state officials to be held accountable for the oversight and management of state 
apprenticeship programs. The bill corrects erroneous references in the Maryland 
Electricians Act to apprenticeship programs authorized by MATC instead of DWDAL. 
 
Specifically, the Maryland Electricians Act currently requires continuing education 
requirements to be administered by a college or an apprenticeship program approved by 
MATC or the federal Office of Apprenticeship, among other entities. The bill requires 
DWDAL, rather than MATC, to approve any such program. 
 
Similarly, MATC (as well as the federal Office of Apprenticeship) are the entities charged 
with approving electrician apprenticeship programs in the Maryland Electricians Act. The 
bill specifies that DWDAL, rather than MATC, approves the apprenticeship programs. 
 
Inactive Licensing Status  
 
The bill generally substitutes “uninsured” for “inactive” licensing status in licensing 
provisions throughout the Maryland Electricians Act. 
 
Under current law, a master electrician licensee on inactive status may not use a State 
license to obtain a local registration for providing electrical services as a master electrician 
in a local jurisdiction. In a county that requires a State master electrician license, a licensee 
on inactive status may not provide electrical services as a master electrician. The bill again 
substitutes “uninsured” for “inactive” and specifies that in a county that requires a State 
master electrician license, an uninsured master electrician licensee may only provide 
electrical services as a journeyperson electrician (i.e., under the supervision of an insured 
master electrician). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 149/ Page 3 
General Liability and Property Insurance Requirements 
 
Under current law, a master electrician who is licensed by the State Board of Electricians 
and provides electrical services (or a person to whom a licensed master electrician licensed 
by the board assigns a local registration under the Maryland Electricians Act) must:   
 
 
maintain general liability insurance of at least $300,000; 
 
maintain property damage insurance of at least $100,000; and 
 
submit proof of the required insurance to the board. 
 
The bill modifies these requirements by specifying that a licensed master electrician, a 
person whom a licensed master electrician assigns a local registration, or another person 
who engages in the business of providing electrical services, may not contract to provide 
electrical services unless the electrical work (including completed operations) of the 
relevant person is covered by liability insurance for general liability of at least 
$300,000 and property damage of at least $100,000. 
 
The bill establishes that the required insurance may be bought (1) by a master electrician 
or (2) for a master electrician, by a person who engages in the business of providing 
electrical services and employs the master electrician. The insurance requirement is not 
meant to cover electrical services that a master electrician provides outside the scope of 
employment for the person who carries the insurance. 
 
The bill further establishes that a licensed apprentice electrician or licensed journeyperson 
electrician employed by a licensed master electrician need not obtain separate insurance 
while providing (or assisting in providing) electrical services under the control and 
supervision of the licensed master electrician. Subject to specified restrictions regarding 
uninsured status, uninsured licensees who have had their uninsured status approved by the 
State Board of Electricians need not obtain insurance while maintaining uninsured status. 
 
Under current law, if a local jurisdiction requires an applicant for a local license to execute 
a bond to the local jurisdiction, the applicant may satisfy the bond requirement by 
submitting proof of the required insurance. The bill alters this provision by specifying that 
it applies to a master electrician or other person who engages in the business of providing 
electrical services. 
 
Finally, the bill requires the State Board of Electricians to specify on each license whether 
the license holder meets the relevant insurance requirements. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDL notes that, currently, an inactive master electrician may be 
hesitant to activate an inactive license because of the insurance requirement. If the inactive 
master electrician wishes to resume working, the only option is to either obtain insurance 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 149/ Page 4 
(i.e., as an individual) or assign the license to another company/individual, which restricts 
the licensee to working for only one person/company. Under the bill, an uninsured master 
licensee does not require individual insurance and may perform work at the journeyman 
level for any licensed and insured master electrician, which may encourage more 
electricians to work. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 44 (Senator McCray) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4