START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 174 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 174 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Victims of Sexually Assaultive Behavior 
 
 
This bill requires an assistant State’s Attorney to meet with a victim of “sexually assaultive 
behavior” at the request of the victim after a decision by the Office of the State’s Attorney 
not to file a charging document against an alleged suspect or to dismiss charges against an 
alleged suspect. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  With respect to an investigation or case involving a victim of “sexually 
assaultive behavior,” an assistant State’s Attorney with knowledge of the case must meet 
with the victim or the victim’s designated representative within 20 days after receiving a 
request from the victim to meet regarding a decision by the Office of the State’s Attorney 
not to file a charging document against an alleged suspect or to dismiss charges against an 
alleged suspect. The meeting may be conducted in person, by phone, or by other means 
mutually agreed on. At the meeting, the assistant State’s Attorney must explain the 
justification for not filing a charging document or for dismissing the charges. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 174/ Page 2 
Current Law:  “Sexually assaultive behavior” means an act that would constitute a sexual 
crime under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article; sexual abuse of a minor under 
§ 3-602 of the Criminal Law Article; sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult under § 3-604 of 
the Criminal Law Article; a violation of 18 U.S.C. Chapter 109A; or a violation of a law 
of another state, the United States, or a foreign country that is equivalent to any of these 
offenses. 
 
Under Maryland law, a victim of a crime or delinquent act (or a representative in the event 
the victim is deceased, disabled, or a minor) has a broad range of specific rights during the 
criminal justice process. On first contact with a victim, a law enforcement officer, 
District Court commissioner, or juvenile intake officer must give an identified victim a 
pamphlet that advises the victim of the rights, services, and procedures available in the 
time before and after the filing of a charging document. Also, within 10 days after the filing 
or unsealing of an indictment or information, the prosecuting attorney must provide a 
victim with a pamphlet that describes the rights, services, and procedures available to a 
victim after the indictment or information is filed and a notification request form by which 
a victim may request notice of various proceedings. 
 
Many of the rights afforded a victim of crime depend on a victim completing a notification 
request form or requesting notice by following the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) 
system protocol. For example, unless provided by the MDEC system, the prosecuting 
attorney must provide prior notice to a victim, if practicable, of each court proceeding in 
the case and the terms of any plea agreement. If a proper request for notification has been 
submitted and prior notice is not practicable, the prosecuting attorney must tell the victim 
or victim’s representative of the terms of any plea agreement, judicial action, and 
proceeding that affects the interests of the victim or victim’s representative, including a 
dismissal, nolle prosequi, or stetting of the charges, as soon after a proceeding as 
practicable. Whether or not a notification request has been submitted, the prosecuting 
attorney may give the victim or victim’s representative information about the status of the 
case upon request. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 300 and HB 225 of 2022 and SB 555 and HB 270 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 391 (Senators Lewis Young and Rosapepe) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 174/ Page 3 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - February 28, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3