START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 421

Chapter 421

(House Bill 158)

AN ACT concerning

Howard County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Residency Requirements

Ho. Co. 11–23

FOR the purpose of providing that a resident of the State meets certain residency
requirements for an applicant for an alcoholic beverages license in Howard County;
and generally relating to residency requirements for alcoholic beverages licenses in
Howard County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 23–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 23–1401, 23–1404, 23–1406, and 23–1407(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 23–1403.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

23–102.

This title applies only in Howard County.

23–1401.

(a) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 1 (“Applications for Local Licenses”)
of Division I of this article apply in the county without exception or variation:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 421 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) § 4–102 (“Applications to be filed with local licensing board”);

(2) [§ 4–103 (“Application on behalf of partnership”);

(3)] § 4–106 (“Payment of notice expenses”);

[(4)] (3) § 4–108 (“Application form required by Comptroller”);

[(5)] (4) § 4–111 (“Payment of license fees”);

[(6)] (5) § 4–112 (“Disposition of license fees”);

[(7)] (6) § 4–113 (“Refund of license fees”); and

[(8)] (7) § 4–114 (“Fees for licenses issued for less than 1 year”).

(b) Section 4–110 (“Required information on application — Petition for support”)
of Division I of this article does not apply in the county and is superseded by § 23–1406 of
this subtitle.

(c) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 1 (“Applications for Local Licenses”)
of Division I of this article apply in the county:

(1) § 4–103 (“APPLICATION ON BEHALF OF PARTNERSHIP”), SUBJECT
TO § 23–1403.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) § 4–104 (“Application on behalf of corporation or club”), subject to §
23–1404 of this subtitle;

[(2)] (3) § 4–105 (“Application on behalf of limited liability company”),
subject to § 23–1404 of this subtitle;

[(3)] (4) § 4–107 (“Criminal history records check”), subject to §§ 23–1402,
23–1403, and 23–1408 of this subtitle; and

[(4)] (5) § 4–109 (“Required information on application — In general”),
subject to [§ 23–1407] §§ 23–1403.1, 23–1404, AND 23–1407 of this subtitle.

23–1403.1.

AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A RESIDENT OF THE STATE MEETS THE RESIDENCY
REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 4–103 OF THIS ARTICLE.

23–1404.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 421

(a) Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, at least one of the
applicants for a new license for a corporation or limited liability company shall certify that
as long as the applicant is the holder of the license, the applicant shall:

(1) own at least 10% of the stock in the corporation or interest in the limited
liability company; or

(2) (i) serve as the manager or supervisor of the corporation or limited
liability company; and

(ii) be physically present on a full–time basis at the licensed
premises of the corporation or limited liability company to conduct the daily business
involving transactions concerning alcoholic beverages sales.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, applicants for a license for
a corporation or limited liability company shall submit:

(1) an executed copy of the articles of incorporation or articles of
organization; and

(2) a schedule that states:

(i) the name, address, and percentage of stock held by each
stockholder holding at least 5% of the stock of a corporation; or

(ii) the name, address, and percentage of interest held by each
member holding at least 5% interest in a limited liability company.

(c) (1) (i) The stock or interest requirements established under subsection
(a) of this section do not apply to a corporation or limited liability company in which:

1. the stock of the corporation or interest in the limited
liability company is authorized for sale by the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission; or

2. a majority of the stock of the corporation or interest in the
limited liability company is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by one or more
corporations or limited liability companies whose stock or interest is authorized for sale by
the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.

(ii) A corporation or limited liability company provided for in
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall maintain one applicant as a manager or supervisor
physically present on a full–time basis at the licensed premises to conduct the daily
business involving transactions concerning alcoholic beverages sales.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 421 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The schedule requirement established under subsection (b) of this
section does not apply to:

(i) a corporation whose stock is authorized for sale by the United
States Securities and Exchange Commission; or

(ii) a limited liability company whose interest is authorized for sale
by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.

(d) (1) The requirements under subsection (a) of this section do not apply to an
application for or renewal of a Class C (continuing care retirement community) beer, wine,
and liquor license by a nonprofit organization if the manager or supervisor of the continuing
care retirement community:

(i) is identified on the application;

(ii) receives alcohol awareness training from an approved alcohol
awareness training program; and

(iii) is physically present at the continuing care retirement
community on a full–time basis.

(2) A continuing care retirement community license shall be issued to:

(i) a manager or supervisor; and

(ii) two officers, one of whom shall be a resident of the [county, a
registered voter, and a taxpayer of the county] STATE at the time the application is filed.

(E) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A RESIDENT OF THE STATE MEETS THE
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS UNDER §§ 4–104 AND 4–105 OF THIS ARTICLE.

23–1406.

(a) At least one of the applicants shall include with the application a petition of
support signed by at least three residents who are owners of real property and registered
voters in the district where the business is to be conducted stating that the applicant:

(1) is known personally to the residents; and

(2) subject to subsection (b) of this section, is a resident of the [county]
STATE at the time the applicant presents the application to the residents.

(b) The Board may waive the residency requirement for an applicant if the
applicant:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 421

(1) is the purchaser of a business already in operation; or

(2) has owned the premises for which a license is sought for at least 2 years
immediately preceding the filing of the application.

23–1407.

(a) At least one of the applicants for a license shall be a resident of the [county]
STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5