START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 131 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 131 
(Delegates Moon and Clippinger) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law – Unnatural or Perverted Sexual Practice – Repeal 
 
 
This bill (1) repeals the crime of unnatural or perverted sexual practice under § 3-322 of 
the Criminal Law Article; (2) makes conforming and technical changes due to the repeal; 
and (3) prohibits the expungement of a conviction for unnatural or perverted practice, as 
the offense existed prior to the bill’s effective date of October 1, 2023, under specified 
circumstances.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government operations or 
finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under § 3-322 of the Criminal Law Article, a person is 
prohibited from (1) taking the sexual organ of another or of an animal in a person’s mouth; 
(2) placing the person’s sexual organ in the mouth of another or of an animal; or 
(3) committing another unnatural or perverted sexual practice with another or with an 
animal. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to 
10 years and/or a fine of up to $1,000. The bill repeals this crime. 
 
However, Chapter 72 of 2019 expanded the prohibition against aggravated cruelty to 
animals to include engaging in sexual contact with an animal, as specified. A person who 
engages in sexual contact with an animal is guilty of the felony of aggravated cruelty to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 131/ Page 2 
animals and is subject to maximum penalties of three years imprisonment and/or a 
$5,000 fine. 
 
Sexual Molestation or Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Activity 
 
Under certain statutes, “sexual molestation or exploitation” and “sexual abuse” include 
unnatural or perverted sexual practices. The bill removes references to “unnatural or 
perverted sexual practices” and replaces those references with “any other sexual conduct 
that is a crime” in the following statutes:  (1) child in need of assistance (§ 3-801 of the 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article); (2) sexual abuse of a minor (§ 3-602 of the 
Criminal Law Article); and (3) abuse or neglect of a vulnerable adult in the first degree 
(§ 3-604 of the Criminal Law Article). The bill also removes unnatural or perverted sexual 
practices from the definition of “sexual activity” under the State’s revenge porn statute 
(§ 3-809 of the Criminal Law Article). 
 
Qualifying Offense to Have a Conviction Vacated for Victims of Human Trafficking 
 
Under current law, a person convicted of a “qualifying offense” may file a motion to vacate 
the judgment if the person’s participation in the offense was a direct result of being a victim 
of human trafficking. The bill clarifies that the offense of an unnatural or perverted sexual 
practice as the offense existed before October 1, 2023, is a qualifying offense. 
 
Expungements 
 
Subject to specified requirements and criteria, a person who has been convicted of a crime 
and the act on which the conviction was based is no longer a crime is eligible to file a 
petition for expungement of a police record, court record, or other record related to the 
conviction. 
 
Although the bill repeals the crime of unnatural or perverted sexual practices, the bill 
specifically prohibits expungement of convictions for unnatural or perverted sexual 
practices, as the offense existed prior to October 1, 2023, if the act was committed:  
 
 
without consent; 
 
with a minor younger than age 16; 
 
with anyone the individual could not marry under State law (e.g., parent, child, or 
sibling);  
 
with a mentally incapacitated individual;  
 
with a physically helpless individual; or 
 
with a substantially cognitively impaired individual. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 131/ Page 3 
Sex Offender Registry 
 
The bill clarifies that a person who has been convicted of unnatural or perverted sexual 
practice, as the offense existed prior to October 1, 2023, is a Tier III sex offender if the 
offense was committed with force or threat of force. 
 
Case Law 
 
In Schochet v. State, 320 Md. 714 (1990), the Maryland Court of Appeals held that the 
unnatural or perverted sexual practice statute could not be enforced against noncommercial 
activity between consenting heterosexual adults in private. In a 1998 decision, the 
Circuit Court for Baltimore City held that State laws prohibiting sodomy and unnatural or 
perverted sexual practices do not apply to noncommercial, consensual private sexual 
activity between adults, regardless of whether the activity is heterosexual or homosexual. 
Williams v. State, 1998 Extra LEXIS 260 (Md. Cir. Ct. 1998). The consent order entered 
into pursuant to that decision enjoined the State and Anne Arundel County from enforcing 
the sodomy and unnatural or perverted sexual practice statutes in these instances. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, in fiscal 2021, there were 
157 violations/charges (1 conviction) in the District Court and 96 violations/charges 
(5 convictions) in the circuit courts for unnatural or perverted sexual practice. During 
fiscal 2022, there were 129 violations/charges (1 conviction) in the District Court and 
60 violations/charges (3 convictions) in the circuit courts for unnatural or perverted sexual 
practice. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the law three years. 
See SB 22 and HB 209 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 54 (Senator Lam) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Charles, and Garrett counties; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State Archives; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 131/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4