START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 121

Chapter 121

(House Bill 123)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – HOV Lanes – Plug–In Electric Drive Vehicles

FOR the purpose of authorizing certain plug–in electric drive vehicles for which a permit
has been obtained from the Motor Vehicle Administration to use high occupancy
vehicle (HOV) lanes regardless of the number of passengers in the vehicles; and
generally relating to the use of HOV lanes by plug–in electric drive vehicles.

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 25–108
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

25–108.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “HOV LANE” MEANS A HIGH OCCUPANCY VEHICLE
LANE DESIGNATED BY THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION WHOSE USE IS
RESTRICTED BY A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE DURING SPECIFIED TIMES TO
VEHICLES CARRYING AT LEAST A SPECIFIED NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A PLUG–IN ELECTRIC DRIVE VEHICLE
THAT HAS A MAXIMUM SPEED CAPABILITY OF AT LEAST 65 MILES PER HOUR.

(C) A PLUG–IN ELECTRIC DRIVE VEHICLE FOR WHICH A PERMIT HAS BEEN
APPLIED FOR AND OBTAINED FROM THE ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS SECTION
MAY USE AN HOV LANE AT ALL TIMES REGARDLESS OF THE NUMBER OF
PASSENGERS IN THE VEHICLE.

(D) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION, THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION,
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE SHALL MAY CONSULT TO DESIGN A
PERMIT TO DESIGNATE A VEHICLE AS A PLUG–IN ELECTRIC DRIVE VEHICLE
AUTHORIZED TO USE AN HOV LANE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 121 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY SHALL CHARGE A FEE, NOT TO
EXCEED $20, FOR ISSUING A PERMIT UNDER THIS SECTION.

(3) THE ADMINISTRATION, ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE
STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, MAY LIMIT THE NUMBER OF PERMITS ISSUED
TO ENSURE HOV LANE OPERATIONS ARE NOT DEGRADED TO AN UNACCEPTABLE
LEVEL.

(E) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE ADMINISTRATION AND THE
STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION JOINTLY SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR
AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE EFFECT OF THE USE OF THE PLUG–IN ELECTRIC DRIVE
VEHICLE PERMITS ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION ON THE OPERATION OF HOV
LANES IN THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted. It shall remain effective through September 30, ~~2035~~ 2025, and, at the end of
September 30, ~~2035~~ 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2