START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 169 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 169 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Utilities - Energy Efficiency and Conservation Programs - Energy 
Performance Targets and Low-Income Housing 
 
   
This bill requires the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
procure or provide energy efficiency and conservation (EE&C) programs and services for 
electricity customers for the 2024-2026 EmPOWER Maryland Program cycle, subject to 
specified requirements. The EE&C programs and services must be designed to achieve a 
target annual incremental gross energy savings, compared to 2016, of at least 0.53% in 
2024, 0.72% in 2025, and 1.0% in 2026. The bill also (1) establishes the Green and Healthy 
Task Force, staffed by DHCD; (2) establishes several reporting and planning requirements 
for DHCD and the Public Service Commission (PSC), including that DHCD develop a plan 
to provide energy efficiency retrofits to all low-income households by 2031; and 
(3) requires the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) and the Governor’s 
Office of Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses (GOSBA) to conduct a related 
disparity study by December 31, 2025. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for DHCD increase significantly beginning in 
FY 2024 to meet the bill’s enhanced energy savings requirements – DHCD estimates by 
$39.8 million in FY 2024, increasing to $214.2 million by FY 2028. Special fund revenues 
increase by an amount necessary to cover DHCD’s annual programmatic costs. Special 
fund expenditures for the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) may increase beginning 
in FY 2024. The effect on electricity rates is discussed separately below. 
    
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that they receive 
additional funding under the bill through expanded DHCD programs. The effect on 
electricity rates is discussed separately below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 169/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Provision of EE&C Programs and Services and EmPOWER Maryland 
 
Energy savings to meet the bill’s threshold requirements must be calculated in a specified 
manner; the bill’s target savings apply to all energy types subject to the EmPOWER energy 
savings goals. DHCD may, when calculating the annual incremental gross energy savings 
specified in the bill, include savings achieved through all funding sources to the extent 
consistent with federal law or regulations governing those funding sources. DHCD must 
adopt regulations for weatherization of leased or rented residences to achieve specified 
benefits and goals under the bill. In addition, DHCD may only approve contractors who 
follow specified labor practices, such as paying at least 150% of the State minimum wage, 
providing paid leave, and offering retirement benefits. 
 
DHCD, MEA, and other State agencies must apply for all federal funding that may become 
available to implement the bill. 
 
Plan and Reporting Requirements  
 
The bill establishes the following plan development and reporting requirements for DHCD 
and PSC:  
 
 
By September 1, 2023, DCHD must submit a plan to PSC detailing proposals for 
achieving the electricity savings and demand reduction targets required by the bill 
for 2024. By September 1, 2024, and every three years thereafter, DHCD must 
submit a plan to PSC detailing proposals for achieving the electricity savings and 
demand reduction targets required by the bill for the three subsequent calendar 
years. The plan must include specified information, including anticipated costs, 
projected electricity savings, and a description of the proposed EE&C programs and 
services. PSC must review the plan to determine whether it is adequate for achieving 
the target, and DHCD must provide an update to PSC every six months on plan 
implementation and progress. 
 
 
PSC must work with DHCD to establish the procedures necessary to develop and 
implement a plan for achieving the electricity savings and demand reduction targets 
required by the bill, including securing cooperation from electric companies related 
to funding, communications, referrals, data sharing, and any other cooperation PSC 
determines is necessary. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 169/ Page 3 
 
DHCD must coordinate with the Department of Budget and Management to identify 
additional funding sources to support a possible expansion of programs that support 
a whole-home approach by addressing health and safety upgrades, weatherization, 
energy efficiency, and other general maintenance for low-income housing. The 
coordination must include funding available through various State and federal 
programs, as specified. DHCD must coordinate with members of the Green and 
Healthy Task Force and identify other interested stakeholders to develop the plan. 
By December 31, 2023, DHCD must submit the plan to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. 
 
 
DHCD must report to PSC each year on (1) the amount of funding it receives and is 
projected to receive for energy efficiency and weatherization from the funding 
sources specified in the bill and (2) for the programs that contribute to energy 
efficiency and weatherization, the number of participants served and the amount of 
energy savings, reported in a specified manner. DHCD may satisfy this reporting 
requirement by including the information in its six-month status reports to PSC. A 
related annual reporting requirement is established for PSC using this information. 
 
 
DHCD must collaborate with members of the Green and Healthy Task Force to 
develop a plan, including a budget, a timeline, and potential funding sources, to 
provide energy efficiency retrofits to all low-income households by 2031. DHCD, 
in collaboration with the task force, must submit the plan to the General Assembly 
by December 1, 2023. 
 
Green and Healthy Task Force 
 
The Green and Healthy Task Force must:   
 
 
beginning July 1, 2023, meet quarterly for a period of three years; 
 
 
advance the alignment, branding, and coordination of resources to more effectively 
deliver green and healthy housing for low-income households in the State; 
 
 
examine the public and private resources needed to address the housing needs of 
low-income communities; 
 
 
develop policy and statutory recommendations to eliminate barriers to low-income 
households achieving healthy, energy-efficient, affordable, and low-emissions 
housing; and 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 169/ Page 4 
 
engage with interested parties and collaborate with other entities that can help 
advance the goals of the task force, including experts in the field of healthy, 
energy-efficient, and low-emissions housing. 
 
By July 1, 2024, and each July 1 thereafter through 2027, the task force must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Secretary of Health, the Secretary of the 
Environment, PSC, the Governor, and the General Assembly. 
 
Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. 
 
Study of Measures to Assist Minority and Women-owned Businesses 
 
The certification agency designated by the Board of Public Works under the State’s 
minority business enterprise (MBE) law (i.e., MDOT) and GOSBA, in consultation with 
DHCD, the Office of the Attorney General, and the General Assembly, must initiate a study 
regarding the energy efficiency and conservation services used by DHCD to evaluate 
whether the enactment of remedial measures to assist minority and women-owned 
businesses in the energy efficiency and conservation services industry and market would 
comply with the U.S. Supreme Court decision in City of Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 
488 U.S. 469, and any subsequent federal or constitutional requirements. 
 
By December 31, 2025, MDOT and GOSBA must submit the findings of the study to the 
Legislative Policy Committee so that the General Assembly may review the findings before 
the 2026 session. 
 
Current Law: 
 
EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act 
 
In 2008, the General Assembly passed the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act, 
which set target reductions of 15% in per capita electricity consumption and peak demand, 
respectively, by 2015 from a 2007 baseline. Legislation in 2017 extended the program 
through its 2018-2020 and 2021-2023 program cycles and established a new annual energy 
savings goal of 2.0% per year, based on each electric company’s 2016 sales.  
 
Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) further increased the goal to 2.25% 
per year in 2025 and 2026 and to 2.5% annually thereafter. The Act also specified that the 
core objective of the reductions must include development and implementation of a 
portfolio of mutually reinforcing goals, including greenhouse gas emissions reduction, 
energy savings, net customer benefits, and reaching underserved customers. The Act 
included related administrative requirements in uncodified language. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 169/ Page 5 
DHCD participates in EmPOWER through two special fund programs:  the Low Income 
Energy Efficiency Program (LIEEP) and the Multifamily Energy Efficiency and Housing 
Affordability (MEEHA) Program. LIEEP helps low-income households undertake energy 
conservation projects in their homes at no charge, while MEEHA promotes energy 
efficiency and affordability in the State’s multifamily rental housing developments for 
low- and moderate-income households. Approved program costs are recovered by electric 
companies on customer bills. 
 
Minority Business Enterprises 
 
MDOT is designated in State regulations as the State’s MBE certification agency. In 1989, 
the U.S. Supreme Court held in City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state or local 
MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under the 
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In addition, 
the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the program is 
narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the jurisdiction that 
operates the program. 
 
See the Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program for additional information. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that DHCD expands its existing EmPOWER 
programs in order to meet the bill’s enhanced energy savings requirements. Further, as 
EmPOWER must continue beyond the current 2024-2026 planning cycle under current 
law, the bill’s costs are assumed to be ongoing in nature. DHCD advises that the costs 
below account for other DHCD programs that can be reasonably expected to count their 
energy savings toward the bill’s overall goals. 
 
DHCD’s estimate of the cost associated with significantly expanding its EmPOWER 
programs to meet the bill’s energy savings requirements is approximately $39.8 million in 
fiscal 2024, increasing to $214.2 million by fiscal 2028. For fiscal 2024, the estimated cost 
is comprised mostly of contractual services for energy efficiency upgrades and related costs 
($19.0 million), $16.5 million for grants, and $4.4 million in direct staff (45 in total) and 
other costs. In future fiscal years, DHCD estimates significantly higher contractual and 
grant costs as energy savings goals increase. By fiscal 2028, contractual services costs are 
estimated to be $111.8 million with grant costs of $96.7 million, while administrative and 
other expenditures remain relatively flat at $5.7 million. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services cannot independently verify DHCD’s costs at this 
time; ultimately, costs will depend on how DHCD chooses to implement the bill going 
forward, and the department could choose to do so in a more cost-efficient manner 
(DHCD’s programs are an expensive component of EmPOWER on a per-unit basis). 
Regardless, costs are likely substantial – in the multiple tens of millions range. For context, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 169/ Page 6 
spending on EmPOWER EE&C programs totaled $252.2 million in 2021, with DHCD 
spending $23.0 million of that amount. 
 
DHCD’s costs are assumed to be paid for by EmPOWER surcharge revenues. Accordingly, 
special fund revenues increase significantly – likely by tens of millions annually – from 
additional EmPOWER surcharge revenue to the extent necessary to cover additional costs. 
The amount and timing will depend on the amount and timing of approved cost collection 
by PSC. For context, utility revenue requirements for the EmPOWER EE&C programs 
totaled about $277.4 million in 2021. 
 
To the extent that the State is able to apply for and obtain federal funding to support a 
possible expansion of programs that support a whole-home approach for energy efficiency 
and related upgrades, DHCD expenditures may further increase; however, that funding 
would be unavailable for other related uses and may be available in absence of the bill, so 
this estimate does not reflect any additional federal fund expenditures. 
 
The effect on electricity rates is discussed in the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Other Effects 
 
This estimate assumes that DHCD can provide staff for the Green and Healthy Task Force 
and develop required plans with the additional staff and resources necessary to otherwise 
implement the bill. It further assumes that costs for other agencies related to the bill are 
generally minimal and/or absorbable within existing budgeted resources, with limited 
exceptions. 
 
MEA must apply for federal funding that may become available to implement the bill and 
may have to hire additional staff to do so (assuming the agency would not have otherwise 
applied). Therefore, special fund expenditures for the Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
may increase to hire one additional staff beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
Assuming DHCD can provide certain industry information about its EmPOWER 
contractors, MDOT advises that it can conduct the required disparity study with existing 
resources. If not, Transportation Trust Fund expenditures increase by approximately 
$15,000 to $25,000 for data analysis in fiscal 2024 or 2025, prior to the disparity analysis 
being conducted at no further cost under existing contracts. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local weatherization agencies receive funds through LIEEP to assist 
in program implementation and local housing authorities receive funds through MEEHA. 
Both receive additional funds to expend on energy efficiency and conservation measures 
through those programs under the bill. The effect on electricity rates is discussed in the 
Additional Comments section below. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 169/ Page 7 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses engaged in weatherization and energy saving 
projects for DHCD benefit from a significant increase in program expenditures, although 
such businesses must comply with the specified labor practices, including paying 150% of 
the State minimum wage, providing paid leave, and offering retirement benefits. The effect 
on electricity rates is discussed in the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Additional Comments:  The EmPOWER surcharge is assessed on utility customers to pay 
for the program. Accordingly, all electricity customers – including the State, local 
governments, and small businesses – will ultimately pay for additional expenditures 
incurred by DHCD under the bill and funded through EmPOWER when those costs are 
recovered by electric companies through an increase in electricity rates. The timing and 
amount of rate recovery is unknown, although the bill represents a substantial increase in 
overall EmPOWER costs to be recovered. Of note, DHCD EmPOWER expenditures are 
typically funded by residential ratepayers. 
 
Although the General Assembly passed similar legislation in the 2022 session 
(Senate Bill 524 and House Bill 108), the Governor vetoed the bills. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 524 and HB 108 of 2022; SB 462 and HB 379 of 2021; and SB 740 and HB 982 of 
2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 144 (Senator Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland 
Energy Administration; Department of General Services; Public Service Commission; 
Department of Human Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 169/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 26, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 169/ Page 9 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. MDOT is 
the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
In August 2013, GOSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2023. GOSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total +2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 169/ Page 10 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require GOSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the 
State’s MBE program, the State conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is 
continued evidence that MBEs are underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The disparity study completed in 2017 serves as the basis for the most recent 
reauthorization of the MBE program. It found continued and ongoing disparities in the 
overall annual wages, business earnings, and rates of business formation between 
nonminority males and minorities and women in Maryland. For instance, average annual 
wages for African Americans (both men and women) were 37% lower than for comparable 
nonminority males; average annual wages for nonminority women were 33% lower than 
for comparable nonminority males. It also found continued disparities in the use of MBEs 
by the State compared to their availability in the marketplace to perform work in designated 
categories of work. For instance, African American-owned construction businesses were 
paid 5.1% of State construction contract dollars, but they made up 10.3% of the 
construction sector in the relevant State marketplace. Nonminority women-owned 
construction businesses were paid 7.5% of State construction contract dollars but made up 
13.7% of the construction sector. According to the analysis, these differences were large 
and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; Chapter 117 of 2022, which 
reauthorized the program for the ninth time since its inception, required a new disparity 
study to be completed by September 2023 to inform the subsequent reauthorization 
process. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation rates for major Executive Branch agencies 
based on contract awards made during fiscal 2021, the most recent year for which data is 
available. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 169/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2021 
 
Cabinet Agency 
% Participation 
Aging 
0.1% 
Agriculture 
5.0% 
Budget and Management 
1.0% 
Commerce 
2.2% 
Education 
4.4% 
Environment 
33.4% 
Executive Department 
2.2% 
General Services 
15.3% 
Health 
3.6% 
Higher Education Commission 
0.7% 
Housing and Community Development 
22.6% 
Human Services 
NA 
Information Technology 
6.0% 
Juvenile Services 
12.6% 
Labor 
3.3% 
Military 
1.4% 
Natural Resources 
1.2% 
Planning 
1.2% 
State Police 
8.2% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
33.3% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
21.5% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
32.8% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
28.20% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
17.8% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
24.5% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
23.9% 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.3% 
Statewide Total1 
17.2% 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
NA:  Not Available/Did Not Report 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 169/ Page 12 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A socially disadvantaged individual is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An economically disadvantaged 
individual is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2023 is $1,995,008. 
 

END OF PAGE 12