START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 141 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 141 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government – Commission on LGBTQIA+ Affairs – Alterations 
 
 
This bill renames the Commission on LGBTQ Affairs to be the Commission on 
LGBTQIA+ Affairs and makes numerous changes to reflect the new name and mandate of 
the commission. The bill also alters provisions regarding membership of the commission. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes, including expense reimbursements for additional 
members, can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The Commission on LGBTQ Affairs – a unit within the 
Governor’s Office of Community Initiatives – is renamed as the Commission on 
LGBTQIA+ Affairs. “LGBTQIA+” means lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or 
questioning, intersex, asexual, agender, or aromantic, and additional identities.  
 
Under current law, the commission consists of 15 members who serve four-year terms. 
Members of the commission may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the 
State budget. The bill increases the number of commission members to 21 and establishes 
that the terms of the members are staggered, as specified. Among other qualifications, 
members under current law are required, to the extent practicable, to reflect the gender, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 141/ Page 2 
racial, ethnic, and geographic diversity of the State; the bill adds that age, gender identity 
or expression, ancestral, national origin, color, disability, religious, sex, sexual orientation, 
and socioeconomic diversity must also be considered.  
 
Under current law, the commission must (1) assess the challenges facing LGBTQ 
communities; (2) collect data across State agencies on the implementation of 
LGBTQ-inclusive policies and complaints alleging discrimination based on sexual 
orientation or gender identity; (3) study and establish best practices for inclusion of 
LGBTQ individuals and communities; (4) inform the Executive and Legislative branches 
of State government of issues concerning women and LGBTQ persons; (5) offer testimony 
on issues concerning women and LGBTQ persons before legislative and administrative 
bodies; (6) act as a clearinghouse for activities to avoid duplication of efforts; (7) create 
surveys and appoint advisory committees in several specified fields; and (8) publish an 
annual report, and any other material the commission considers necessary, that includes 
recommendations on policies for LGBTQ adults and youth that work to end discriminatory 
practices in the State. The bill repeals requirements for the commission to specifically 
inform specified branches of State government of and offer testimony on issues concerning 
women. 
 
Consistent with the commission’s new name, the bill also replaces above references with 
“LGBTQIA+”, thereby updating the mandate of the commission to include issues 
impacting questioning, intersex, asexual, agender, or aromantic, and additional identities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 251 (Senator M. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2