START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 174

Chapter 174

(House Bill 150)

AN ACT concerning

Housing and Community Development – Adaptive Reuse

FOR the purpose of establishing that adaptive reuse of existing buildings to create
affordable multifamily housing is an eligible use of certain financial assistance
provided by the Department of Housing and Community Development; requiring the
Department to notify applicants for certain financial assistance that adaptive reuse
is an eligible use of funds; and generally relating to the creation and financing of
affordable multifamily housing through the adaptive reuse of existing buildings.

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 1–102 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 1. General Provisions”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

Subtitle 1. [Definitions] GENERAL PROVISIONS.

1–102.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ADAPTIVE REUSE” MEANS THE RETROFITTING AND
REPURPOSING OF AN EXISTING BUILDING TO DEVELOP NEW DWELLING UNITS.

(3) “AFFORDABLE MULTIFAMILY HOUSING” MEANS A MULTIFAMILY
DWELLING WHERE ALL OR A PORTION OF THE DWELLING UNITS ARE RESERVED FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHOSE HOUSEHOLD INCOME IS LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO A CERTAIN
LIMIT ON MAXIMUM HOUSEHOLD INCOME.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THIS SECTION
APPLIES TO ANY PROGRAM OPERATED BY THE DEPARTMENT THAT AWARDS LOANS
THAT MAY BE USED TO DEVELOP AFFORDABLE MULTIFAMILY HOUSING.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 174 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IF THE LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING A PARTICULAR
PROGRAM ESTABLISH MORE SPECIFIC RULES REGARDING THE USE OF LOAN
PROCEEDS FOR ADAPTIVE REUSE, THE MORE SPECIFIC RULES SHALL APPLY.

(C) (1) ADAPTIVE REUSE OF A PROPERTY TO DEVELOP AFFORDABLE
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING IS AN ELIGIBLE USE OF THE PROCEEDS OF A LOAN COVERED
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) (I) THE SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL NOTIFY APPLICANTS FOR A LOAN COVERED UNDER THIS
SECTION THAT ADAPTIVE REUSE OF A PROPERTY TO DEVELOP AFFORDABLE
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING IS AN ELIGIBLE USE OF LOAN PROCEEDS.

(II) THE NOTICE REQUIREMENT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY WHEN AN INDIVIDUAL APPLIES FOR A LOAN
UNDER A DEPARTMENT PROGRAM THAT DOES NOT FOCUS ON HOUSING, INCLUDING
PROGRAMS WITHIN THE DIVISION OF NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2