START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 124 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 124 
(The Speaker, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Mandated Reports - Revisions 
 
   
This bill repeals specified statutory reporting requirements that are obsolete, duplicative, 
or unnecessary. It also consolidates, reschedules, and clarifies specified reporting 
requirements for the purposes of efficiency and practicality and makes technical and 
stylistic changes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and has no direct effect on State 
finances. Some agencies may experience operational efficiencies as a result of the repeal, 
rescheduling, or consolidation of existing reporting requirements.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  State law requires State agencies and other statutory entities 
to report to the General Assembly on specified activities, services, and trends. 
Chapter 58 of 2015 mandated the Department of Legislative Services (DLS), in 
consultation with State agencies, to periodically review and make recommendations 
regarding specified reports that may no longer be warranted. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 124/ Page 2 
During the 2022 interim, DLS conducted a review of the mandated reports in State law to 
identify requirements that have become obsolete, duplicative, impractical, inefficient, or 
otherwise unnecessary. This bill is a direct result of that effort.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 131 (The President) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2