START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 625

Chapter 625

(House Bill 186)

AN ACT concerning

Victim Services Programs – Supplementing Federal Funding and Support
(Victim Services Stabilization Act)

FOR the purpose of providing for the funding of certain victim services programs; requiring
the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services to help
support certain programs providing services for victims of crime; requiring the Office
to consult with certain individuals and organizations regarding the allocation of
certain funding; requiring the Governor to include certain funding in the State
budget; and generally relating to victim services programs.

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–934 to be under the new part “Part V. Federal Victim Services Programs
Funding Supplement”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–932. RESERVED.

11–933. RESERVED.

PART V. FEDERAL VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS FUNDING SUPPLEMENT.

11–934.

(A) THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION IS TO PROVIDE FOR DEVELOPMENT,
SUPPORT, AND CONTINUITY OF VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS TO PROVIDE
TRAUMA–INFORMED, HIGH–QUALITY SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME AND TO
STABILIZE FUNDING AND SUPPORT FOR VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS BY
SUPPLEMENTING FEDERAL FUNDING FOR VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS WHEN
FEDERAL VICTIMS OF CRIME ACT FUNDING FLUCTUATES.

(B) (1) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL HELP SUPPORT PROGRAMS PROVIDING SERVICES FOR
VICTIMS OF CRIME THROUGHOUT THE STATE.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 625 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS SHALL BE DEVELOPED AND
LOCATED TO FACILITATE THEIR USE BY ALLEGED VICTIMS RESIDING IN
SURROUNDING AREAS.

(C) (1) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES MAY AWARD GRANTS TO PUBLIC OR PRIVATE NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS TO OPERATE THE VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE PROGRAMS SHALL PROVIDE SERVICES TO VICTIMS OF CRIME AS AUTHORIZED
BY THE FEDERAL VICTIMS OF CRIME ACT AND RELATED REGULATIONS.

(3) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES:

(I) MAY NOT REQUIRE VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS TO
PROVIDE A MATCH FOR STATE FUNDS EXPENDED; AND

(II) SHALL ENSURE THAT STATE FUNDS AWARDED UNDER THIS
SECTION MAY BE USED AS A MATCH FOR FEDERAL VICTIMS OF CRIME ACT FUNDS.

(II) SHALL ENSURE THAT STATE FUNDS AWARDED UNDER THIS
SECTION:

1. ARE ADMINISTERED IN A UNIFIED PROCESS WITH
FEDERAL VICTIMS OF CRIME ACT FUNDS, WITH SEPARATE FINANCIAL REPORTING
AS NECESSARY TO COMPLY WITH FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS;

2. MAY BE USED AS A MATCH FOR FEDERAL VICTIMS OF
CRIME ACT FUNDS; AND

3. MAY NOT BE USED FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS OR
CAPITAL PROGRAMMING OF ANY KIND.

(D) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL REGULARLY CONSULT, COLLABORATE WITH, AND
CONSIDER THE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING ALLOCATION OF FUNDING FROM:

(1) THE FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED STATE SEXUAL ASSAULT
COALITION;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 625

(2) THE FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED STATE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
COALITION;

(3) THE STATE ALLIANCE OF CHILD ADVOCACY CENTERS;

(4) STATE’S ATTORNEYS’ OFFICES;

(5) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS ASSISTING VICTIMS OF CRIME;

(6) CIVIL LEGAL SERVICES ORGANIZATIONS ASSISTING VICTIMS OF
CRIME; AND

(7) REPRESENTATIVES OF ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDING SERVICES TO
SURVIVORS OF CHILD ABUSE, ELDER ABUSE, HUMAN TRAFFICKING, HOMICIDE, OR
OTHER VICTIMS OF CRIME.

(E) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL PRIORITIZE CONTINUITY AND STABILITY OF CRIME VICTIM
SERVICES AND EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDING IN EVERY JURISDICTION IN
THE STATE.

(F) (1) MONEY FOR THE VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS SHALL BE AS
PROVIDED IN THE ANNUAL STATE BUDGET AND SHALL BE USED TO SUPPLEMENT,
BUT NOT SUPPLANT, MONEY THAT THE PROGRAMS RECEIVE FROM OTHER SOURCES.

(2) IN EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION THAT, TOGETHER WITH THE AMOUNT
RECEIVED UNDER THE FEDERAL VICTIMS OF CRIME ACT IN THE PRIOR YEAR,
TOTALS AN AGGREGATE $60,000,000 FOR THE VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAMS
FUNDED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(G) THE ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL INCLUDE SUBMIT A REPORT ON THE VICTIM SERVICES
PROGRAMS IN THE ANNUAL REPORT SUBMITTED BY THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF
CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES ALL VICTIM SERVICES
PROGRAMS AND GRANTEES AND FUNDS AWARDED UNDER THIS SECTION TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3