START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 346

Chapter 346

(House Bill 113)

AN ACT concerning

Worcester County – Alcoholic Beverages – Ocean City Promoter’s License

FOR the purpose of establishing an Ocean City promoter’s license in Worcester County;
authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Worcester County to issue the
license to a for–profit organization to sell and serve beer, wine, and liquor at an
entertainment event that is held on certain premises located in the Town of Ocean
City; and generally relating to alcoholic beverage licenses in Worcester County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 33–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 33–1310
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

33–102.

This title applies only in Worcester County.

33–1310.

(A) THERE IS AN OCEAN CITY PROMOTER’S LICENSE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE TO A FOR–PROFIT ORGANIZATION
TO SELL AND SERVE BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR AT AN ENTERTAINMENT EVENT THAT
IS HELD ON A PREMISES THAT IS:

(1) LOCATED WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE TOWN OF
OCEAN CITY;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 346 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) OWNED BY THE TOWN OF OCEAN CITY; AND

(3) DESIGNATED AND APPROVED IN WRITING BY THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL OF OCEAN CITY OCEAN CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT:

(1) RESTRICT THE NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED UNDER THIS
SECTION EACH YEAR; AND

(2) ESTABLISH THE REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDUCTING THE SALE AND
SERVICE OF BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR AT THE EVENT DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B)
OF THIS SECTION, INCLUDING HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS TO BE MET BY A
LICENSE HOLDER.

(D) AN APPLICANT FOR THE LICENSE SHALL SUBMIT AN APPLICATION
UNDER OATH ON THE FORM THAT THE BOARD PROVIDES.

(E) THE LICENSE FEE IS $5,000 PER ENTERTAINMENT EVENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2