START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 491

Chapter 491

(House Bill 188)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Wildlife Advisory Commission – Membership

FOR the purpose of increasing the membership of the Wildlife Advisory Commission;
requiring the Governor to appoint a member to the Wildlife Advisory Commission
who is an academic researcher with certain expertise; requiring the membership of
the Commission to include representation from certain stakeholder communities;
and generally relating to the Wildlife Advisory Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 1–102(c)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

1–102.

(c) (2) (i) 1. [The] SUBJECT TO SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF THIS
SUBPARAGRAPH, THE Wildlife Advisory Commission is composed of nine 10 members
appointed by the Governor.

2. THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT ONE MEMBER WHO
IS AN ACADEMIC RESEARCHER WITH EXPERTISE IN WILDLIFE BIOLOGY, WILDLIFE
CONSERVATION, WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT, OR ECOLOGY.

(ii) 1. The Governor shall solicit nominations for vacancies on
the Wildlife Advisory Commission from individuals or organizations that promote the
future of hunting and individuals or organizations that promote the preservation of wildlife
in the State, with geographical distribution being a prime consideration for filling
vacancies.

2. There shall be representation from [the]:

A. THE farming community;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 491 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

B. THE HUNTING OR FISHING COMMUNITIES
COMMUNITY;

C. THE WILDLIFE PRESERVATION COMMUNITY; AND

D. THE PASSIVE WILDLIFE RECREATION COMMUNITY.

(iii) The term of a member is 4 years.

(iv) A member may not serve more than 2 terms on the Commission.

(v) The terms of members are staggered so that:

1. 3 shall end in 1987 2023;

2. 3 shall end in 1988; and 2024;

3. 3 shall end in 1989 2025; AND

4. 1 SHALL END IN 2028.

(vi) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.

(vii) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only
for the rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act may not alter the
term of a member of the Wildlife Advisory Commission that is serving as of the effective
date of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Governor shall appoint
one member to the Wildlife Advisory Commission in accordance with § 1–102(c)(2)(i) of the
Natural Resources Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act. The member shall serve for
a term of 4 years which shall begin on July 1, 2024, and shall terminate at the end of June
30, 2028, and the member shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2