START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 186 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 186 
(Delegate B. Barnes) 
Appropriations and Judiciary 
Budget and Taxation and Judicial Proceedings 
 
Victim Services Programs – Supplementing Federal Funding and Support 
(Victim Services Stabilization Act) 
 
 
This bill (1) requires the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services (GOCPYVS) to help support programs providing services for victims of crime 
throughout the State; (2) authorizes GOCPYVS to award grants to public or private 
nonprofit organizations to operate the victim services programs; (3) requires money for the 
victim services programs to be provided in the annual State budget (to supplement, but not 
supplant, money that the programs receive from other sources); and (4) requires the 
Governor, in each fiscal year, to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation that, 
together with the amount received under the federal Victims of Crime Act (VOCA) in the 
prior year, totals an aggregate $60.0 million for the victim services programs funded under 
the bill. By December 31, each year, the Executive Director of GOCPYVS must report to 
the General Assembly on all victim services programs and grantees and funds awarded 
under the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the impact in any given year depends on the amount received under 
VOCA in the prior year, general fund expenditures and State revenues are not anticipated 
to be affected, under the assumptions discussed below. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 186/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The victim services programs must (1) be developed and located to 
facilitate their use by alleged victims residing in surrounding areas and (2) with specified 
exceptions, provide services to victims of crime as authorized by VOCA and related 
regulations. 
 
GOCPYVS may not require victim services programs to provide a match for State funds 
expended. In addition, GOCPYVS must ensure that State funds awarded under the bill 
(1) are administered in a unified process with federal VOCA funds, as specified; (2) may 
be used as a match for VOCA funds; and (3) may not be used for capital projects or capital 
programming of any kind. GOCPYVS must regularly consult, collaborate with, and 
consider the recommendations regarding allocation of funding from specified entities. In 
addition, GOCPYVS must prioritize continuity and stability of crime victim services and 
equitable distribution of funding in every jurisdiction in the State. 
 
Current Law:  GOCPYVS serves as a coordinating office that advises the Governor on 
criminal justice strategies. The office plans, promotes, and funds efforts with government 
entities, private organizations, and the community to advance public policy, enhance public 
safety, reduce crime and juvenile delinquency, and serve victims. Chapter 422 of 2018 
established the Victim Services Unit in GOCPYVS to coordinate State responsibilities 
concerning services to victims, including the collection of restitution and reimbursements 
for sexual assault forensic evidence examinations and other eligible expenses for cases 
involving rape, sexual offenses, or child sexual abuse. Oversight functions and operations 
relating to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board and the Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Fund were transferred from the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services to GOCPYVS. 
 
The Crime Victims Fund, established by the federal VOCA of 1984, is a major funding 
source for victim services throughout the country. The fund is comprised of revenues from 
criminal fines, forfeited bail bonds, penalty fees, and special assessments collected by 
U.S. Attorney’s Offices, U.S. Courts, and the Bureau of Prisons. The purpose of the VOCA 
program is to improve the treatment of victims of crime by providing victims with the 
assistance and services necessary to aid their restoration after a violent criminal act and to 
support and aid victims as they move through the criminal justice process. Victim 
assistance includes services such as crisis intervention, counseling, emergency 
transportation to court, temporary housing, and criminal justice support and advocacy. As 
shown in Exhibit 1, the amount of funding awarded to the State through VOCA fluctuates 
annually. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 186/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Federal Victims of Crime Act Funding Awarded 
 
Federal Fiscal Year 
Award Amount 
FY 2018 
$61,140,519 
FY 2019 
41,161,674 
FY 2020 
30,398,592 
FY 2021 
18,937,787 
FY 2022 
26,364,732 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill’s mandated appropriation requires funding to be included in 
the annual budget that, together with the federal amount received, totals an aggregate 
$60.0 million. The actual fiscal impact of the bill depends on the amount awarded to the 
State through VOCA in the prior year. However, this analysis assumes that funding under 
VOCA remains level with federal fiscal 2022 ($26.4 million). Although general funds are 
needed to ensure that funding totals the mandated aggregate $60.0 million, the fiscal 2024 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $35.0 million in general funds for 
crime victim assistance, which is consistent with general fund support provided in 
fiscal 2023. This estimate further assumes that, even in the absence of the bill, the level of 
general fund support in fiscal 2023 and 2024 would have continued. Accordingly, based 
on these assumptions, general fund expenditures are not anticipated to be affected. The 
Department of Legislative Services notes, however, that should federal funding awards 
decrease beyond that received in the most recent federal fiscal year, general fund 
expenditures increase accordingly to meet the mandated funding amount in the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 148 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Budget and Taxation and 
Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 186/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4