START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 302

Chapter 302

(House Bill 172)

AN ACT concerning

Health Occupations – Licensed Athletic Trainers – Dry Needling Approval

FOR the purpose of authorizing the State Board of Physicians to approve licensed athletic
trainers to perform dry needling as a specialized task; and generally relating to
licensed athletic trainers and dry needling.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 14–5D–01(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 14–5D–01(e–1), 14–5D–11.4, and 14–5D–14(a)(30)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 14–5D–14(a)(28) and (29)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

14–5D–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(E–1) “DRY NEEDLING” MEANS AN INTRAMUSCULAR MANUAL THERAPY THAT:

(1) INVOLVES THE INSERTION OF ONE OR MORE SOLID NEEDLES OR A
~~MECHANICAL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ INTO THE MUSCLE AND RELATED TISSUES TO EFFECT CHANGE
IN THE MUSCLE AND RELATED TISSUES;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 302 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) REQUIRES ONGOING EVALUATION, ASSESSMENT, AND
REEVALUATION OF AN IMPAIRMENT;

(3) IS USED ONLY IN PARTS OF THE BODY WITH NEUROMUSCULAR OR
MUSCULOSKELETAL LINKS TO AN IMPAIRMENT; AND

(4) IS NOT PERFORMED FOR:

(I) THE PURPOSES OF ACUPUNCTURE AS DEFINED IN § 1A–101
OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

(II) ANY PURPOSE OUTSIDE OF THE SCOPE OF PRACTICE OF
ATHLETIC TRAINERS.

14–5D–11.4.

(A) A LICENSED ATHLETIC TRAINER SHALL BE APPROVED BY THE BOARD
BEFORE THE LICENSED ATHLETIC TRAINER MAY PERFORM DRY NEEDLING AS A
SPECIALIZED TASK.

(B) (1) THE BOARD SHALL ISSUE AN APPROVAL TO PERFORM DRY
NEEDLING TO A LICENSED ATHLETIC TRAINER WHO PROVIDES PROOF OF
COMPLETION OF AT LEAST 80 HOURS OF INSTRUCTION IN A CONTINUING
EDUCATION COURSE APPROVED BY:

(I) THE NATIONAL ATHLETIC TRAINERS’ ASSOCIATION;

(II) THE BOARD OF CERTIFICATION FOR THE ATHLETIC
TRAINER; OR

(III) THE UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES.

(2) OF THE 80 HOURS OF INSTRUCTION REQUIRED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AT LEAST 40 HOURS OF INSTRUCTION SHALL
BE IN THE FOLLOWING COURSE CONTENT AREAS:

(I) THEORY AND APPLICATION OF DRY NEEDLING;

(II) DRY NEEDLING TECHNIQUE, INCLUDING SPINE AND
EXTREMITIES;

(III) DRY NEEDLING INDICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 302

(IV) INFECTION CONTROL, THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION’S BLOODBORNE PATHOGEN PROTOCOL, AND SAFE
HANDLING OF NEEDLES;

(V) EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE PROCEDURES
RELATED TO COMPLICATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DRY NEEDLING; AND

(VI) APPROPRIATE DOCUMENTATION OF DRY NEEDLING.

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION, OF
OF THE 80 HOURS OF INSTRUCTION REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AT LEAST 40 HOURS SHALL BE PRACTICAL, HANDS–ON INSTRUCTION
IN THE APPLICATION AND TECHNIQUE OF DRY NEEDLING THAT IS COMPLETED
UNDER THE ~~SUPERVISION~~ GUIDANCE OF A LICENSED HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER
WHO HAS:

(I) COMPLETED ALL REQUISITE COURSEWORK UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION IS APPROVED TO PERFORM DRY NEEDLING; AND

(II) PRACTICED HAS PRACTICED DRY NEEDLING FOR AT LEAST
5 YEARS.

(4) THE INSTRUCTION REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE AN ASSESSMENT OF THE LICENSED ATHLETIC TRAINER’S COMPETENCY TO
PERFORM DRY NEEDLING THAT IS PERFORMED BY THE INSTRUCTOR OF THE
APPROVED COURSE.

14–5D–14.

(a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
on the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

(28) Violates an order of the Board or a disciplinary panel, including any
condition of probation; [or]

(29) Fails to complete a criminal history records check under § 14–308.1 of
this title; OR

(30) PERFORMS DRY NEEDLING WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF THE
BOARD ISSUED UNDER § 14–5D–11.4 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 302 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4