START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 163 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 163 
(Delegate Otto) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Law Enforcement Officers' Pension System - Crisfield Police Department 
 
 
This bill requires, if the Crisfield Police Department becomes a participating governmental 
unit (PGU) in the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pensions System (LEOPS), that membership 
in LEOPS be mandatory for all current law enforcement officers employed by the 
Crisfield Police Department. It further entitles current Crisfield law enforcement officers 
to eligibility and creditable service in LEOPS for their prior service in the Crisfield Police 
Department. The bill also specifies the provisions in current law that govern the transfer of 
credit from the Employees’ Pension System (EPS) to LEOPS for affected members. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only PGUs. 
  
Local Effect:  Contingent on the City of Crisfield electing to participate in LEOPS as a 
PGU, pension liabilities for the City of Crisfield increase by $1.0 million, and total 
employer contributions increase by $120,700, as of the city’s decision to join LEOPS. No 
material effect on pension liabilities or employer contributions for other LEOPS PGUs. No 
effect on local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  LEOPS was established on July 1, 1990, with participation 
a condition of employment for specified public safety officers. Members of LEOPS earn 
2.0% of their average final compensation (AFC) for each year of creditable service. Vested 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 163/ Page 2 
members qualify for a normal service retirement benefit at age 50 or with at least 25 years 
of creditable service. However, the normal service allowance is capped at 65% of AFC, 
meaning that members stop accruing benefits after 32.5 years of service (2% x 32.5 = 65%). 
Chapter 784 of 2018 increased the cap on LEOPS normal service retirement from 60% to 
65% of AFC. 
 
Counties and municipal corporations in the State are eligible to participate in LEOPS as 
PGUs. If 60% of the law enforcement officers in an eligible governmental unit petition to 
become members of LEOPS, the legislative body of the eligible local government may 
approve their participation.  
 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs the conditions under which 
members of one State or local pension system can transfer service credit to another State 
or local pension system. Under Title 37, a “new system” means the system into which the 
member is transferring service credit, and “previous system” means the system from which 
the individual is transferring. Members transferring creditable service from EPS to another 
system must pay the difference in the member contribution rates in effect for the period of 
service covered by the transferred service credit, plus interest. They are also refunded any 
accumulated contributions in the previous system that are in excess of the member 
contributions required by the new system. As the City of Crisfield participates in the 
noncontributory benefit within EPS, participating members have not made any member 
contributions for their time in EPS. Under Title 37, they would have to make payments 
equivalent to 7% of their compensation for every year of past service, plus interest. 
 
However, the bill exempts the transfer of service for Crisfield law enforcement officers 
from Title 37, so the individuals who are transferring credit do not have to make up the 
difference between employee contributions for their past service. Instead, the 
Crisfield Police Department is responsible for making up the difference through annual 
liability payments to LEOPS. The Department of Legislative Services notes that normally 
a PGU does not require authorizing legislation to join LEOPS; however, Crisfield requires 
State legislation in order to exempt its members from Title 37.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The City of Crisfield currently participates as a PGU in the 
noncontributory EPS benefit for its employees, including law enforcement officers. If 
Crisfield elects to allow the Crisfield Police Department to become a LEOPS PGU, the 
State Retirement Agency advises that eight law enforcement officers with a covered payroll 
of $407,861 from the Crisfield Police Department are eligible for the transfer of 
membership and service credit under the bill. The employer contribution rate increases 
from 7.79% pay in EPS to 36.91% in LEOPS. Therefore, Crisfield’s annual employer 
contribution initially increases by $118,769 each year.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 163/ Page 3 
In addition, the eight officers account for $380,989 in accrued pension liabilities under EPS 
but are projected to account for $1.4 million in liabilities after transferring to LEOPS. As 
a result, total pension liabilities for Crisfield increase by $1.0 million. The unfunded 
portion of those liabilities is amortized, resulting in an annual “new entrant liability” 
payment of $1,888, which is added to the annual employer contribution discussed above. 
Therefore, Crisfield’s total employer contribution increases by approximately $120,700 
annually. Any increase in employer contributions would begin upon the election to join 
LEOPS. 
 
Based on the actuarial analysis conducted by the system’s actuary, total employer liabilities 
within the municipal LEOPS pool increase only marginally, resulting in no discernible 
increase in employer contributions for other PGUs already in LEOPS. 
 
Additional Comments:  If the Crisfield Police Department becomes a LEOPS PGU, 
participating members will contribute 7% of their compensation annually, compared with 
not making any member contributions under the noncontributory EPS benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 958 and HB 1445 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 68 (Senator Carozza) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3