START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 187

Chapter 187

(House Bill 149)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Electricians Act – Revisions

FOR the purpose of altering the entity that must administer or approve an apprenticeship
program for electricians; substituting the term “uninsured” for the term “inactive” in
certain provisions of law relating to liability insurance requirements for certain
electricians; prohibiting a certain electrician from contracting to provide electrical
services unless the electrical work is covered by certain liability insurance; specifying
who is authorized and required to purchase certain insurance; requiring the State
Board of Electricians to specify on each license whether the license holder meets the
insurance requirements of certain provisions of this Act; and generally relating to
electricians and liability insurance requirements.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 6–205(b), 6–304, 6–307.1, 6–311, 6–312, 6–313, and 6–604
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

6–205.

(b) The continuing education requirements adopted under this section shall:

(1) be based on the National Electrical Code or any local variants adopted
by a local board;

(2) consist of a course or training on practical techniques, installation
procedures, or other relevant topics; and

(3) be administered by:

(i) a college or an apprenticeship program approved by the
[Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council] DIVISION OF WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT LEARNING or the federal Office of Apprenticeship;

(ii) a state or nationally recognized training program; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 187 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) another person approved by the State Board.

6–304.

(a) To qualify for a State license, an applicant shall meet the requirements of this
section.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, an applicant for a master
electrician license shall have been engaged or employed regularly and principally in
providing electrical services for all types of electrical equipment and apparatuses for at
least 7 years while under the direction and supervision of:

(i) a master electrician; or

(ii) a similarly qualified employee of a governmental unit.

(2) (i) The State Board may allow an applicant up to 3 years of credit
toward the experience required under paragraph (1) of this subsection, if the State Board
determines that the applicant has completed a formal course of study or professional
training in electrical installation comparable to the required experience.

(ii) The State Board shall credit toward the experience required
under paragraph (1) of this subsection an applicant’s work as part of a successfully
completed electrician apprenticeship program approved by the [Maryland Apprenticeship
and Training Council] DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT
LEARNING or the federal Office of Apprenticeship.

(c) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, an applicant for a
journeyperson electrician license shall have been engaged or employed regularly and
principally in providing electrical services for all types of electrical equipment and
apparatuses for at least 4 years while under the direction and supervision of:

(i) a master electrician; or

(ii) an employee of a governmental unit who is similarly qualified as
a master electrician licensed under this title.

(2) The State Board shall credit toward the experience required under
paragraph (1) of this subsection an applicant’s work as part of a successfully completed
electrician apprenticeship program approved by the [Maryland Apprenticeship and
Training Council] DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT LEARNING
or the federal Office of Apprenticeship.

(d) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the applicant shall pass an
examination given by the State Board under this subtitle.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 187

(e) The State Board may investigate the qualifications of each applicant to
determine whether the applicant meets the requirements of this section.

6–307.1.

The State Board shall waive the experience and examination requirements for an
applicant for a journeyperson electrician license if the applicant:

(1) (i) provides written proof of 4 years of work experience providing
electrical services under the control and direction of a master electrician; and

(ii) submits an application for a license to the State Board on or
before December 31, 2022; or

(2) provides written proof that the applicant has successfully completed an
electrician apprenticeship program approved by the [Maryland Apprenticeship and
Training Council] DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT LEARNING
or the federal Office of Apprenticeship that consists of:

(i) at least 576 classroom hours; and

(ii) 8,000 hours of work experience.

6–311.

(a) The State Board shall place a State licensee on [inactive] UNINSURED status
and issue an [inactive] UNINSURED status certificate to the State licensee, if the State
licensee:

(1) submits to the State Board an application for [inactive] UNINSURED
status on the form that the State Board provides;

(2) pays to the State Board any applicable [inactive] UNINSURED status
application fee;

(3) except for the insurance requirements of § 6–604 of this title, qualifies
for an active State license; and

(4) returns the State license to the State Board.

(b) The State Board shall place an applicant for an initial State license on
[inactive] UNINSURED status and issue an [inactive] UNINSURED status certificate to the
applicant, if the applicant:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 187 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) submits to the State Board an application for [inactive] UNINSURED
status on the form that the State Board provides;

(2) pays to the State Board an [inactive] UNINSURED status application
fee set by the State Board; and

(3) except for MEETING the continuing education requirement [of]
ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE BOARD UNDER § 6–310(c) of this subtitle and the
insurance requirements of § 6–604 of this title, qualifies for an active State license.

(c) (1) A master electrician licensee on [inactive] UNINSURED status may not
use a State license to obtain a local registration for providing electrical services as a master
electrician in a local jurisdiction of the State.

(2) In a county that requires a State master electrician license, a licensee
on [inactive] UNINSURED status may [not] ONLY provide electrical services as a [master]
JOURNEYPERSON electrician.

(d) (1) Unless the individual applies for another 2–year term as provided in
this subsection, an individual on [inactive] UNINSURED status loses that status on the
expiration of the [inactive] UNINSURED status.

(2) (i) At least 1 month before the [inactive] UNINSURED status of an
individual expires, the State Board shall mail or electronically transmit to the individual:

1. a renewal application form; and

2. a notice that states:

A. the date on which the [inactive] UNINSURED status
expires; and

B. the amount of the renewal fee.

(ii) If an electronic transmission under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph is returned to the State Board as undeliverable, the State Board shall mail to
the individual, at the last known address of the individual, the materials required under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph within 10 business days of the date the State Board
received the notice that the electronic transmission was undeliverable.

(3) Before the [inactive] UNINSURED status expires, an individual on
[inactive] UNINSURED status periodically may renew it for an additional 2–year term, if
the individual:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 187

(i) otherwise is entitled to be placed on [inactive] UNINSURED
status;

(ii) except for an electrical inspector, pays to the State Board a
renewal fee set by the State Board; [and]

(iii) submits to the State Board a renewal application on the form
that the State Board provides; AND

(IV) MEETS THE CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS
ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE BOARD UNDER § 6–310(C) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) After an [inactive] UNINSURED status expires, the former licensee may
reapply for [inactive] UNINSURED status only if the former licensee:

(i) otherwise is entitled to be placed on [inactive] UNINSURED
status;

(ii) pays to the State Board a reapplication fee set by the State
Board; and

(iii) reapplies to the State Board for [inactive] UNINSURED status
within 2 years after initial expiration of [inactive] UNINSURED status on a form that the
State Board provides.

(5) The State Board shall renew the [inactive] UNINSURED status of each
individual or grant the reapplication for [inactive] UNINSURED status of each former
licensee who meets the requirements of this subsection.

(e) If [a former licensee] AN INDIVIDUAL WHO WAS FORMERLY on [inactive]
UNINSURED status who has failed to renew the [inactive] UNINSURED status within 2
years of its expiration reapplies for that status, the State Board shall require the [former
licensee] INDIVIDUAL to comply with the requirements for obtaining a State license under
§§ 6–304 and 6–307 of this subtitle and § 6–503 of this title as well as the requirements for
[inactive] UNINSURED status under this section.

(f) The State Board shall reactivate the State license of an individual who is on
[inactive] UNINSURED status, if the individual:

(1) meets the renewal requirements that are in effect when the individual
requests the reactivation of the State license;

(2) submits to the State Board an application for reactivation on the form
that the State Board provides; and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 187 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) pays to the State Board a reactivation fee set by the State Board.

6–312.

(a) The State Board shall reinstate the State license of an individual who is not
on [inactive] UNINSURED status and who has failed to renew the State license for any
reason, if the individual:

(1) applies to the State Board for reinstatement within 2 years after the
State license expires;

(2) meets the renewal requirements of § 6–310 of this subtitle; and

(3) in addition to the renewal fee required under § 6–310 of this subtitle,
pays to the State Board a reinstatement fee set by the State Board.

(b) If an individual who has failed to renew the State license for any reason
applies for reinstatement more than 2 years after the State license has expired, the State
Board shall require the individual to pay a reinstatement fee set by the State Board, and
comply with the requirements for obtaining a State license under §§ 6–304 and 6–307 of
this subtitle and § 6–503 of this title.

6–313.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a county or local
government may employ an individual as an electrical inspector only if the individual:

(i) holds a State license or local license, as applicable;

(ii) previously held, within the last 5 years, a State license or local
license, as applicable, that was not suspended or revoked; or

(iii) is certified by:

1. the International Code Council as a combination inspector
or as an electrical inspector for residential or commercial buildings;

2. the North American Board of Certified Energy
Practitioners; or

3. a certifying entity that is comparable to the entity listed
in item 1 or 2 of this item.

(2) Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply to a county or local
government that uses code inspectors or combination building code inspectors to conduct

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 187

trade–specific inspections on residential or commercial buildings to determine compliance
with adopted electrical codes or related building codes.

(b) An individual may not have any financial interest in any electrical business
while employed by the State, a county, or a local government as an electrical inspector.

(c) (1) On appointment or employment as an electrical inspector, the
individual:

(i) shall place the State license of the individual on [inactive]
UNINSURED status; and

(ii) except for the renewal fee, shall meet the [inactive] UNINSURED
status requirements of § 6–311 of this subtitle.

(2) The State Board may issue an electrical inspector identification card to
an electrical inspector who has placed the State license on [inactive] UNINSURED status.

(3) The State Board may not charge a fee to issue the identification card.

(d) The State Board may change the status of an electrical inspector to individual
[inactive] UNINSURED status, if the electrical inspector:

(1) meets the [inactive] UNINSURED status requirements of § 6–311 of this
subtitle; and

(2) pays an [inactive] UNINSURED status fee set by the State Board.

(e) On termination of the appointment or employment of an individual as an
electrical inspector, the State Board shall reactivate the State license of the individual who
is on [inactive] UNINSURED status, without examination, if the individual meets the
reactivation requirements for a State license under § 6–311(f) of this subtitle, including
payment of the reactivation fee.

6–604.

(a) This section does not apply to a State licensee on [inactive] UNINSURED
status.

(b) A LICENSED master electrician [who is licensed by the State Board and
provides electrical services or], a person to whom a LICENSED master electrician [licensed
by the State Board] assigns a local registration under this title [shall], OR ANOTHER
PERSON WHO ENGAGES IN THE BUSINESS OF PROVIDING ELECTRICAL SERVICES
MAY NOT CONTRACT TO PROVIDE ELECTRICAL SERVICES UNLESS THE ELECTRICAL
WORK, INCLUDING COMPLETED OPERATIONS, OF THE LICENSED MASTER

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 187 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ELECTRICIAN, PERSON ASSIGNED A LOCAL REGISTRATION, OR PERSON WHO
ENGAGES IN THE BUSINESS OF PROVIDING ELECTRICAL SERVICES IS COVERED BY
LIABILITY INSURANCE:

(1) [maintain] FOR general liability [insurance] in the amount of at least
$300,000; AND

(2) [maintain] FOR property damage [insurance] in the amount of at least
$100,000[; and

(3) submit proof of the required insurance to the State Board].

(C) (1) THE INSURANCE REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE
BOUGHT:

(I) BY A MASTER ELECTRICIAN; OR

(II) FOR A MASTER ELECTRICIAN, BY A PERSON WHO ENGAGES
IN THE BUSINESS OF PROVIDING ELECTRICAL SERVICES AND EMPLOYS THE MASTER
ELECTRICIAN.

(2) THE INSURANCE REQUIREMENT OF THIS SECTION IS NOT MEANT
TO COVER ELECTRICAL SERVICES THAT A MASTER ELECTRICIAN PROVIDES OUTSIDE
THE SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PERSON WHO CARRIES THE INSURANCE.

(D) (1) A LICENSED APPRENTICE ELECTRICIAN OR LICENSED
JOURNEYPERSON ELECTRICIAN IN THE EMPLOY OF A LICENSED MASTER
ELECTRICIAN NEED NOT OBTAIN SEPARATE INSURANCE WHILE PROVIDING OR
ASSISTING IN PROVIDING ELECTRICAL SERVICES UNDER THE CONTROL AND
SUPERVISION OF THE LICENSED MASTER ELECTRICIAN.

(2) SUBJECT TO THE RESTRICTIONS OF § 6–311 OF THIS TITLE
REGARDING UNINSURED STATUS, UNINSURED LICENSEES WHO HAVE HAD THEIR
UNINSURED STATUS APPROVED BY THE STATE BOARD NEED NOT OBTAIN
INSURANCE WHILE MAINTAINING UNINSURED STATUS.

[(c)] (E) (1) An applicant for a State license shall submit proof of the
insurance required under this section to the State Board with the license application.

(2) The State Board may not issue a State license to an applicant to whom
the insurance requirements of this section would apply unless the applicant submits proof
of the insurance.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 187

[(d)] (F) Unless an applicant meets the insurance requirements of this section,
the State Board may not renew a State license of the applicant to whom the insurance
requirements of this section would apply.

[(e)] (G) If the insurance required under this section is canceled, the insurer
shall notify the State Board within 10 days after the date of cancellation.

[(f)] (H) If a local jurisdiction requires [an applicant for a local license] A
MASTER ELECTRICIAN OR OTHER PERSON WHO ENGAGES IN THE BUSINESS OF
PROVIDING ELECTRICAL SERVICES to execute a bond to the local jurisdiction, the
applicant may satisfy the bond requirement by submitting proof of the insurance required
under this section.

(I) THE STATE BOARD SHALL SPECIFY ON EACH LICENSE WHETHER THE
LICENSE HOLDER MEETS THE INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9