START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 152 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 152 
(Delegate Wells, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Agriculture - Urban Agriculture Grant Programs - Alterations 
 
 
This bill modifies the Urban Agriculture Grant Program by (1) mandating a minimum 
amount of funding ($100,000 annually) for the program from fiscal 2025 through 2029;  
(2) expanding eligibility for grants under the program, making them available directly to 
urban agricultural producers and to specified nonprofit organizations and institutions of 
higher education; and (3) modifying provisions relating to the grant process and the use of 
the grants. The bill also expands the definition of “urban agricultural producer” under both 
the Urban Agriculture Grant Program and the Urban Agriculture Water and Power 
Infrastructure Grant Program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $100,000 annually from 
FY 2025 through 2029. Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. 
This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2025 through 2029. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 152/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Urban Agriculture Grant Program 
 
 
Mandated Funding 
 
For fiscal 2025 through 2029, the bill requires the Governor to include in the annual budget 
bill an appropriation of at least $100,000 to the Urban Agriculture Grant Fund (which, 
under existing law, provides grants under the program). 
 
 
Expanded Eligibility  
 
The bill allows for the fund to be used to provide grants directly to urban agricultural 
producers, as well as to nonprofit organizations statewide (under existing law, only 
nonprofits in Baltimore City are eligible), and institutions of higher education. 
 
The bill modifies the definition of “urban agricultural producer” so that it means any person 
that annually sells, or normally would have sold, $1,000 or more of farm products in any 
“urban area,” instead of only in Baltimore City. “Urban area” means an area of the State 
that is (1) delineated as an urban area by the U.S. Census Bureau or (2) within the 
boundaries of a municipality. 
 
An institution of higher education or a nonprofit organization is qualified to receive a grant 
if the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) determines that the entity (1) works to 
increase the viability of urban farming and improve access to urban-grown foods and 
(2) will provide direct training and ongoing technical assistance, as specified, to urban 
agricultural producers that receive a grant under the program. A nonprofit organization 
must also be incorporated or maintain its principal place of business in an urban area.  
 
An urban agricultural producer is qualified to receive a grant if MDA determines that the 
urban agricultural producer will complete a new farming training or continuing education 
program. 
 
 
Grant Process and the Use of Grants 
 
The bill replaces a requirement that MDA adopt specified regulations governing the 
process of awarding grants, and the use of the grants, under the Urban Agriculture Grant 
Program (including the establishment of a review board to implement the grant process) 
with provisions establishing an Urban Agriculture Advisory Committee, staffed by MDA, 
to recommend guidelines, policies, and practices for the implementation of the program.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 152/ Page 3 
The committee must make recommendations that: 
 
 
establish a competitive grant application process that prioritizes applications that 
benefit socially disadvantaged urban farmers by allowing them to (1) secure 
specified real property; (2) maintain safe, environmentally sustainable, and socially 
responsible practices; and (3) make capital improvements to support viable urban 
agriculture enterprises; 
 
require that grant applications demonstrate a measurable community benefit, which 
may include improving local food access; and 
 
prohibit grant recipients from using more than 15% of the amount of the grant for 
operating expenses.  
 
Members of the committee may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the 
State budget. 
 
The bill repeals an existing reporting requirement applicable to MDA and instead requires 
the committee to report to the Governor, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and 
the House Appropriations Committee by December 30, 2023, and each December 30 
thereafter.  
 
Urban Agriculture Water and Power Infrastructure Grant Program 
 
The bill modifies the definition of “urban agricultural producer” under the Urban 
Agriculture Water and Power Infrastructure Grant Program so that – in addition to a 
producer in an area of the State delineated as an urban area by the U.S. Census Bureau – it 
also includes a producer in an area of the State within the boundaries of a municipality 
whether or not the area is delineated as an urban area by the U.S. Census Bureau. Under 
existing law, urban agricultural producers are eligible for grants under the program for the 
purchase and installation of (1) agricultural equipment associated with water supply and 
irrigation and (2) electric power access. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Urban Agriculture Grant Program 
 
Chapter 320 of 2021 established the Urban Agriculture Grant Program within MDA to 
increase the viability of urban farming and improve access to urban-grown foods. To 
support the program, Chapter 320 also established an Urban Agriculture Grant Fund to 
provide grants to qualified nonprofit organizations in Baltimore City. The Governor is 
authorized to include an appropriation to the fund in the annual budget bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 152/ Page 4 
The fund must be used to provide grants to qualified nonprofit organizations that distribute 
the grant money to urban agricultural producers. A nonprofit organization is qualified to 
receive a grant if MDA determines that the nonprofit organization (1) is incorporated or 
maintains its principal place of business in Baltimore City and (2) works to increase the 
viability of urban farming and improve access to urban-grown foods. 
 
MDA must adopt regulations, subject to the availability of money in the fund, to provide 
grants under the fund. The regulations must:  
 
 
establish a review board to implement (1) a competitive grant application process 
that prioritizes applications that will accomplish the goals of the Urban Agriculture 
section of the 2019 Baltimore Sustainability Plan and historically disadvantaged 
urban farmers; (2) a system to fairly evaluate each grant application and award 
grants from money available in the fund; and (3) a grant agreement to be used by 
the review board and grant recipients; 
 
require the review board to include members representing (1) the Baltimore Office 
of Sustainability; (2) the Baltimore Development Corporation; and (3) the 
Department of Planning;  
 
require that (1) more than 75% of the review board be composed of staff 
representing an agency of Baltimore City and (2) the remainder be appointed by 
MDA, based on the member’s ability to help achieve the purpose of the program;  
 
require grant recipients to distribute at least 70% of the amount of the grant to urban 
agricultural producers to (1) secure real property; (2) maintain safe, environmentally 
sustainable, and socially responsible practices; and (3) support viable urban 
agriculture enterprises;  
 
require that grant applications demonstrate a measurable impact on improving local 
food access or other community benefits;  
 
require at least 70% of the amount of each grant to be distributed to minority-owned 
or operated urban agricultural producers; and  
 
prohibit grant recipients from using more than 30% of the amount of the grant for 
operating expenses.  
 
In adopting the regulations, MDA must seek and prioritize input from urban agriculture 
farms and farmer advocates. 
 
Within 90 days after the end of a grant cycle, a qualified nonprofit organization that 
received a grant must submit a report to MDA that includes (1) the names and locations of 
urban agricultural producers that received funds under the program; (2) the dollar amount 
of funds awarded to each urban agricultural producer; and (3) the impact of the program 
on increasing the viability of urban farming and improving access to urban-grown foods. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 152/ Page 5 
By October 15 each year, beginning in 2023, MDA must submit a report to the Governor, 
the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and the House Appropriations Committee on 
the effectiveness of the funding provided under the program. 
 
MDA may adopt any additional implementing regulations. 
 
Urban Agriculture Water and Power Infrastructure Grant Program 
 
Chapters 393 and 394 of 2022 established the Urban Agriculture Water and Power 
Infrastructure Grant Program within MDA. The program provides grants to urban 
agricultural producers and qualified nonprofit organizations for the purchase and 
installation of (1) agriculture equipment associated with water supply and irrigation and 
(2) electric power access. “Urban agricultural producer” means any person that (1) annually 
produces farm products in an area of the State delineated as an urban area by the 
U.S. Census Bureau and (2) sells, plans to sell, or normally would have sold at least $1,000 
annually of farm products produced from a farming operation in the State. 
 
For fiscal 2024 through 2027, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill a general 
fund appropriation of $500,000 to the Urban Agriculture Water and Power Infrastructure 
Grant Fund (which provides grants under the program).  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Urban Agriculture Grant Program has not been funded since it 
was established, and funding is not included in the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced. 
Assuming the program is also not funded in fiscal 2025 and future years absent the bill, 
general fund expenditures increase by at least $100,000 annually from fiscal 2025 through 
2029, reflecting the bill’s mandated appropriation. Special fund revenues to the Urban 
Agriculture Grant Fund increase correspondingly, reflecting receipt of the general fund 
appropriations to the fund. Special fund expenditures also increase by an equivalent amount 
overall, reflecting spending from the Urban Agriculture Grant Fund; however, spending 
from the fund may not necessarily occur entirely in the same fiscal year that the funding is 
received. 
 
MDA can manage the program and fund, including staffing the Urban Agriculture 
Advisory Committee, with existing resources.  
 
As institutions of higher education that meet specified qualifications are eligible for grants 
under the bill’s changes, revenues increase for any State institutions of higher education 
that receive grants under the bill; expenditures increase correspondingly. 
 
The bill’s expansion of the definition of “urban agricultural producer” under the Urban 
Agriculture Water and Power Infrastructure Grant Program is not expected to have a fiscal 
impact. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 152/ Page 6 
Small Business Effect:  Grants, training, and technical assistance provided under the 
program are expected to have a meaningful impact on small business urban farmers, 
consistent with the purpose of the program of increasing the viability of urban farming and 
improving access to urban-grown foods. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1216 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6