START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 192 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 192 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Currency - Campaign Finance Prohibitions - Disclosures by Financial 
Institutions 
 
 
This bill establishes prohibitions against specified use of any currency other than 
United States currency in the financing of election campaigns, independent expenditures, 
and electioneering communications. The bill authorizes the State Administrator of 
Elections to investigate potential violations and authorizes the State Board of Elections 
(SBE) to impose civil penalties for violations or make referrals to the State Prosecutor to 
investigate potential criminal violations. The bill also allows for the Comptroller to request 
information and assistance from a virtual currency money transmitter in enforcing State 
tax laws and to direct a virtual currency money transmitter to seize, attach, and forward to 
the Comptroller property of an account holder that is subject to a tax lien. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues 
may increase annually, beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. SBE and the 
Comptroller can handle any additional enforcement activities that may arise as a result of 
the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 192/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Prohibitions Against Use of Any Currency Other Than United States Currency in 
Campaign Finance 
 
The bill prohibits a person from making a monetary contribution to a campaign finance 
entity, or a monetary donation to specified persons making independent expenditures or 
disbursements for electioneering communications (those required to register with SBE), 
using any currency other than United States currency. The bill also prohibits a campaign 
finance entity from accepting a monetary contribution made using any currency other than 
United States currency and prohibits specified persons making independent expenditures 
or disbursements for electioneering communications from accepting a monetary donation 
made using any currency other than United States currency. In addition, the bill prohibits 
a campaign finance entity, or a person acting on its behalf, from making a monetary 
expenditure using any currency other than United States currency. 
 
The bill gives the State Administrator of Elections (or the administrator’s designee) 
specified authority to investigate potential violations of these prohibitions and authorizes 
SBE, at the conclusion of an investigation, to (1) impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for 
each violation or (2) refer the matter for further investigation by the State Prosecutor if 
SBE has reasonable cause to believe that a person willfully and knowingly violated a 
prohibition, which is a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $25,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to one year (under an existing penalty provision). 
 
Enforcement of Tax Laws 
 
The bill includes a virtual currency money transmitter, that is regulated under Title 12 of 
the Financial Institutions Article of the Maryland Code, among financial institutions from 
which the Comptroller may request information and assistance to enable the Comptroller 
to enforce the tax laws of the State and which the Comptroller may direct to seize, attach, 
and forward to the Comptroller (pursuant to procedures set out in statute) property of an 
account holder that is subject to a tax lien. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Campaign Accounts, Contributions, and Disbursements/Expenditures 
 
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by law, all campaign finance activity for an election 
under the Election Law Article of the Annotated Code must be conducted through a 
campaign finance entity (defined as a political committee established under Title 13 of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 192/ Page 3 
Election Law Article). An individual may not file a certificate of candidacy or a declaration 
of intent until the individual establishes, or causes to be established, an authorized 
candidate campaign committee (a campaign finance entity authorized by the candidate to 
promote the candidate’s candidacy). 
 
Each campaign finance entity must designate one or more campaign accounts. Each 
designated campaign account must (1) be in a financial institution and (2) be registered in 
a manner that identifies it as the account of a campaign finance entity. A campaign finance 
entity must deposit all funds received in a designated campaign account. 
 
A contribution of money to a campaign finance entity may be made only by check, credit 
card, cash (if the contribution does not exceed $100 in an election cycle), or an electronic 
method that SBE authorizes by regulation. 
 
A campaign finance entity may not directly or indirectly make a disbursement except from 
a designated campaign account. A disbursement may only be made by check or an 
electronic method that SBE authorizes by regulation. However, a campaign finance entity, 
or a person authorized by the campaign finance entity, may pay an expense of the campaign 
finance entity from funds other than a campaign account if (1) the expense is supported by 
a receipt that is provided to the campaign finance entity and (2) the campaign finance entity 
reimburses the person who paid the expense from the campaign account and reports the 
expense as an expenditure of the campaign finance entity. 
 
Independent Expenditures and Electioneering Communications 
 
Independent expenditures in general – political spending by individuals or organizations 
without coordination with a candidate – cannot be limited or prohibited, pursuant to the 
2010 Supreme Court decision Citizens United v. FEC. Requirements for disclosure of 
independent expenditures, however, have been upheld by courts. Under Maryland’s 
disclosure requirements, independent expenditures are expenditures for public 
communications that are not made in coordination with a candidate or campaign finance 
entity and that expressly advocate the success or defeat of a clearly identified candidate or 
ballot question. Electioneering communications, on the other hand, do not expressly 
advocate the success or defeat of a candidate or ballot question, but refer to a clearly 
identified candidate or ballot question, are made within 60 days of an election, are capable 
of being received by a certain amount of individuals (with the amount depending on the 
type of communication) in the constituency where the candidate or ballot question is on 
the ballot, and are not made in coordination with a candidate or campaign finance entity. 
 
Within 48 hours after a person makes aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements 
for electioneering communications of $5,000 or more in an election cycle, the person must 
file a registration form with SBE. Within 48 hours after a day on which a person makes 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 192/ Page 4 
aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements for electioneering communications 
of $10,000 or more in an election cycle, the person must file a report with SBE providing 
information on the person, the expenditures or disbursements, and persons who made 
cumulative donations of $6,000 or more to the person during the period covered by the 
report. Further, a person who files an independent expenditure or electioneering 
communication report must file an additional report within 48 hours after a day on which 
the person makes aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements for electioneering 
communications of $10,000 or more following the closing date of the person’s previous 
report. 
 
Enforcement of Tax Laws 
 
The Comptroller is given specified authority to (1) request from a financial institution 
information and assistance to enable the Comptroller to enforce the tax laws of the State 
and (2) direct a financial institution to seize, attach, and forward to the Comptroller 
property of an account holder that is subject to a tax lien, after following specified 
procedures including notice to the account holder and an opportunity for the account holder 
to challenge the actions of the Comptroller in court. 
 
“Financial institution” is defined as (1) a depository institution, as defined in the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Act; (2) a federal credit union or State credit union, as defined in the 
Federal Credit Union Act; (3) a State credit union regulated under Title 6 of the Financial 
Institutions Article of the Maryland Code; or (4) a benefit association, insurance company, 
safe deposit company, money market mutual fund, or similar entity doing business in the 
State that holds property or maintains accounts reflecting property belonging to others. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may increase annually, beginning in fiscal 2024, 
to the extent the Comptroller is able to satisfy tax liens that otherwise would not have been 
satisfied, by collecting property from accounts with virtual currency money transmitters. 
The extent of any increase cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase annually, beginning 
in fiscal 2024, to the extent civil or criminal penalty revenues are collected as a result of 
the bill’s penalty provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 192/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 269 (Senator Rosapepe, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; State 
Prosecutor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5