START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 279 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 279 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Prescription Drug Affordability Board - Upper Payment Limits 
 
 
This emergency bill reinstates provisions of law regarding the authority of the Prescription 
Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) to set upper payment limits and related requirements, 
including an appeals process. By December 1, 2026, PDAB, in consultation with its 
stakeholder council, must report to specified committees of the General Assembly on 
(1) the legality, obstacles, and benefits of setting upper payment limits on all purchases and 
payor reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State and (2) recommendations 
regarding whether the General Assembly should pass legislation to expand the authority of 
PDAB to set upper payment limits to all purchases and payor reimbursements of 
prescription drug products in the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent upper payment limits are implemented and reduce drug prices, 
State expenditures decrease. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent upper payment limits are implemented and reduce drug prices, 
local government health care expenditures decrease. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Upper Payment Limits – Plan of Action 
 
If the board finds that it is in the best interest of the State to establish a process for setting 
upper payment limits for prescription drug products that it determines have led or will lead 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 279/ Page 2 
to an affordability challenge, the board, in conjunction with the stakeholder council, must 
draft a plan of action for implementing the process that includes the criteria the board must 
use to set upper payment limits. 
 
The criteria must include consideration of (1) the cost of administering the prescription 
drug product; (2) the cost of delivering the prescription drug product to consumers; and 
(3) other relevant administrative costs related to the prescription drug product. 
 
The process for setting upper payment limits must (1) prohibit the application of an upper 
payment limit for a prescription drug product that is on the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) prescription drug shortage list and (2) require the board to monitor 
the availability of any prescription drug product for which it sets an upper payment limit 
and, if there becomes a shortage of the prescription drug product in the State, reconsider or 
suspend the upper payment limit. 
 
If a plan of action is drafted, the board must submit the plan of action to the Legislative 
Policy Committee (LPC) for approval. LPC must have 45 days to approve the plan of 
action. If LPC does not approve the plan of action, the board must submit the plan of action 
to the Governor and the Attorney General for approval. The Governor and the 
Attorney General must have 45 days to approve the plan of action. The board may not set 
upper payment limits unless the plan is approved by either (1) LPC or (2) the Governor 
and the Attorney General. 
 
Implementation of Upper Payment Limits If Plan of Action Approved 
 
If a plan of action is approved, the board may set upper payment limits for prescription 
drug products that are (1) purchased or paid for by a unit of State or local government or 
an organization on behalf of a unit of State or local government, including State or county 
correctional facilities, State hospitals, and health clinics at State institutions of higher 
education; (2) paid for through a health benefit plan on behalf of a unit of State or local 
government, including a county, bicounty, or municipal employee health benefit plan; or 
(3) purchased for or paid for by the Maryland Medicaid program. The upper payment limits 
must be for prescription drug products that have led or will lead to an affordability 
challenge and be set in accordance with the criteria established in board regulations. 
 
The board must monitor the availability of any prescription drug product for which it sets 
an upper payment limit. If there becomes a shortage of a prescription drug product in the 
State, the board must reconsider whether the upper payment limit should be suspended or 
altered. An upper payment limit may not be applied to a prescription drug product while 
the prescription drug product is on the FDA’s prescription drug shortage list. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 279/ Page 3 
Appeals 
 
A person aggrieved by an upper payment limit set by the board may request an appeal 
within 30 days after the board makes the decision to set the limit. The board must hear the 
appeal and make a final decision within 60 days after the appeal is requested. Any person 
aggrieved by a final decision of the board may petition for judicial review under the 
Administrative Procedure Act.  
 
Current Law:  Established by Chapter 692 of 2019, PDAB comprises five members –
one each appointed by the Governor, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House 
of Delegates, and the Attorney General and one appointed jointly by the President of the 
Senate and the Speaker of the House of Delegates, who must serve as chair. The board 
must also have three alternate members to participate when a member is recused. At least 
one member of the board must have specified expertise. PDAB must make specified 
determinations, collect data, and identify specified prescription drug products that may 
cause affordability issues; PDAB may conduct a cost review of each identified drug 
product. 
 
Section 3 of Chapter 692 included substantially the same provisions relating to upper 
payment limits (including the requirement to submit the plan of action for approval), the 
appeals process, and the reporting requirement that are included in the bill. PDAB was 
authorized to set upper payment limits on or after January 1, 2022. However, Section 3 of 
the Act was contingent on receipt of approval of the plan of action for implementing a 
process for setting upper payment limits by January 1, 2023. As a plan of action was neither 
drafted nor approved by this date, these provisions terminated.  
 
Additional Comments:  In June 2022, PDAB submitted a one-time study of the operation 
of the generic drug market in the State. The study recommended that PDAB, with its State 
partners, should (1) evaluate policies to identify and address affordability challenges for 
generic drugs with high prices or high price increases; (2) explore opportunities to collect 
data to better understand and address specified issues; (3) evaluate waste-free formularies 
as a policy to promote savings through generic drugs; (4) explore policies to address drug 
shortages in Maryland; and (5) explore partnerships and policies to support a safe and 
robust supply chain for generic drugs in Maryland. 
 
In December 2022, PDAB submitted its annual cost review report as required, which 
detailed price trends for prescription drug products, Maryland drug price and spending 
trends for 2018 through 2020, and Maryland’s cost review experience to date. Because the 
cost review process remains under development, no actual cost reviews were completed in 
2022. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 279/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 202 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Prescription Drug Affordability Board; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - February 17, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4