START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 290 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 290 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Dental Services - Access 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to (1) annually evaluate 
Medicaid dental reimbursement rates; (2) create and distribute specified “plain language” 
materials related to dental services; (3) convene a stakeholder workgroup to study the 
establishment of a specified grant or loan program for dental providers; (4) conduct a study 
on dental provider participation in Medicaid; and (5) conduct a study on providing 
Medicaid reimbursement for services provided by a certified community health worker 
(CHW). The bill also alters the Maryland Dent-Care Program and requires the State Board 
of Dental Examiners to publish a searchable list of mobile/portable dental services 
providers. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $75,000 in FY 2024 and 
Medicaid general and federal fund expenditures (50% general funds/50% federal funds) 
increase by another $100,000 in FY 2024 and $20,000 in FY 2025 for contractual support, 
as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. General fund expenditures 
also increase for Maryland Dent-Care, including $11,400 in FY 2024 for administrative 
costs to update the Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS), as discussed 
below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FF Revenue 
$50,000 
$10,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$86,400 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
$100,000 
$20,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($136,400) 
($10,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal, as discussed below.  
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 290/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Maryland Dent-Care Program 
 
The bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Dent-Care Program to include dental 
hygienists and makes conforming changes. The bill also specifies higher education loan 
assistance grant amounts under the program. Beginning October 1, 2023, awards must be 
at least $50,000 per year for three years for a dentist and may not exceed $10,000 per year 
for two years for a dental hygienist. The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA), 
in collaboration with MDH, must periodically evaluate the minimum and maximum grant 
amounts. 
 
Plain Language Dental Information 
 
MDH must create, distribute to dental practices, and encourage dentists and dental 
hygienists to distribute to their patients “plain language” materials (as defined in the bill) 
regarding the importance of regular dental appointments and various dental procedures, as 
determined by MDH. 
 
State Board of Dental Examiners – Mobile or Portable Dentistry Information 
 
The State Board of Dental Examiners must require applicants for initial or renewal 
licensure to report whether they provide or intend to provide mobile or portable dental 
services. The board must publish on its website a searchable list of licensed dentists and 
licensed dental hygienists who provide mobile or portable dental services. 
 
Stakeholder Workgroup 
 
MDH must convene a stakeholder workgroup to study the establishment of a grant or 
no-interest loan program for dental providers to open practices in underserved areas. The 
workgroup must include representatives from the Maryland Community Health Resources 
Commission, Office of Oral Health (OOH), and the Community Dental Clinics Grant 
Program. The workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the Senate 
Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee by  
December 1, 2024. 
 
Study on Provider Participation in the Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program 
 
MDH must conduct a study on dental provider participation in Medicaid’s Maryland 
Healthy Smiles Dental Program, including a review of administrative issues and incentives 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 290/ Page 3 
to encourage participation, as specified. MDH must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee by December 1, 2024. 
 
Study on Reimbursement for Community Health Workers 
 
MDH must conduct a study on providing reimbursement for services provided to a 
Medicaid recipient by a certified CHW that are (1) covered by Medicaid and (2) assist a 
Medicaid recipient in accessing dental services. MDH must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee by December 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Dent-Care Program 
 
The Maryland Dent-Care Program provides higher education loan repayment assistance to 
licensed dentists practicing in Maryland full time who provide care to Medicaid 
participants (at least 30% of their patient population). To qualify for a grant, a dentist must 
currently be paying off outstanding student loan debt. 
 
Medicaid Dental Coverage – Maryland Health Smiles Dental Program 
 
Under federal requirements, comprehensive dental coverage is mandatory for children 
enrolled in Medicaid. However, dental benefits for Medicaid-eligible adults are optional. 
Prior to January 1, 2023, Medicaid dental coverage (provided through the Maryland 
Healthy Smiles Dental Program) was available to children younger than age 21, former 
foster care recipients younger than age 26, pregnant women age 21 and older, and adults 
enrolled in the Rare and Expensive Case Management program. Effective January 1, 2023,  
Medicaid provides dental coverage for all adults with incomes up to 133% of the federal 
poverty level.  
 
Community Health Workers 
 
“Community health worker” means a frontline public health worker who (1) is a trusted 
member of, or has an unusually close understanding of, the community served; (2) serves 
as a liaison, link, or intermediary between health and social services and the community to 
facilitate access to services and improve the quality and cultural competence of service 
delivery; and (3) builds individual and community capacity by increasing health knowledge 
and self-sufficiency through a range of activities, including outreach, community 
education, the provision of information to support individuals in the community, social 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 290/ Page 4 
support, and advocacy. Currently, CHWs are not able to render any Medicaid services in 
Maryland. However, other state Medicaid programs reimburse for patient education. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Medicaid Dental Reimbursement Rate Evaluation 
 
The requirement for MDH to annually evaluate Medicaid dental reimbursement rates has 
no direct fiscal effect. However, to the extent annual evaluation causes MDH to increase 
dental rates in future years, Medicaid general/federal fund expenditures (and federal 
matching fund revenues) increase by an indeterminate, but potentially significant, amount. 
 
Maryland Dent-Care Program 
 
The bill expands the Maryland Dent-Care Program to include dental hygienists and sets 
the minimum award for dentists at $50,000 per year for three years and the maximum award 
for dental hygienists at $10,000 per year for two years. The Maryland Higher Education 
Commission (MHEC) advises that OSFA requires an estimated $11,439 in general funds 
to incorporate changes to MDCAPS to accommodate the addition of dental hygienists. 
 
Current regulations specify that award amount determinations are made annually by OSFA 
and OOH based on the number of applicants and funding availability. Awards must be for 
a minimum of $10,000 up to a maximum of $30,000 per year for an eligible dentist. In 
fiscal 2022, the program made $304,663 in awards to 15 recipients (all dentists with an 
average award amount of $20,311). 
 
MHEC advises that, should the award amounts specified under the bill be awarded to 
10 dentists and 5 dental hygienists, award amounts would total $550,000 annually, an 
increase of $245,337 over fiscal 2022. This estimate assumes that one-third of the dentists 
currently receiving awards has met the three-year limit and that no new dentists receive an 
award in the first year of the expansion. MHEC further advises that OOH plans to greatly 
increase the number of award recipients such that, with the additional eligibility of dental 
hygienists, total costs for the program could rise to $1.2 million in fiscal 2025 to make 
awards to 8 additional dentists and 5 hygienists. The Department of Legislative Services 
notes that such expansion of the program is not required under the bill. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $11,439 in fiscal 2024 for one-time 
contractual costs to update MDCAPS. Further general fund expenditures are likely 
necessary in fiscal 2024 even though expanding eligibility and increasing minimum awards 
for dentists does not necessarily require additional spending. However, without additional 
spending, fewer awards may be made and the requirement for dentists to receive awards 
for three years may not be met. For every dentist already in the program who has not yet 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 290/ Page 5 
received three years of funding, expenditures of $50,000 a year are required. For 
illustrative purposes only, if the 15 dentists currently receiving awards are equally split 
into cohorts of five in the first year of awards, five in the second year of awards, and five 
in the third year of awards, then general fund expenditures increase by $195,337 in 
fiscal 2024 to meet the bill’s requirement of providing $50,000 for three years – just for 
the population currently being served. Under this scenario, current funding would be 
sufficient to cover the third cohort in fiscal 2025 and allow for 1 more dentist or 5 (or more) 
dental hygienists to receive awards that year. For each additional dentist served, 
expenditures increase by at least $50,000 annually for three years; for each dental hygienist 
served, expenditures increase by up to $10,000 annually for two years. 
 
Plain Language Dental Information 
 
MDH advises that it works with a dental benefits administrator (SKYGEN USA, which 
administers the Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program) that is already required to 
develop materials in accordance with the Federal Plain Writing Act of 2010. To the extent 
that MDH must work with SKYGEN to develop and distribute additional materials, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by an estimated $75,000 for contractual support in 
fiscal 2024 only.  
 
State Board of Dental Examiners – Mobile or Portable Dentistry Information 
 
The State Board of Dental Examiners can likely collect the required information and 
publish a list of dentists and dental hygienists who provide mobile or portable dental 
services on its website with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Stakeholder Workgroup 
 
OOH can likely provide administrative staff to support the workgroup with existing 
budgeted resources.  
 
Study on Provider Participation in the Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program 
 
MDH advises that it requires contractual support from a research organization to complete 
the study at an estimated cost of approximately $100,000 in fiscal 2024 and $20,000 in 
fiscal 2025. Expenditures are eligible for a 50% federal matching rate.  
 
Study on Reimbursement for Community Health Workers 
 
MDH can conduct the study of CHW reimbursement with existing resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 290/ Page 6 
Small Business Effect:  Small business dental practices that offer mobile or portable dental 
services may benefit from inclusion in a list published by the State Board of Dental 
Examiners. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 237 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland 
Department of Health; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 24, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6