START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 775

Chapter 775

(House Bill 248)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore County – Class B–ECF/DS (Education Conference Facility/Dining
Service) License – Towson University

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore County
to issue a Class B–ECF/DS (Education Conference Facility/Dining Service) license
for use at certain Towson University events; and generally relating to alcoholic
beverages licenses in Baltimore County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 13–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 13–1001
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

13–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore County.

13–1001.

(a) There is a Class B–ECF/DS (Education Conference Facility/Dining Service)
beer, wine, and liquor license.

(b) The Board may issue the license to an individual who is:

(1) authorized by the University of Maryland, Baltimore County OR
TOWSON UNIVERSITY to:

(i) act on behalf of the campus under the license; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 775 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) be subject to the penalties, conditions, and restrictions under this
title; and

(2) a resident of the State.

(c) (1) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
for on–premises consumption from multiple designated outlets on the [University’s]
campus OF THE UNIVERSITY ON BEHALF OF WHICH THE LICENSE HOLDER IS
AUTHORIZED TO ACT only at [University–related] UNIVERSITY–RELATED events
catered by the [University’s] UNIVERSITY’S campus dining services contractor.

(2) Beer, wine, and liquor purchased at a designated outlet are to be
consumed in the confines of that outlet and may not be transported to another outlet.

(d) All profits from the retail sale of beer, wine, and liquor shall be deposited in
the auxiliary services account of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County OR
TOWSON UNIVERSITY, AS APPROPRIATE.

(e) The Board:

(1) may regulate the manner in which beer, wine, and liquor are dispensed
under the license;

(2) before issuing the license, shall designate the exact campus locations
for the outlets for the sale of beer, wine, and liquor;

(3) shall maintain a map and description of the designated outlets for
verification on the renewal of the license; and

(4) shall require the University of Maryland, Baltimore County OR
TOWSON UNIVERSITY, AS APPROPRIATE, to report to the Board at least 5 days before a
[University–related] UNIVERSITY–RELATED event at which beer, wine, or liquor is
intended to be sold or served.

(f) The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor during the hours and days
as set out for a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license under § 13–2004 of this title.

(g) The annual license fee is $2,000.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2