START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 210 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 210 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Baltimore County - Board of Education - Member Elections and Appointments 
 
 
This bill staggers the election and appointment of members of the Baltimore County Board 
of Education such that (1) the four appointed members must be appointed by the Governor 
in presidential election years from a list of nominees submitted by the Baltimore County 
School Board Nominating Commission and (2) the seven elected members of the county 
board must continue to be elected in gubernatorial election years. To achieve the 
staggering, the bill requires that the terms of the four appointed members of the county 
board that are scheduled to expire on December 1, 2026, must instead terminate at the end 
of December 1, 2028. The Governor must then appoint new members to serve a full term 
of four years beginning December 2, 2028, until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County finances are not affected since the bill is procedural in 
nature. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of 12 members, 
including 4 at-large members appointed by the Governor, 7 nonpartisan members each 
elected from 1 of 7 councilmanic districts, and 1 student member. The Baltimore County 
Board of Education is 1 of 4 hybrid school boards in the State with both appointed and 
elected members. There are 20 elected school boards in the State. The Appendix – Local 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 210/ Page 2 
Boards of Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and 
membership of the 24 local boards of education. 
 
Board Terms 
 
Except for the student member (who serves a one-year term), a member serves for a term 
of four years beginning on the first Monday in December after the member’s election or 
appointment and until a successor is elected or appointed and qualifies. An individual who 
takes office to fill a vacancy serves for the remainder of the term for which the appointment 
was made and until a successor is elected or appointed and qualifies. 
 
Board Chair and Vice Chair Selection 
 
At the first meeting of the Baltimore County Board of Education in December each year, 
the county board must elect a chair and vice chair from among the members. 
 
Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission 
 
The Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission consists of 19 members, 
which must reflect the diversity of Baltimore County. The Governor, in consultation with 
the Baltimore County Executive, must appoint 8 members, 1 from each legislative district 
in Baltimore County. The county executive must appoint 1 member from the county at 
large, and 10 specified organizations must each appoint 1 member. The county executive 
must designate a member as chair, and the Baltimore County Public School System must 
provide staff for the commission. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 476 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 210/ Page 3 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
Membership 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. Twenty-two boards have student members; 
however, only 8 boards allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority 
to vote on matters relating to collective bargaining, personnel, and operating and capital 
budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership of the 
24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2023 
 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Anne Arundel2 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore City3 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed from county at large  
7 elected from councilmanic districts  
1 student (one-year term)  
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 210/ Page 4 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles4 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Harford5 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed from county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (one-year term)  
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term) 
Kent6 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Prince George’s7 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Somerset 
5 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Washington8 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Wicomico 
7 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term) 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 210/ Page 5 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed by Governor and elected board, except (1) in Baltimore City, 
members are appointed by the mayor and (2) in Harford County, members are appointed by the county 
executive with the advice and consent of the county council. Entries for local boards that are at any point 
in the process of transitioning between means of selection reflect the final state the board will be in once 
the transition fully takes effect. 
 
2 Chapter 473 of 2017 restructured the Anne Arundel County Board of Education from a nine-member 
appointed board to an eight-member elected board consisting of seven elected members (one from each of 
the seven councilmanic districts on a nonpartisan basis) and one student member. The terms of the elected 
members are staggered; four members were elected at the 2018 general election and three members were 
elected at the 2020 general election as the terms of previously appointed board members expired. In this 
manner, the elected board is phased in. The members elected in 2018 serve a six-year term, while the 
members elected in 2020 serve a four-year term. Thus, beginning in 2024, all members must stand for 
election. An elected member of the board generally serves a four-year term beginning on the first Monday 
in December after the member’s election and until a successor is elected and qualifies. 
 
3 Chapter 593 of 2017 repealed the role of the Governor in making appointments to the Baltimore City 
Board of School Commissioners; it also repealed the Governor’s role in filling board vacancies and 
removing board members. As a result, board members are appointed solely by the Mayor of Baltimore City 
until the appointed/elected board established by the legislation is executed at the 2022 general election. 
Chapter 593 also established the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel (which the mayor 
must convene) and specified its membership. The purpose of the panel is to select nominees to be 
recommended to the mayor as qualified candidates for appointment to the board, including candidates for 
vacancies. If the mayor chooses not to appoint a member or to fill a vacancy from a list submitted by the 
panel, the mayor must reconvene the panel to submit additional names of qualified candidates. Beginning 
with the 2022 general election, the board will be restructured as a hybrid board with two members elected 
from the city at large, nine members appointed by the mayor, and one student member. Elected members 
will serve a four-year term and appointed members will serve a three-year term. 
 
4 Chapters 404 and 405 of 2021 added two new members to the Charles County Board of Education and 
altered the selection method for board members by requiring that eight board members be elected from the 
county commissioner districts (two from each of the four districts) and one board member be elected from 
the county at large. Previously, the seven board members were all elected from the county at large. All seats 
are subject to election in November 2022; however, the at-large member elected in November 2022 must 
serve a two-year term (instead of the usual four-year term) until a successor is elected to a full term in 
November 2024. Chapters 404 and 405 also provided the student member with voting rights, subject to 
certain restrictions. 
 
5 Chapter 569 of 2022 eliminated the role of the Governor in appointing members to the Harford County 
Board of Education. Instead, beginning with members appointed following the 2022 gubernatorial election, 
the Harford County Executive will appoint board members, subject to the advice and consent of the 
Harford County Council by a vote of at least five members. In appointing members to the board, the county 
executive must ensure, to the extent practicable, that the total makeup of the board reflects the gender, 
ethnic, and racial diversity of the county. Members appointed to the board following the 2022 election must 
serve for a term of two years until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Subsequent board members will 
be appointed following the 2024 presidential election and each presidential election thereafter. 
 
6 Although not in statute, the Kent County Board of Education reports that there is a nonvoting student 
member of the board and that the student member does not attend closed sessions. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 210/ Page 6 
7 Chapter 217 of 2022 altered the membership of the Prince George’s County Board of Education by 
removing the four appointed members from the board. Effective July 1, 2024, the board will become an 
elected board that consists of nine elected members, each of whom must reside in and be elected from a 
different school board district, and one student member. 
 
8 Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 

END OF PAGE 6