START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 232 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 232 
(Delegate Williams) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child in Need of Assistance – Neglect – Cannabis Use 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “neglect” in statutory provisions that govern child in need 
of assistance (CINA) proceedings. The bill specifies that neglect does not include the use 
of cannabis by any parent or individual who has permanent or temporary care or custody 
or responsibility for supervision of the child unless, as a result of the use of cannabis (1) the 
child’s health or welfare is harmed or placed at substantial risk of harm or (2) the child has 
suffered mental injury or been placed at substantial risk of mental injury. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A CINA is a child who requires court intervention because (1) the child 
has been abused or neglected, has a developmental disability, or has a mental disorder and 
(2) the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian is unable or unwilling to give proper care 
and attention to the child and the child’s needs. “Neglect” means the leaving of a child 
unattended or other failure to give proper care and attention to a child by any parent or 
individual who has permanent or temporary care or custody or responsibility for 
supervision of the child under circumstances that indicate (1) that the child’s health or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 232/ Page 2 
welfare is harmed or placed at substantial risk of harm or (2) that the child has suffered 
mental injury or has been placed at substantial risk of mental injury. Statutory provisions 
outline numerous requirements for CINA proceedings. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1325 and SB 772 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 653 (Senator Carter) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
Enrolled - April 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer K. Botts 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2