START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 283 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 283 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Gender-Affirming Treatment (Trans 
Health Equity Act) 
 
   
This bill requires Medicaid, beginning January 1, 2024, to provide coverage for 
“gender-affirming treatment.” By December 1 each year, beginning in 2024, each 
Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) must submit a specified report to the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). By January 1 each year, beginning in 2025, MDH 
must compile an annual report on geographic access to gender-affirming treatment across 
the State. MDH and each MCO must include the name, location, and types of services 
offered by each provider offering gender-affirming treatment in their provider directories. 
The bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly that Medicaid provide 
gender-affirming treatment to all Medicaid recipients for whom gender-affirming treatment is 
medically necessary, including transgender, nonbinary, intersex, two-spirit, and other gender 
diverse individuals. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by an indeterminate but likely significant 
amount beginning in FY 2024. This analysis assumes services are eligible for federal 
matching funds of 90% for fertility preservation and 64.5% for other services; federal 
matching funds increase accordingly. This bill increases the cost of an entitlement 
program beginning in FY 2024. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 283/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Gender-affirming Treatment 
 
“Gender-affirming treatment” means any medically necessary treatment consistent with 
current clinical standards of care prescribed by a licensed health care provider for the 
treatment of a condition related to the individual’s gender identity. Gender-affirming 
treatment includes (1) hormone therapy, hormone blockers, and puberty blockers; (2) hair 
alteration for the purposes of altering secondary sex characteristics and surgical site 
preparation; (3) alterations to voice, voice therapy, and voice lessons; (4) alterations to 
abdomen, chest, trunk, and buttocks; (5) alterations to the face and neck; (6) alterations to 
the genitals and gonads; (7) laser treatment for scars from gender-affirming treatment; 
(8) standard fertility preservation procedures, as specified; (9) revisions to previous 
treatments and reversal of treatments; (10) combinations of gender-affirming procedures; 
and (11) other treatments as prescribed to suppress the development of endogenous 
secondary sex characteristics, align the individual’s appearance or physical body with 
gender identity, and alleviate symptoms of clinically significant distress resulting from 
gender dysphoria.  
 
Gender-affirming treatment may include treatment described in the current clinical 
standards of care for gender-affirming treatment published by the World Professional 
Association for Transgender Health.  
 
Medicaid must provide coverage for medically necessary gender-affirming treatment in a 
nondiscriminatory manner. Gender-affirming treatment must be assessed according to 
nondiscriminatory criteria consistent with current clinical standards of care. Medicaid may 
not deny or limit coverage for gender-affirming treatment when that treatment is 
(1) prescribed because of, related to, or consistent with the recipient’s gender identity; 
(2) medically necessary; and (3) prescribed in accordance with current clinical standards 
of care.  
 
Medicaid may not: 
 
 
deny or limit coverage for gender-affirming treatment based on the recipient’s 
gender identity; 
 
exclude gender-affirming treatment on the basis that the treatment is a cosmetic 
service; 
 
establish a categorical exclusion for a particular gender-affirming treatment; or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 283/ Page 3 
 
issue an adverse benefit determination denying or limiting access to 
gender-affirming treatment unless a health care provider with experience 
prescribing or delivering gender-affirming treatment has reviewed and confirmed 
the appropriateness of the adverse benefit determination. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
Each MCO must submit a report to MDH that includes, for each health care provider 
offering gender-affirming treatment with which the MCO has an active contract and that 
consents to the inclusion, (1) the name and location of the health care provider; (2) the 
types of gender-affirming treatment provided by the health care provider; and (3) whether 
the health care provider consents to being publicly listed as part of MDH’s annual report. 
 
MDH must compile an annual report that includes, for each health care provider offering 
gender-affirming treatment to Medicaid recipients and whose consent to the inclusion has 
been submitted to MDH, (1) the name and location of the health care provider; (2) the 
MCOs that have active contracts with the health care provider; and (3) the types of 
gender-affirming treatment provided by the health care provider. MDH must publish the 
report in a conspicuous manner on the department’s website. 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid generally provides health coverage to children, pregnant women, 
elderly or disabled individuals, low-income parents, and childless adults. To qualify for 
Medicaid, applicants must pass certain income and asset tests. Effective January 1, 2014, 
Medicaid coverage was expanded to persons with household incomes up to 138% of federal 
poverty guidelines, as authorized under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act. Most Medicaid recipients are required to enroll in a Medicaid MCO.  
 
Maryland Medicaid currently covers gender-affirming treatments for individuals that 
(1) are age 18 and older; (2) have the capacity to make fully informed decisions and consent 
for treatment; (3) have a diagnosis of gender dysphoria; and (4) undergo a minimum of 
12 months of continuous hormonal therapy when recommended by a mental health 
professional (excluding individuals seeking mastectomy surgery). The individual must also 
have two referrals from qualified mental health professionals who independently assess the 
individual. The following treatments are currently reimbursable by Medicaid for eligible 
participants:  (1) outpatient psychotherapy or mental health services for gender dysphoria 
and associated comorbid psychiatric diagnoses; (2) continuous hormone replacement 
therapy; (3) outpatient laboratory testing to monitor continuous hormone therapy; 
(4) gender reassignment surgery; (5) specified procedures for individuals transitioning 
from male to female (MTF) and from female to male (FTM); and (6) post-transition 
services as medically necessary for transgender persons appropriate to their anatomy. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 283/ Page 4 
The following services (which are required to be covered under the bill) are not covered by 
Medicaid:  (1) hair alteration; (2) voice modification surgery and therapy/lessons; 
(3) alterations to the abdomen, trunk, and buttocks; (4) alterations to the face and neck; 
(5) fertility preservation services (which are not covered for any Medicaid participants for 
any reason); and (6) revisions and reversal of prior treatments. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  In 2022, the Williams Institute reported that there were 
24,000 transgender adults in Maryland. An estimated 6,000 of these adults are enrolled in 
Medicaid. The number of nonbinary, intersex, two-spirit, and other gender diverse 
individuals enrolled in Maryland Medicaid is not currently available. In calendar 2022, 
98 individuals received gender-affirming treatment through Medicaid.  
 
MDH advises that utilization of gender-affirming treatments increases under the bill due 
to the availability of services not currently covered and greater awareness of services, 
which often are covered on only a limited basis by other payors. MDH advises that the 
number of Medicaid enrollees seeking gender-affirming treatment under the bill is 
estimated to increase by approximately 25 individuals per year.  
 
MDH further advises that, based on publicly available estimates of the cost for new services 
covered under the bill, individual procedures range from less than $800 for voice 
therapy/voice lessons to more than $25,000 for facial feminization or masculinization 
surgeries. Medicaid expenditures increase by as much as $52,743 per person for individuals 
transitioning from MTF and by as much as $52,493 per person for individuals transitioning 
from FTM for most of the newly available services under the bill. However, this estimate 
does not include an average of $8,000 per person for cryopreservation of either ova, 
embryo, or sperm, as well as an ongoing annual cost to store the ova/embryo/sperm of 
$500 per year. Costs per person may be lower depending on the individual’s utilization of 
covered services.  
 
MDH advises that, while there appears to be an extremely low prevalence of regret in 
transgender patients after receiving gender-affirming surgeries, approximately 1% may 
seek reversal of treatments. As this is not currently covered by Medicaid (and Medicaid 
cannot establish a categorial exclusion for a particular treatment under the bill), to the 
extent Medicaid recipients seek reversal of treatments, Medicaid expenditures increase by 
an additional indeterminate amount.  
 
Assuming the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services approve coverage for 
fertility preservation services for this population, such services would be subject to a 90% 
federal matching rate; all other services would be subject to a federal matching rate of 
64.5% in fiscal 2024 and 63.9% in fiscal 2025 and thereafter.   
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 283/ Page 5 
Thus, Medicaid expenditures increase by an indeterminate but likely significant amount 
beginning in fiscal 2024. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. Actual expenditures 
depend on the number of individuals seeking services who would not have done so absent 
the bill, the number of individuals already receiving services who obtain additional 
services, and the specific gender-affirming services provided.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, if 125 individuals (reflecting utilization in calendar 2022 
and assumed growth of 25 additional individuals) received all of the new services available 
under the bill, including fertility preservation, Medicaid expenditures increase by 
$7.6 million (68% federal funds, 32% general funds). If 125 individuals received only 
some services, in this example, hair alterations and laryngoplasty/voice modification 
surgery (totaling $17,000 per person), Medicaid expenditures increase by $2.1 million 
(64.5% federal funds, 35.5% general funds). 
 
This estimate does not reflect any administrative costs for MCOs to submit annual reports 
on gender-affirming services or for MDH to compile an annual report on geographic access 
to gender-affirming treatment across the State.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care providers that provide gender-affirming 
treatment may receive additional reimbursement from Medicaid. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH notes that fertility preservation services are currently not 
covered for Medicaid participants for any reason. Expanding coverage for this service for 
gender-affirmation purposes may lead to pressure to cover the benefit for other populations, 
such as those with cancer. Provision of fertility preservation services for all Medicaid 
participants could significantly increase costs (an estimated $8.1 million annually based on 
0.07% of total enrollment utilizing the services). 
 
MDH advises that the bill creates a new appropriateness standard for review of adverse 
benefit decisions for gender-affirming services. MDH would be prohibited from issuing an 
adverse benefit determination denying or limiting access to gender-affirming treatment 
unless a health care provider with experience prescribing or delivering gender-affirming 
treatment has reviewed and confirmed the appropriateness of the adverse benefit 
determination. Given the limited number of specialists in this area, it is unclear whether there 
is a sufficient network of providers for this process. If a sufficient network is not available 
for review, enforcement of medical necessity criteria will not be feasible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 746 and SB 682 of 2022. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 283/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  SB 460 (Senator M. Washington, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6