START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 767

Chapter 767

(House Bill 232)

AN ACT concerning

Child in Need of Assistance – Neglect – Cannabis Use

FOR the purpose of providing that the use of cannabis by a parent or certain other
individuals who care for a child does not qualify as neglect except in certain
circumstances for purposes of provisions of law applicable to children in need of
assistance; and generally relating to children in need of assistance.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–801(a) and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–801(s)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

3–801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(f) “Child in need of assistance” means a child who requires court intervention
because:

(1) The child has been abused, has been neglected, has a developmental
disability, or has a mental disorder; and

(2) The child’s parents, guardian, or custodian are unable or unwilling to
give proper care and attention to the child and the child’s needs.

(s) (1) “Neglect” means the leaving of a child unattended or other failure to
give proper care and attention to a child by any parent or individual who has permanent or
temporary care or custody or responsibility for supervision of the child under circumstances
that indicate:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 767 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(1)] (I) That the child’s health or welfare is harmed or placed at
substantial risk of harm; or

[(2)] (II) That the child has suffered mental injury or been placed at
substantial risk of mental injury.

(2) “NEGLECT” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE USE OF CANNABIS BY ANY
PARENT OR INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY CARE OR CUSTODY
OR RESPONSIBILITY FOR SUPERVISION OF THE CHILD UNLESS, AS A RESULT OF THE
USE OF CANNABIS:

(I) THE CHILD’S HEALTH OR WELFARE IS HARMED OR PLACED
AT SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF HARM; OR

(II) THE CHILD HAS SUFFERED MENTAL INJURY OR HAS BEEN
PLACED AT SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF MENTAL INJURY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2