START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 335

Chapter 335

(House Bill 229)

AN ACT concerning

Employment for Minors – Opportunities for Work

FOR the purpose of requiring the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, subject to a certain
limitation, to release certain personal information of a minor who has a work permit
to certain entities that have requested and have registered with the Maryland
Department of Labor for the purposes of receiving the information; and generally
relating to the employment of minors and work permits.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–206
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–206.

(a) A parent or guardian of a minor may apply for a work permit by completing
an online application that includes:

(1) verification of the minor’s age;

(2) a description of the work to be performed by the minor;

(3) approval by the parent or guardian of the minor’s employment; and

(4) any other information the Commissioner may require.

(b) After reviewing an online application for a work permit, the Commissioner
may issue the permit if the employment is allowed under this subtitle for the minor for
whom the permit is sought.

(c) (1) The Commissioner may issue a work permit that authorizes a minor to
be employed in an occupation that otherwise would be restricted under § 3–213 of this
subtitle, if the minor:

(i) is exempted, under § 7–301(d)(2)(i) of the Education Article, from
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 335 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

attendance in public school because the emotional, mental, or physical condition of the
minor makes instruction detrimental to the progress of the minor;

(ii) is to be employed only in office work;

(iii) is to be employed in work that is performed outside of all rooms
where goods are manufactured or processed; or

(iv) is to be employed in work that a county school system obtains
and supervises as part of a work–study, student–learner, or similar program for which the
employment is an integral part of the course of study.

(2) The Commissioner shall issue a work permit that authorizes a minor to
be employed:

(i) in an occupation that otherwise would be restricted under §
3–213 of this subtitle if the minor is granted an exception by the Commissioner because,
after investigation, the Commissioner determines that neither the work nor the work site
where the work is to be performed is hazardous to the minor; or

(ii) in an occupation that otherwise would be restricted under §
3–213(c)(1) or (2) of this subtitle, if the minor:

1. has completed a course of study in that occupation at an
accredited school and has been graduated from the school; or

2. is granted an exception by the Commissioner because
employment in that occupation is part of a work–study, student–learner, or apprentice
program under a federal, State, or local governmental agency.

(D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COMMISSIONER SHALL RELEASE THE NAME, HOME ADDRESS, AND TELEPHONE
NUMBER OF A MINOR WHO IS AT LEAST 16 YEARS OLD AND HAS A WORK PERMIT TO
THE FOLLOWING ORGANIZATIONS THAT REQUEST AND HAVE REGISTERED WITH THE
DEPARTMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECEIVING THE INFORMATION:

(I) EMPLOYERS AND APPRENTICESHIP SPONSORS;

(II) EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS AND INSTITUTIONS; AND

(III) LOCAL WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT BOARDS THAT HAVE
SYSTEMS TO SHARE THE INFORMATION WITH EMPLOYERS, APPRENTICESHIP
SPONSORS, AND EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS AND INSTITUTIONS THAT REGISTER
WITH THE LOCAL WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT BOARD FOR THE PURPOSE OF
RECEIVING THE INFORMATION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 335

(2) THE COMMISSIONER MAY RELEASE INFORMATION RELATING TO
A MINOR ONLY IF A PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF THE MINOR OR THE MINOR ELECTS TO
ALLOW THE SHARING OF THE INFORMATION.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO
CARRY OUT THIS SUBSECTION, INCLUDING THE PROCESS BY WHICH A PARENT OR
GUARDIAN OF THE MINOR OR THE MINOR MAY OPT IN TO THE SHARING OF
INFORMATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3