START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 278 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 278 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Clinical Nurse Specialists - Prescribing 
 
 
This bill authorizes a “clinical nurse specialist” (CNS) to “practice as a clinical nurse 
specialist” for the purpose of prescribing drugs and durable medical equipment (DME), 
among other things. The bill designates a CNS as an “authorized prescriber” under the 
Maryland Pharmacy Act. Practice as a CNS is governed by rules and regulations adopted 
by the Maryland Board of Nursing (MBON) and that concern additional acts in the practice 
of registered nursing. A licensed physician may personally prepare and dispense a 
prescription written by an advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) working with the 
physician in the same office setting. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding the scope of practice for a CNS does not substantively change 
governmental operations or finances. MBON can implement the bill with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Clinical nurse specialist” means an individual who is (1) licensed by 
MBON to practice registered nursing or has a multistate licensure privilege to practice 
registered nursing under the Nurse Licensure Compact and (2) certified by MBON to 
practice as a CNS. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 278/ Page 2 
“Practice as a clinical nurse specialist” means to (1) provide direct care to patients with 
complex needs; (2) act as a consultant to another health care provider as needed; 
(3) conduct health-related research; and (4) provide education and guidance for staff 
nurses. Practice as a CNS includes (1) ordering, performing, and interpreting laboratory 
tests; (2) ordering diagnostic tests and using the findings or results in the care of patients; 
(3) prescribing drugs and DME, as specified; (4) ordering home health and hospice care; 
and (5) initiating, monitoring, and altering appropriate therapies or treatments. 
 
Current Law:  In general, an individual must be licensed as a registered nurse (RN) and 
be certified as an APRN by MBON. An APRN is certified by MBON to practice as a nurse 
practitioner, nurse anesthetist, nurse midwife, or CNS. 
 
Registered Nurse 
 
Practice registered nursing means the performance of acts requiring substantial specialized 
knowledge, judgment, and skill based on the biological, physiological, behavioral, or 
sociological sciences as the basis for assessment, nursing diagnosis, planning, 
implementation, and evaluation of the practice of nursing to maintain health, prevent 
illness, or care for or rehabilitate the ill, injured, or infirm. 
 
An applicant for a RN license must complete and meet all requirements for a diploma or 
degree from a registered nursing education program approved by MBON, or an education 
program in registered nursing in any other state or country that MBON finds substantially 
equivalent to programs in the State. RN applicants must also pass an examination 
developed by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing, demonstrate English 
language competency, and be of good moral character. 
 
Advanced Practice Registered Nurse 
 
An applicant for an advance practice certification (including CNS) must (1) be a licensed 
RN or have a privilege to practice under the Nurse Licensure Compact; (2) complete an 
education program approved by MBON; (3) submit a completed application for each area 
in which certification is sought; and (4) submit documentation that the applicant has 
graduated from a graduate-level accredited program for advanced practice registered 
nursing and of certification as an APRN by a national certifying body recognized by 
MBON. 
 
Clinical Nurse Specialist 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.27.27.02), an applicant for certification as a 
CNS must (1) be a licensed RN or have a privilege to practice under the Nurse Licensure 
Compact; (2) complete a graduate level education program accredited by specified entities; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 278/ Page 3 
(3) complete a national certifying exam; (4) hold a current national certification as a CNS; 
(5) submit a completed application for certification as a CNS; (6) comply with specified 
regulations; (7) demonstrate oral and written competency in the English language; and 
(8) pay all fees. The role of a CNS encompasses the continuous improvement of patient 
outcomes and nursing care. Among other things, the role entails practicing with individual 
clients, families, groups, and populations of clients; diagnosing, treating, and managing 
patients with acute and chronic illness or disease; and creating therapeutic environments 
through mentoring and system changes. 
 
Prescriber Authority 
 
An “authorized prescriber” is any licensed dentist, licensed dental hygienist with 
prescriptive authority, licensed physician, licensed podiatrist, licensed veterinarian, 
advanced practice nurse with prescriptive authority (for “starter dosages” only), licensed 
nurse anesthetist, or other individual authorized by law to prescribe prescription or 
nonprescription drugs or devices. 
 
A “starter dosage” means an amount of drug sufficient to begin therapy that is either (1) for 
a duration of 72 hours or less, or (2) prescribed prior to a patient obtaining a larger quantity 
of the drug to complete therapy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 276 and SB 513 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 213 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3