START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 661

Chapter 661

(House Bill 244)

AN ACT concerning

Estates and Trusts – Registers of Wills – Electronic Filing and Signatures

FOR the purpose of requiring a register of wills to accept certain documents filed
electronically through a system established by the register of wills; prohibiting a
register of wills from refusing to accept a document based on the manner in which it
was signed; and generally relating to the filing of documents with a register of wills.

BY adding to
Article – Estates and Trusts
Section 2–214
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Estates and Trusts

2–214.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELECTRONIC”, “SIGN”, AND “WILL” HAVE THE
MEANINGS STATED IN § 4–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) A REGISTER SHALL ACCEPT ANY DOCUMENT, EXCEPT AN
ORIGINAL WILL, THAT IS FILED:

(I) ELECTRONICALLY THROUGH A SYSTEM ESTABLISHED BY
THE REGISTER; AND

(II) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MARYLAND RULES.

(2) NOTHING IN THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT
THE FILING OF A DOCUMENT IN PAPER FORM WITH A REGISTER.

(C) A REGISTER MAY NOT REFUSE TO ACCEPT ANY DOCUMENT BASED ON
THE MANNER IN WHICH IT WAS SIGNED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 661 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2