START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 289 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 289 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Forestry Education Fund - Establishment 
 
  
This bill establishes the Maryland Forestry Education Fund, a special fund administered 
by the Maryland Forestry Foundation. In general, the purpose of the fund is to provide 
small grants and specified training, education, and outreach opportunities for forest 
landowners, district forestry boards, local governments, and businesses. For 
fiscal 2025 and 2026, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation 
of $250,000 to the fund. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 
annually in FY 2025 and 2026 due to the mandated appropriation and by indeterminate 
amounts in future years to the extent discretionary funding is provided. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation in FY 2025 and 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$250,000 
$250,000 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$250,000 
$250,000 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$250,000 
$250,000 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
(-) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local grant revenues and expenditures likely increase in FY 2025 and 2026 
and may increase in future years. Local governments likely also benefit from the additional 
training and education provided under the bill. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact on some small 
businesses in the forestry industry, as discussed below. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 289/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, 
interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of 
the fund. 
 
The stated purpose of the fund is to expand and enhance (1) the Maryland Forestry 
Foundation’s capacity to provide education and resources that support forest landowners 
in the State; (2) the ability of district forestry boards and the knowledge of local 
governments to achieve environmental, economic, and social sustainability of forest health 
and the sustainable management of forest resources; and (3) the ability of businesses to test 
innovative best management practices in forestry. The fund may be used only for: 
 
 
providing training and education to forest landowners, district forestry boards, and 
local governments to ensure they are well-informed on advances and developments 
in (1) healthy forest management; (2) ecological service markets; (3) emerging 
forestry threats; (4) climate science; (5) forest conservation; (6) urban forestry; 
(7) sustainability science; (8) forestry policy; (9) forestry practices; and (10) resource 
options that promote the multiple benefits of forest management; 
 
providing outreach and engagement that builds local capacity and institutionalizes 
sustainability efforts within communities and the district forestry boards, including 
holding a forest sustainability conference once every two years, implementing a 
peer-to-peer learning exchange, and providing healthy forest presentations; 
 
developing and expanding a healthy forest education and conservation program; 
 
improving the outreach of district forestry boards by providing education, 
recognition, strategies, and actions the boards can implement; 
 
providing small grants to district forestry boards, forest landowners, local 
governments, and businesses to test innovative best management practices in forestry; 
 
recognizing the efforts forest landowners and local governments make toward 
achieving healthy, sustainable forest management; and 
 
expenses related to the administration of the fund. 
 
Money expended from the fund for specified outreach, training, education, and grants is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for forestry education and outreach. 
 
Current Law:  It is the policy of the State to encourage economic management and 
scientific development of its forests and woodlands to maintain, conserve, and improve the 
soil resources of the State so that an adequate source of forest products is preserved for the 
people. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 289/ Page 3 
The mission of the Forest Service within the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is 
to restore, manage, and protect Maryland’s trees, forests, and forested ecosystems to 
sustain the State’s natural resources and connect people to the land. Among other activities, 
the Forest Service (1) promotes the use of sustainable forestry management and urban tree 
planting; (2) provides education on forest sustainability to landowners, communities, 
organizations, and government agencies; (3) supports the maintenance of diverse forest 
economic activities and the forest products industry to provide for ecological and economic 
benefits of the State’s forests; (4) uses a variety of outreach mechanisms and partnerships 
to communicate forestry information to targeted audiences; and (5) works with government 
agencies, utilities, community groups, and citizens to expand and protect urban tree 
resources. 
 
Among its forestry-related duties, DNR is required to divide the State into districts based 
on the character and extent of the timber stand, similarity of forest problems, convenience 
of administration, and other pertinent factors. Within each district, DNR must establish a 
district forestry board, commonly referred to as a forest conservancy district board. DNR 
must appoint at least five members; the appointments must include, if possible, a person 
who represents each of the major types of forestry and woodworking interests and at least 
one person who represents farm woodland owners, as specified. 
 
District forestry boards must (1) promote private forestry by assisting landowners in forest 
management, planting trees, conservation and development of tree crops, and protection of 
forests from fires, insects, and diseases; (2) provide landowners with the services of a 
forester and advise them regarding their forest and tree crop problems; (3) assist county 
assessors in their appraisal of forest lands for tax purposes; (4) disseminate forest 
conservation information and collect data concerning forest conservation problems; 
(5) secure the cooperation and assistance of the United States and any of its agencies and 
State agencies in conservation of forest resources; (6) advise private forest land owners on 
the construction of flood control measures, seeding and planting of waste slopes, 
abandoned or eroded lands, and development of wildlife by planting food or cover 
producing trees, bushes, and shrubs; and (7) receive and pass on proposed work plans for 
cutting forest lands. 
 
Among other duties and powers, district forestry boards may cooperate with other 
government agencies to achieve better forest growth and promulgate conservation 
measures. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by (1) $250,000 in fiscal 2025 
and 2026 due to the bill’s mandated appropriation to the Maryland Forestry Education Fund 
in those years and (2) indeterminate amounts in future years to the extent that any 
additional, discretionary funding is provided to the fund. Special fund revenues and 
expenditures increase correspondingly, as the mandated appropriations and any future 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 289/ Page 4 
discretionary appropriations, along with any interest earnings, are received by the fund and 
spent in accordance with the bill. The bill requires that expenditures from the fund may be 
made only in accordance with the State budget. Accordingly, even though the fund is 
administered by the Maryland Forestry Foundation, which is a nonprofit organization, this 
analysis assumes that the special funds flow through the State budget. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent local governments receive a grant under the program, 
local revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly in fiscal 2025 and 2026 and may 
also increase in future years if discretionary funding is provided to the fund. In addition, 
local governments likely benefit from the additional training and outreach provided under 
the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Businesses are eligible to receive small grants from the fund to 
test innovative best management practices in forestry. Accordingly, small business 
foresters benefit to the extent they receive a grant under the program. They may also benefit 
indirectly from the additional training and outreach provided to forest landowners, district 
forestry boards, and local governments to the extent it results in an increase in the demand 
for forestry-related services. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Forestry Foundation is a nonprofit organization 
that (1) promotes sustainable forestry through legislative advocacy; (2) administers a 
tree-planting operation on private property in the State; (3) supports several urban forestry 
programs; (4) manages college fellowships in the field of natural resources; and (5) acts as 
the fiduciary agent for Maryland Forestry Board programs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 876 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 282 (Senator King, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Budget and 
Management; Baltimore, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; cities of 
Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 289/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5