START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 261 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 261 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Eligible Projects - Procurement of Construction Materials (Buy Clean Maryland 
Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of General Services (DGS), by January 1, 2026, and in 
consultation with the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), to establish a 
maximum acceptable global warming potential (GWP) for each category of cement or 
concrete mixture used in the construction of an eligible project. By December 31, 2024, 
producers of those materials must submit specified environmental product declarations 
(EPDs) to DGS for analysis. Beginning July 1, 2026, State agencies must specify in each 
solicitation for a construction project the cement or concrete mixture that will be used in 
the project and the reasonable minimum usage thresholds below which the bill’s 
requirements do not apply; contractors may not install any cement or concrete mixture 
before they submit EPDs. The bill also establishes an Environmental Product Declaration 
Assistance Fund, administered by the Department of Commerce, to award grants to 
producers of eligible materials to support the development, standardization, and 
transparency of EPDs. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2023, but certain 
provisions take effect July 1, 2026; the grant program terminates December 31, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $200,000 in FY 2024 to capitalize 
the fund; contingent funding for this purpose is included in the FY 2024 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly. Special fund revenues and expenditures increase 
commensurately. General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2025 for a 
consultant and by $217,900 in FY 2026 for staffing; out-years reflect annualization, 
inflation, and ongoing costs. No effect on total capital spending, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$200,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$200,000 
$50,000 
$217,900 
$413,400 
$485,100 
SF Expenditure 
$200,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($200,000) 
($50,000) 
($217,900) 
($413,400) 
($485,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 261/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Construction costs for local community college capital projects that receive 
State funding likely increase. Any such increase likely does not affect total capital spending 
by counties, as that amount is fixed each year, but it likely results in less local funding 
being available for other capital projects. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Global warming potential” means the degree that a given mass of a 
chemical contributes to global warming over a given time period when compared to the 
same mass of carbon dioxide. 
 
An “eligible project” is a capital project described in § 3-602.1(c) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article; it does not include any maintenance program for the upkeep of an 
eligible project. Section 3-602.1(c) relates to high-performance buildings. Specifically, 
under that provision, except as specified, if a capital project includes the construction or 
major renovation of a building that is 7,500 square feet or greater, the building must be 
constructed or renovated to be a high-performance building. The provision applies to 
capital projects that are funded solely with State funds and community college capital 
projects that receive State funds. 
 
Establishing Global Warming Potential 
 
In establishing GWPs for cement and concrete mixtures, DGS must:   
 
 
analyze EPDs submitted by producers; 
 
base the maximum acceptable GWP on the industry average for each material; 
 
determine the industry average of GWP emissions, as specified, by consulting 
nationally or internationally recognized databases of EPDs; and 
 
express the maximum acceptable GWP in a specified manner. 
 
DGS may also (1) establish additional subcategories; (2) establish a maximum acceptable 
GWP for each material category in the aggregate; and (3) consult with other relevant units 
of State government. 
 
By January 1, 2029, and every three years thereafter, DGS must again review the GWPs 
and may adjust the potential for any category to reflect industry conditions. However, DGS 
may not adjust the GWP upward for any category of eligible material. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 261/ Page 3 
In carrying out these requirements, DGS must strive to achieve a continuous reduction of 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions over time. 
 
Capital Construction Projects 
 
A successful bidder or offeror on a State capital contract must submit, for any cement or 
concrete mixture to be used in the project, (1) a current EPD that meets specified standards 
or (2) a similarly robust life cycle assessment method that includes uniform standards in 
data collection. A contractor may not install cement or concrete until the contractor submits 
a facility-specific EPD for each material. If an EPD is not available for a specific product, 
the contractor must notify the State agency and use an alternative material with an EPD. 
 
DGS may waive these requirements if it determines that requiring the relevant cement or 
concrete mixture would:   
 
 
be technically infeasible; 
 
result in a significant increase in project cost; 
 
result in a significant delay in project completion; or 
 
result in only one source or manufacturer being able to provide the necessary 
materials. 
 
By December 1, 2025, and each year thereafter, DGS must submit a report to the 
General Assembly with specified information regarding implementation of the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) required the 
Maryland Green Building Council (MGBC) to examine (1) the use of EPDs to measure the 
climate impact of concrete procured by the State; (2) the use of performance incentives to 
encourage adoption of low-carbon materials and methods by concrete manufacturers that 
provide concrete for State-funded projects; (3) the establishment of an expedited product 
evaluation, testing, and approval protocol for low-carbon concrete products; (4) the 
implementation of performance-based specification standards for concrete, as specified; 
and (5) the use of methods of compliance, including maximum cement content 
specifications and specifications based on maximum potential for global warming. 
 
In examining these topics, MGBC was required to consult with (1) any relevant 
associations that set industry standards for the procurement of low-carbon concrete and 
(2) affected contractors and subcontractors to consider both environmental and health and 
safety impacts. MGBC was required to report its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 261/ Page 4 
Among the findings in the MGBC report are: 
 
 
no in-state manufacturers of concrete have developed EPDs for their mixes; 
 
there are many different types of EPDs; 
 
EPDs cost about $15,000 to produce; 
 
low-carbon concrete with an EPD costs more than concrete currently being used; 
and 
 
EPDs are tracked through existing searchable life-cycle assessment databases. 
 
The federal Inflation Reduction Act provides approximately $6.0 billion to reduce 
GHG emissions at manufacturing plants that produce construction materials such as steel, 
asphalt, and concrete. 
 
High-performance Buildings 
 
Chapter 124 of 2008 requires most new or renovated State buildings to be constructed as 
high-performance buildings, subject to waiver processes established by the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM) and DGS. Identical requirements were later added for 
community college projects that receive State funds. 
 
Chapter 124 defines a high-performance building as one that:   
 
 
meets or exceeds the U.S. GBC Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
(LEED) certification criteria for a silver rating; or 
 
achieves a comparable numeric rating according to a nationally recognized, 
accepted, and appropriate standard approved by DBM and DGS. Based on a 
unanimous recommendation from MGBC, in 2017, DGS and DBM approved the 
use of the Green Globes rating system developed by the Green Building Initiative 
as an alternative to LEED silver. 
 
Only new or renovated State buildings that are at least 7,500 square feet and are built or 
renovated entirely with State funds are subject to the high-performance requirement. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Department of General Services 
 
The bill adds significant intermittent and ongoing responsibilities to DGS for which it 
currently does not have in-house expertise or staffing. These responsibilities include:   
 
 
establishing GWPs for each type of cement and concrete blend and updating the 
GWPs every three years; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 261/ Page 5 
 
monitoring contractor compliance with EPD requirements on State construction 
contracts; 
 
processing waiver requests; and 
 
reporting annually on implementation of the bill. 
 
These DGS responsibilities generally do not begin until fiscal 2025 and 2026. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2025 and by $217,876 
in fiscal 2026. This estimate includes the cost of hiring a consultant in fiscal 2025 to 
analyze the EPDs submitted by cement and concrete producers and develop GWPs for 
those materials before the January 2026 deadline. It also reflects the cost of hiring a contract 
manager, a procurement officer, and a database specialist in fiscal 2026 for DGS to carry 
out the other tasks described above. The estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. It is assumed that new staff are 
hired as of January 1, 2026, to begin planning for the implementation of the bill’s 
construction contract provisions in fiscal 2027, including establishing a waiver process for 
contractors. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$196,412 
Operating Expenses 
    21,464 
Total FY 2026 DGS Expenditures 
$217,876 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Additional consulting services 
to review and adjust GWPs are not needed until fiscal 2029, which is beyond the 
five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note. 
 
It is assumed that MDOT can consult with DGS as needed using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Department of Commerce 
 
The new Environmental Product Declaration Assistance Fund exists only for 18 months. 
This analysis assumes that it awards one round of grants (in fiscal 2024) to producers of 
cement and concrete to develop EPDs as required by the bill. The fiscal 2024 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly includes $200,000 in general funds for this purpose, 
contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures increase by $200,000 only in fiscal 2024 to capitalize the new fund, and 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase commensurately to award the grants 
(under the assumption that the appropriation is transferred to the new special fund by 
budget amendment). Commerce can administer the grant program with existing resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 261/ Page 6 
State and Local Capital Construction Costs 
 
Low-carbon concrete is generally more expensive than concrete currently used on State 
construction projects and on local community college construction projects that receive 
State funds. Therefore, construction costs for most State construction projects and affected 
community college projects likely increase to the extent that low-carbon concrete is used 
and waivers are not granted. 
 
However, this has no overall effect on the capital budget, MDOT’s Consolidated 
Transportation Program, or local capital expenditures, which are all established annually 
in accordance with their respective capital affordability guidelines or debt capacity. To the 
extent that individual construction projects are more expensive, some projects may be 
delayed or canceled. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small construction contractors that work on State projects or on 
affected community college projects must comply with the bill’s requirements regarding 
the use of low-carbon concrete and the submission of EPDs. Although the requirements 
are generally procedural in nature, they may put a strain on small contractors that have 
limited or no support staff. Small contractors must also purchase and use low-carbon 
concrete on State contracts, which is generally more expensive than concrete currently in 
use; however, higher costs are assumed to be passed on to the State. To the extent that 
producers of cement and concrete are small businesses, they benefit from the available 
grant funding in fiscal 2024. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill’s requirement for DGS to annually report, as specified, 
beginning December 1, 2025, is assumed to apply initially on December 1, 2026, as that 
provision of the bill does not take effect until July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 961 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 424 (Senators Elfreth and Feldman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
General Services; Department of Commerce; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; U.S. Department of Energy; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 261/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7