START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 385

Chapter 385

(House Bill 214)

AN ACT concerning

Commission on Public Health – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Commission on Public Health to make
recommendations to improve the delivery of foundational public health services in
the State; requiring the Commission to conduct a certain assessment ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ and generally relating to the Commission on Public Health.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 13–4801 through 13–4807 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 48.
Commission on Public Health”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 48. COMMISSION ON PUBLIC HEALTH.

13–4801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE COMMISSION ON PUBLIC HEALTH.

(C) “FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES” INCLUDES:

(1) THE FOLLOWING FOUNDATIONAL AREAS:

(I) COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL;

(II) CHRONIC DISEASE AND INJURY PREVENTION;

(III) ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC HEALTH;

(IV) MATERNAL, CHILD, AND FAMILY HEALTH; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 385 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) ACCESS TO AND LINKAGE WITH CLINICAL CARE; AND

(2) THE FOLLOWING FOUNDATIONAL CAPABILITIES:

(I) ASSESSMENT AND SURVEILLANCE;

(II) COMMUNITY PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT;

(III) EQUITY;

(IV) ORGANIZATIONAL COMPETENCIES;

(V) POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT;

(VI) ACCOUNTABILITY AND PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT;

(VII) EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE; AND

(VIII) COMMUNICATIONS.

13–4802.

THERE IS A COMMISSION ON PUBLIC HEALTH.

13–4803.

(A) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(3) THE DEPUTY SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC HEALTH, OR THE DEPUTY
SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) (4) THE DEPUTY SECRETARY FOR BEHAVIORAL HEALTH, OR
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(3) (5) THE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF MINORITY HEALTH AND
HEALTH DISPARITIES, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 385

(4) (6) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND HEALTH
CARE COMMISSION, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE HEALTH SERVICES COST
REVIEW COMMISSION, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE; AND

(6) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

(I) TWO THREE LOCAL HEALTH OFFICERS OF WHOM:

1. ONE SHALL BE FROM A RURAL JURISDICTION;

2. ONE SHALL BE FROM A SUBURBAN JURISDICTION;
AND

3. ONE SHALL BE FROM AN URBAN JURISDICTION;

(II) TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM STATE ACADEMIC
INSTITUTIONS WITH EXPERTISE IN PUBLIC HEALTH SYSTEMS;

(III) A FACULTY MEMBER FROM A PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAM AT
A HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY; AND

(IV) A STATE RESIDENT WITH EXPERTISE IN PUBLIC HEALTH
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY;

(V) A STATE RESIDENT WITH EXPERTISE IN THE PUBLIC
HEALTH WORKFORCE;

(VI) A STATE RESIDENT WITH EXPERTISE IN HEALTH EQUITY;

(VII) A STATE RESIDENT WITH EXPERIENCE AS A SAFETY NET
~~PROVIDER;~~

(VIII) A STATE BUSINESS LEADER WITH DEMONSTRATED
~~EXPERTISE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~IMPROVING~~ ~~POPULATION~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~JURISDICTIONS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
~~STATE;~~

(IX) A CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF A HOSPITAL LOCATED IN
THE STATE;

(X) A CONSUMER HEALTH ADVOCATE IN THE STATE; AND

(XI) A HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL LICENSED IN THE STATE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 385 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) AT LEAST THREE BUT NOT MORE THAN FIVE MEMBERS OF
THE PUBLIC WITH DEMONSTRATED INTEREST IN PUBLIC HEALTH AND EXPERIENCE
IN AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING AREAS:

1. HEALTH EQUITY;

2. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY;

3. WORKFORCE; AND

4. POPULATION HEALTH.

(B) IN PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION, THE COMMISSION
SHALL CONSULT WITH, AS APPROPRIATE AND NECESSARY:

(1) THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE COMMISSION;

(2) THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION;

(3) THE MARYLAND COMMUNITY HEALTH RESOURCES
COMMISSION;

(4) THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT;

(5) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES;

(6) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF DISABILITIES;

(7) THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH DATA UTILITY; AND

(8) ANY OTHER STATE AGENCY AS APPROPRIATE.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH THE FOLLOWING
WORKGROUPS:

(I) FUNDING;

(II) GOVERNANCE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CAPABILITIES;

(III) WORKFORCE;

(IV) DATA AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 385

(V) COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.

(2) EACH WORKGROUP ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) TWO MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION; AND

(II) MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WITH RELEVANT EXPERIENCE IN
THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE WORKGROUP WHO MAY INCLUDE:

1. PRIMARY AND SPECIALTY CARE PRACTITIONERS;

2. PAYORS;

3. CONSUMER ADVOCATES;

4. HOSPITAL EXECUTIVES;

5. SAFETY NET HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS;

6. PUBLIC HEALTH PRACTITIONERS; AND

7. COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATIONS; AND

8. FAITH–BASED ORGANIZATIONS.

(3) THE PURPOSE OF THE WORKGROUPS ESTABLISHED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS TO FOSTER BROAD ENGAGEMENT AND
PROVIDE EXPERTISE FOR THE PURPOSE OF INFORMING THE WORK AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMISSION.

(D) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND CONSISTENT WITH FEDERAL AND
STATE LAW, THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION AND WORKGROUPS
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL REFLECT THE RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND
GENDER DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

(B) (E) THE MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(6)(II) (A)(4)(II) OF THIS SECTION SHALL COCHAIR THE
COMMISSION THE COMMISSION SHALL BE COCHAIRED BY:

(1) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(6)(I) OF THIS
SECTION, DESIGNATED BY THE GOVERNOR;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 385 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(6)(II) OF THIS
SECTION, DESIGNATED BY THE GOVERNOR; AND

(3) THE MEMBER APPOINTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(6)(III) OF THIS
SECTION.

(C) (F) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

13–4804.

THE ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS REPRESENTED BY THE COCHAIRS OF THE
COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE STAFF SUPPORT FOR THE COMMISSION.

13–4805.

THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
IMPROVE THE DELIVERY OF FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES IN THE
STATE.

13–4806.

(A) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, THE THE COMMISSION SHALL ASSESS
THE ~~CAPABILITY~~ FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH CAPABILITIES OF THE
DEPARTMENT AND LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS IN THE STATE TO PROVIDE
FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES TO ALL RESIDENTS OF THE STATE.

(B) (1) IN CONDUCTING THE ASSESSMENT REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(I) CONSIDER THE FOLLOWING FACTORS:

1. THE STATE’S RESPONSE TO COVID–19;

2. THE STATE’S RESPONSE TO OVERDOSE DEATHS;

3. RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISPARITIES IN MATERNAL
MORTALITY AND BIRTH OUTCOMES IN THE STATE; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 385

4. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
ANY OTHER FACTORS CONSIDERED APPROPRIATE BY THE COMMISSION; AND

(II) HOLD AT LEAST THREE PUBLIC MEETINGS IN DIFFERENT
AREAS OF THE STATE THAT INCLUDE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC COMMENT.

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY NOT CONSIDER MORE THAN THREE
ADDITIONAL FACTORS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(I)4 OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(I) EXPLAIN THE IMPACT OF THE FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC
HEALTH CAPABILITIES ON THE STATE’S ABILITY TO ADDRESS FOUNDATIONAL
PUBLIC HEALTH AREAS, INCLUDING AS THE FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH AREAS
RELATE TO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH;

(II) EXPLAIN THE IMPACT OF THE FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC
HEALTH CAPABILITIES ON THE STATE’S ABILITY TO RESPOND TO COVID–19,
OVERDOSES, MATERNAL AND INFANT MORTALITY, AND OTHER MAJOR PUBLIC
HEALTH CHALLENGES AS APPROPRIATE; AND

(III) PROVIDE PUBLIC OUTREACH TO HOLD AT LEAST THREE
PUBLIC MEETINGS IN DIFFERENT AREAS OF THE STATE THAT INCLUDE AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC COMMENT.

(3) (2) IN CONDUCTING THE ASSESSMENT REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION MAY:

(I) REQUEST AND OBTAIN DEIDENTIFIED AND PUBLICLY
AVAILABLE DATA FROM THE DEPARTMENT, LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS, AND
THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE; DATA UTILITY; AND

(II) REQUEST INTERVIEWS WITH STATE AND LOCAL HEALTH
OFFICIALS; AND

~~(III)~~ ~~FORM~~ ~~WORKGROUPS.~~

(C) (1) BASED ON THE ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
REFORM IN THE FOLLOWING AREAS:

(I) ORGANIZATION OF STATE AND LOCAL PUBLIC HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS;

(II) INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, INFORMATION EXCHANGE,
AND DATA AND ANALYTICS;
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 385 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) WORKFORCE, INCLUDING HUMAN RESOURCES AND USE OF
THE MEDICAL RESERVE CORPS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH;

(IV) PROCUREMENT, INCLUDING OVERSIGHT OF
CONTRACTORS;

(V) FUNDING; AND

(VI) COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT; AND

(VI) (VII) ANY OTHER AREA CONSIDERED APPROPRIATE BY THE
COMMISSION.

(2) THE RECOMMENDATIONS MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE ~~WHETHER~~ THE FUNDING OR LEGISLATION ~~IS~~
REQUIRED TO IMPLEMENT THE RECOMMENDATION, IF ANY.

(3) THE COMMISSION SHALL JUSTIFY EACH RECOMMENDATION
MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BASED ON HOW THE
RECOMMENDATION CONTRIBUTES TO THE PROVISION OF FOUNDATIONAL PUBLIC
HEALTH SERVICES.

(4) (I) THE COMMISSION SHALL MAKE A DRAFT OF ITS
RECOMMENDATIONS AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC COMMENT FOR 30 DAYS.

(II) THE FINAL REPORT OF THE COMMISSION SHALL INCLUDE A
RESPONSE TO ANY SUBSTANTIVE PUBLIC COMMENT RECEIVED ON THE DRAFT
RECOMMENDATIONS.

(5) (I) THE COMMISSION SHALL USE BEST EFFORTS TO REACH
CONSENSUS ON ITS RECOMMENDATIONS.

(II) IF THE COMMISSION CANNOT REACH CONSENSUS ON ITS
RECOMMENDATIONS, THE COMMISSION SHALL INCLUDE THE OPPORTUNITY FOR
DISSENTING COMMENTS IN THE COMMISSION’S FINAL REPORT.

13–4807.

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2023, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT
AN INTERIM REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION
COMMITTEE, THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 385

COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
COMMITTEE.

(B) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025 DECEMBER 1, 2024, THE
COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT A FINAL REPORT OF ITS FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION
COMMITTEE, THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS
COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
COMMITTEE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of ~~4~~ 2 years and 1 month and,
at the end of ~~September~~ June 30, ~~2027~~ 2025, this Act, with no further action required by
the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9