START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 262 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 262 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Abandoned Vehicles - Secured Parties - Electronic Notification 
 
 
This bill authorizes a police department that takes an abandoned vehicle into custody to 
notify any secured party electronically, if that form of notice is agreed to by the police 
department, the tower, and the secured party in writing (or by electronic communication). 
The bill also makes conforming changes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations although 
efficiencies and minimal cost savings may be realized. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations 
although efficiencies and minimal cost savings may be realized.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An “abandoned vehicle” is defined as a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer 
that:   
 
 
is inoperable and left unattended for 48 hours on public property; 
 
remains illegally on public property for 48 hours; 
 
is on private property without consent for 48 hours; 
 
has remained in a garage for more than 10 days after the garage keeper has given 
the vehicle owner notice to remove the vehicle, or beyond the time when, by 
contract, the vehicle was to remain in the garage; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 262/ Page 2 
 
is left for more than 10 days in a garage by someone other than the registered owner 
or left by a person only authorized to have possession of the vehicle under a contract; 
 
has remained on public property for 48 hours and has invalid or incorrect 
registration plates; 
 
has been left unattended for 24 hours on a controlled access highway; 
 
has been left unattended on a highway and does not display appropriate warning 
devices; or 
 
is not reclaimed from impoundment under specific court order. 
 
Notice by Police to Last Known Registered Owner and Secured Parties 
 
As soon as reasonably possible – but no more than seven days after it takes an abandoned 
vehicle into custody – a police department must send a notice by certified U.S. mail with a 
return receipt requested to (1) the last known registered owner of the vehicle and (2) each 
secured party, as shown on Motor Vehicle Administration records. 
 
The notice must include specified information, including information about the vehicle and 
the location of the facility where the vehicle is held. In general, a vehicle may be reclaimed 
within three weeks after the date of the notice, after payment of all towing, preservation, 
and storage charges resulting from taking or placing the vehicle in custody. In 
Baltimore City and Montgomery County, the vehicle must be reclaimed within 11 working 
days after receipt of the notice and payment of any applicable charges. 
 
In Baltimore City, Prince George’s and Montgomery counties, a police department or its 
agent may seek to recover costs of impoundment, storage, and sale of a vehicle, as specified 
in the Transportation Article. If a police department or its agent seeks to exercise this 
option, the required notice must include additional information specifying the 
consequences of failing to reclaim the vehicle within the specified time period. 
 
Under certain circumstances (i.e., the identity of the last registered owner cannot be 
determined, the vehicle registration gives no address, it is impossible to determine the 
identity and address of each secured party, or the required certified mail notice is returned 
as undeliverable), a police department that takes an abandoned vehicle into custody must 
post a notice in the circuit court of the county where the abandoned vehicle was found. 
Among other requirements, any such notice must be posted within 15 days of taking the 
vehicle into custody or (if applicable) within seven days of the return of an undeliverable 
certified mail notice.  
 
Failure to Reclaim Vehicle 
 
Failure to reclaim the vehicle within the appropriate time period is considered (1) a waiver 
of the owner’s or secured party’s right, title, and interest in the vehicle; (2) a consent to the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 262/ Page 3 
sale of the vehicle at public auction; and (3) a consent by the owner (other than a lessor) to 
the retention of the vehicle for public purposes as specified in the Transportation Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3