START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 277 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 277 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County – Alcoholic Beverages – Holders of Class B–BWL 
(Clubhouse/Lodge) License and Class 7 Micro–Brewery License MC 16–23 
 
 
This bill clarifies that the holder of a Class B-BWL (clubhouse/lodge) license in 
Montgomery County that is issued a Class 7 micro-brewery license is not subject to the 
general licensure restriction on holders of Class 7 micro-brewery licenses. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Montgomery County 
operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Montgomery County Class B-BWL (Clubhouse/Lodge) License 
 
The Montgomery County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to issue a 
Class B-BWL 
(clubhouse/lodge) 
license 
to 
the 
executive 
director 
of 
the 
Montgomery County Revenue Authority or the designee of the executive director, for use 
by a multiuse facility that has a golf course, a restaurant, a clubhouse, a tasting bar, and the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 277/ Page 2 
catering of events anywhere on the property. The Class B-BWL (clubhouse/lodge) license 
authorizes the license holder to:   
 
 
sell beer and wine for off-premises consumption. 
 
sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption; and 
 
offer samples of alcoholic beverages at no charge or for a fee. 
 
Specified requirements regarding the ratio of food and alcohol sales of a Class B beer, 
wine, and liquor license in Montgomery County do not apply to a Class B-BWL 
(clubhouse/lodge) license holder. The license holder may also hold (1) a Class 4 limited 
winery license and (2) a Class 7 micro-brewery license, as specified. The annual license 
fee is $1,000. 
 
Class 7 Micro-brewery License 
 
A Class 7 micro-brewery license is issued by the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission, and 
the annual license fee may not exceed $500. The license holder may collectively brew, 
bottle, or contract for up to 45,000 barrels of beer each calendar year, and up to 5,000 of 
those barrels may be sold for on-premises consumption each year, as specified. 
 
Generally, the holder of a Class 7 micro-brewery license may hold or have financial interest 
in one retail license that does not apply to the premises to which a Class 7 micro-brewery 
license applies. 
 
Class 7 micro-brewery (on- and off-sale) licenses in the county may be issued to the holder 
of (1) a Class B BWL (on-sale) license that is issued for use on the premises of a restaurant 
located in the county; (2) a Class D beer and wine license that is issued for the sale of beer 
and wine, at retail, at the place described in the license, for on- and off-sale premises 
consumption, as specified; (3) a Class H beer and wine license that is issued for the sale of 
beer and wine at a hotel or restaurant, at retail, at the place described in the license, for 
on-premises consumption; (4) a Class BD-BWL license that is issued for the sale of beer 
and wine for on- and off-premises consumption, and liquor for on-premises consumption, 
at the place described in the license; (5) a Class B-BWL (clubhouse/lodge) license that is 
issued for the sale of beer and wine for on- and off- premises consumption, at the place 
described in the license; or (6) a Class D beer, wine, and liquor license that is issued for 
the sale of beer, wine and liquor for on-premises consumption, at the place described in the 
license. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 277/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3