START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 251 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 251 
(Delegate Boyce) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Class A-7 Licenses 
 
 
This bill repeals the prohibition against the Baltimore City Board of License 
Commissioners issuing a Class A-7 beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license in the 
43rd legislative district. The bill also authorizes the board to issue a Class A-7 license after 
June 30, 2022. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.       
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues increase minimally beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent the board issues additional Class A-7 licenses under the bill, as discussed below. 
Baltimore City can enforce the bill with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class A-7 License  
 
Chapter 537 of 2018 authorized the board to issue a Class A-7 BWL license. The license 
authorizes the holder to sell, for off-premises consumption, beer, wine, and liquor at retail 
at the place described in the license on Monday through Sunday from 10;00 a.m. to 
midnight. The annual license fee is $1,500. A license holder who holds a valid Class B-D-7 
license issued on or before July 1, 2018, may apply to the board to exchange the license 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 251/ Page 2 
for a Class A-7 license if the license holder first obtains approval by resolution of the 
Baltimore City Council. The board may not issue a Class A-7 license after July 1, 2022. 
Chapter 510 of 2020 prohibited a Class A-7 license from being issued in the 
43rd legislative district.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the board issues a Class A-7 BWL license, including 
in the 43rd legislative district, after July 1, 2023, under the bill, revenues increase by 
$2,100 at the time of application and $1,500 annually thereafter. The estimate reflects a 
$600 application fee and the annual license fee of $1,500 for a Class A-7 beer, wine, and 
liquor license.  
 
Also, for each Class B-D-7 license exchanged for a Class A-7 license after July 1, 2023, 
under the bill, Baltimore City revenues increase by $780 at the time of application and 
$180 annually thereafter. This estimate reflects a $600 application fee and the difference 
between the annual license fees for the Class A-7 and Class B-D-7 licenses ($1,500 and 
$1,320, respectively). While the number of license holders who will seek to exchange a 
Class B-D-7 license for a Class A-7 license after July 1, 2023, under the bill is unknown, 
it is likely to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 381 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2