START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 258 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 258 
(Delegate Arentz, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Caroline and Queen Anne's Counties - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Residency 
Requirement 
 
   
This bill alters the residency requirement for an alcoholic beverages license on behalf of a 
partnership, corporation or club, or limited liability company in Caroline County and a 
partnership in Queen Anne’s County and makes technical changes. The bill establishes that 
the residency requirement for an applicable license is satisfied if at least one of the 
applicants is a resident of the State at the time the application is filed and provides that a 
license only remains valid for as long as at least one of the applicants is a resident of the 
State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the operations or finances of 
Caroline or Queen Anne’s counties.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
Current Law:   
 
Caroline County:  Applicants seeking an alcoholic beverages license on behalf of a 
partnership, corporation or club, or limited liability company in Caroline County have 
specific residency requirements.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 258/ Page 2 
For a partnership, each of the partners must (1) reside in the jurisdiction or municipality 
where the business is located at the time the application is filed and (2) remain a resident 
of the jurisdiction or municipality where the business is located for the duration of time the 
license is in effect.  
 
For a corporation or club, unless otherwise specified, a license on behalf of a corporation 
or club must be applied for and issued to three officers of the corporation or club as 
individuals. At least one of the three officers must (1) be a resident of the jurisdiction or 
municipality at the time the application is filed and (2) remain a resident of the jurisdiction 
or municipality for the duration of time the license is in effect.  
 
For a limited liability company, if a limited liability company has fewer than 
three authorized individuals, each authorized individual must apply for the license. If the 
limited liability company has three or more authorized individuals, three authorized 
individuals must apply for the license. At least one of the authorized individuals must (1) be 
a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality at the time the application is filed and 
(2) remain a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality for the duration of time the license 
is in effect.  
 
Queen Anne’s County:  An applicant for an alcoholic beverages license on behalf of a 
corporation or limited liability company in Queen Anne’s County is not required to be a 
resident of the county. 
 
For a partnership in Queen Anne’s County, each of the partners must (1) reside in the 
jurisdiction or municipality where the business is located at the time the application is filed 
and (2) remain a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality where the business is located 
for the duration of time the license is in effect. Additionally, an applicant on behalf of a 
partnership in Queen Anne’s County may not be issued a Class A beer, wine, and liquor 
license unless the owners of 75% of the interest in the partnership are residents of the 
county at the time the application is filed.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 258/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Queen Anne’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 22, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3