START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 236 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 236 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Sales - Homeowner Protection Program - Outreach 
 
 
This bill establishes the intent of the General Assembly that at least 2% of the balance in 
the Homeowner Protection Fund be spent each year to conduct specified outreach to 
encourage homeowners in tax sale to enroll in the Homeowner Protection Program. The 
bill also (1) establishes authority of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman to conduct the outreach 
and gather related information and (2) requires that a summary of the outreach conducted 
by the ombudsman be included in a specified annual report.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures may increase by up to $204,200 in FY 2024; 
future years reflect annualization and inflation. Special fund revenues may decrease 
annually beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Expenditure 
$204,200 
$187,100 
$191,700 
$196,400 
$202,100 
Net Effect 
($204,200) 
($187,100) 
($191,700) 
($196,400) 
($202,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 236/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: The bill establishes that it is the intent of the General Assembly that: 
 
 
at least 2% of the balance in the Homeowner Protection Fund be spent each year to 
conduct outreach to homeowners in tax sale to encourage the homeowners to enroll 
in the Homeowner Protection Program; 
 
the outreach consist of (1) live telephone calls to homeowners whenever practicable 
or (2) if live telephone calls are not practicable, methods of contacting homeowners 
other than sending information by mail; and 
 
priority be given to contacting homeowners as soon as possible after their dwellings 
are sold at tax sale.  
 
The bill authorizes the State Tax Sale Ombudsman to (1) conduct outreach to homeowners 
using State employees and resources or (2) contract with a private vendor to conduct 
outreach to homeowners.  
 
At the request of the ombudsman (1) promptly after each county tax sale, the local tax 
collector must provide the ombudsman with the list of homeowners whose dwellings were 
sold at the tax sale; (2) the Comptroller must provide the telephone number of a homeowner 
if the homeowner included the homeowner’s telephone number on a tax return filed with 
the Comptroller; and (3) any other State or local government agency must promptly provide 
any information required to conduct outreach. The ombudsman may obtain information 
from any reliable private source to conduct outreach. 
 
The bill requires that a summary of outreach to homeowners pursuant to the bill be included 
in an annual report – on tax sale information and the activities of the ombudsman – that, 
under existing law, the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) must 
publish on its website and submit to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the 
House Committee on Ways and Means by November 15 each year.  
 
Current Law:   
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman 
 
Chapter 730 of 2019 established the State Tax Sale Ombudsman within SDAT to, among 
other things, (1) actively assist homeowners to apply for tax credits, discount programs, 
and other public benefits that may assist the homeowners to pay delinquent taxes and 
improve their financial situation; (2) refer homeowners to legal services, housing 
counseling, and other social services that may assist the homeowners to pay delinquent 
taxes and improve their financial situation; and (3) maintain a toll-free telephone number 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 236/ Page 3 
that a homeowner may call to obtain individualized personal assistance with delinquent 
taxes. 
 
By November 15 of each year, SDAT must publish on its website and submit to the 
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Committee on Ways and Means a 
report that includes (1) an analysis and summary of tax sale information collected through 
a required annual survey of the counties and (2) information on the activities of the 
ombudsman, including a summary of the implementation of the Homeowner Protection 
Program. 
 
Notice of Sale 
 
At least 30 days before any property is first advertised for sale by a tax collector, the 
collector must mail to the owner a specified notice that the collector will proceed to sell 
the lien on the property if unpaid taxes are not paid within 30 days. The notice must include 
specified information about assistance available to the homeowner, including (1) the State 
Tax Sale Ombudsman’s availability to assist the homeowner and the ombudsman’s 
toll-free telephone number and website address and (2) information on the homeowner’s 
property tax credit and Homeowner Protection Program. 
 
Right of Redemption 
 
An owner or other person that has an estate or interest in property sold by a tax collector 
may redeem the property at any time until the right of redemption has been finally 
foreclosed. In general, a holder of a certificate of sale is not authorized to file a complaint 
to foreclose the right of redemption earlier than six months after the date of the tax sale. 
For owner-occupied residential property in Baltimore City, that time period is nine months 
instead of six months. 
 
The person redeeming the property must pay the collector (1) the total lien amount paid at 
the tax sale for the property together with interest; (2) any taxes, interest, and penalties paid 
by any holder of the certificate of sale; (3) except if the property is owner-occupied 
residential property in Baltimore City, any delinquent taxes, interest, and penalties accruing 
after the date of the tax sale; and (4) in the manner and by the terms required by the 
collector, any expenses or fees for which the plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale 
is entitled to reimbursement. 
 
Homeowner Protection Program and Fund 
 
Chapter 382 of 2021 established the Homeowner Protection Program administered by the 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman, and the Homeowner Protection Fund to support the program. 
The program diverts vulnerable homeowners from the private tax lien sale process into an 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 236/ Page 4 
alternative program – through the purchase of a homeowners’ lien, whether before or after 
the lien is sold at a tax sale – in order to (1) minimize tax collection costs to homeowners; 
(2) assist homeowners to pay their taxes; and (3) allow homeowners to remain in their 
homes.  
 
By June 30 each year, SDAT must determine the maximum number of homeowners who 
may be enrolled in the program in the next succeeding fiscal year based on the amount of 
funding available for the program in the fund. 
 
The ombudsman must (1) prominently advertise the program and make applications 
available on the ombudsman’s website and (2) collaborate with local governments, 
community organizations, and public and private providers of social services and benefits 
to raise awareness of the program and disseminate applications. 
 
The fund consists of (1) tax and interest payments made to the department by homeowners 
enrolled in the program; (2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (3) interest 
earnings; and (4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the 
fund. For each of fiscal 2023 through 2025, the Governor is required to include an 
appropriation of $750,000 for the fund in the annual budget bill. The fund may be used 
only for any expenses associated with the program. The fund may not be used for any 
expenses of the tax sale ombudsman’s office that are not directly related to the program. 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget and the 
fund is the exclusive source of funding for the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Special Fund Expenditures 
 
Special fund (Homeowner Protection Fund) expenditures may increase by up to $204,166 
in fiscal 2024 for costs associated with the outreach program. This estimate reflects the 
cost of (1) hiring one additional staff person within the ombudsman’s office to coordinate 
the outreach campaign with a call center vendor and assist with increasing incoming call 
volume to the ombudsman’s office as a result of the outreach campaign; (2) a contract with 
a call center vendor; (3) phone number research services; and (4) programming for the 
Comptroller’s Office to be able to produce available phone numbers from its database from 
a list of homeowners provided by the ombudsman’s office. The estimate includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The estimate is 
based on the following assumptions: 
 
 
A significant outreach effort is conducted, attempting to contact all homeowners 
whose properties are sold at a tax sale each year. To the extent a more limited 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 236/ Page 5 
outreach effort is undertaken – due to availability of funding and/or the number of 
homeowners the program can enroll – costs are reduced. 
 
The programming costs of the Comptroller’s Office ($30,000) are able to be covered 
by special funds as an expense associated with the Homeowner Protection Program. 
Otherwise, general funds are needed to cover the cost.  
 
The amount of funding in the Homeowner Protection Fund that is spent, if a 
significant outreach effort is undertaken, is well above the minimum 2% of the 
balance in the fund that the General Assembly intends, under the bill, to be spent on 
outreach, barring a significant increase in funding for the program. While the 
balance in the fund presumably varies from year to year (and over the course of a 
fiscal year), for illustrative purposes, 2% of the $750,000 mandated appropriation 
to the fund in fiscal 2024 is $15,000. 
 
Special fund expenditures only increase in a fiscal year to the extent that, in the 
absence of the bill, that funding is not otherwise spent on costs of purchasing 
homeowners’ liens. To the extent that the funding is otherwise partially or fully 
spent in the absence of the bill, the amount of the increase in special fund 
expenditures is reduced or even eliminated – since that funding is just shifted from 
being spent on costs of purchasing homeowners’ liens to costs of conducting 
outreach.  
 
Position  
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits  
$59,557 
Call Center Vendor 
100,000 
Programming 
30,000 
Phone Number Research Services 
7,200 
Other Operating Costs  
     7,409 
Total FY 2024 Special Fund Expenditures  
$204,166 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Special Fund Revenues 
 
Special fund (Homeowner Protection Fund) revenues decrease in future years to the extent 
that funding spent on conducting outreach (administrative costs that are not recoverable) 
otherwise would have been spent on costs of purchasing homeowners’ liens, which are 
intended to be at least partially recovered through enrollees’ reimbursement of the fund 
over the course of their enrollment in the program. This analysis assumes that revenues 
may decrease beginning in fiscal 2025, the first year after any shift in the use of funding 
from costs of purchasing homeowners’ liens to costs of conducting outreach. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 236/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman webpage on SDAT’s website, 
along with the office’s most recent annual report, which contains data on tax sales in the 
State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Garrett, and Howard 
counties; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6