START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 234 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 234 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Chiropractic Examiners - Disciplinary Actions 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Board of Chiropractic Examiners to deny a license to an 
applicant or take specified actions against a licensee – including but not limited to 
suspending or revoking a license – if the applicant or licensee fails to comply with any 
board order. An order of the board may not be stayed pending judicial review; however, 
the board may grant a stay of enforcement of an order in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The bill also specifies that the board may appeal any 
decision that reverses or modifies its orders. If a license is suspended or revoked, the board 
may reinstate the license only in accordance with (1) the terms and conditions of the order 
of suspension or revocation or (2) an order of reinstatement issued by the board. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Chiropractic Examiners is responsible for ensuring that 
chiropractors and chiropractic assistants are properly educated, trained, and licensed and 
comply with laws and regulations pertaining to their respective scope of practice. The 
board also conducts investigations and disciplinary hearings relating to any violations of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 234/ Page 2 
applicable laws and regulations. The board comprises seven volunteer members:  
five licensed chiropractors and two consumer members. 
 
The board, under certain circumstances, is authorized to deny a license to an applicant, 
reprimand a licensee, place a licensee on probation, or suspend or revoke a license. Those 
circumstances include the fraudulent or deceptive use of a license, impersonating another 
practitioner, violating any rule or regulation adopted by the board, failing to submit to a 
criminal history records check, or defying any other disciplinary ground under § 3-313 of 
the Health Occupations Article. 
 
Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved by the board’s final decision to deny a license, 
suspend or revoke a license, or take another specified action may not appeal the decision 
to the Secretary of Health. However, an applicant or licensee may take a direct judicial 
appeal as provided in the APA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2