START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 249 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 249 
(Delegates Addison and Young) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Baltimore City - Property Tax - Retroactive Exemption 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes a person in Baltimore City who applies for a property tax 
exemption for property owned by specified nonprofit or religious organizations to request 
the exemption apply retroactively for up to three taxable years ending with the year in 
which the application is filed. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) 
must grant the exemption, subject to a specified review and approval of the Baltimore City 
Solicitor and the Baltimore City Department of Finance. Baltimore City and the State must 
pay a refund of excess taxes paid due to a retroactive exemption that is granted under the 
bill. By December 1, 2023, and each December 1 through December 1, 2027, the  
Baltimore City Department of Finance must submit a report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly that indicates (1) the number of requests for a retroactive exemption 
that the department received and approved during the immediately preceding year and  
(2) any amounts refunded for a retroactive exemption. The bill terminates 
December 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues decrease by approximately $14,200 
annually in FY 2023 through 2027. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City property tax revenues decrease by approximately $285,000 
annually in FY 2023 through 2027. Baltimore City can handle the reporting requirements 
with existing resources. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses that are eligible for the 
real property tax exemption benefit from property tax refunds. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 249/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the law exempts certain types of real property from property 
taxation such as government-owned, charitable, benevolent, educational, religious, 
veterans’ organizations, fire companies, historical societies, and museums. SDAT is 
responsible for determining exemptions that are specified by law. The department is 
required by law to assess all exempt real property, except property owned by the federal 
government. 
 
While local governments have limited ability to alter real property exemptions, they have 
been granted broad authority to exempt certain types of personal property from property 
taxation. The types of property exempt from local taxation are enumerated in Title 7 of the 
Tax-Property Article. Exemptions apply to State property taxation as well, although the 
State does not tax personal property. The major real property exemptions from the local 
property tax are: 
 
 
local, State, and federal government property; 
 
property of religious organizations; 
 
cemeteries and mausoleums; 
 
nonprofit hospitals;  
 
portions of continuing care facilities for the elderly;  
 
property of charitable, fraternal, and educational institutions; 
 
property used for national defense or military housing; 
 
property of national veterans’ organizations; 
 
homes of disabled veterans and the blind (partial exemption), or a surviving spouse 
of either; 
 
property of historical societies and museums; 
 
property owned by certain taxpayers engaged in building, operating, and managing 
nonprofit multifamily units, subject to local government approval; and 
 
property owned by fire companies, rescue squads, community water corporations, 
and housing authorities.     
 
In Baltimore City, tax exempt organizations must submit an application to SDAT every 
three years in accordance with the department’s three-year assessment cycle. The 
application must certify that the property is being used for its tax-exempt purpose. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues decrease by approximately $14,200 annually in  
fiscal 2023 through 2027. The estimate is based on the following facts and assumptions: 
 
 
approximately 25 properties transfer from taxable properties to exempt ownership 
each year; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 249/ Page 3 
 
the average taxable assessment of these properties is approximately $170,000; 
 
the State real property tax rate is $0.112 per $100 of assessment; and 
 
refunds are paid for three years for each newly exempt property. 
 
Local Revenues:  Based on the above estimate, and a Baltimore City real property tax rate 
of $2.248 per $100 of assessment, Baltimore City property tax revenues decrease by 
approximately $285,000 annually in fiscal 2023 through 2027. 
 
Additional Comments:  For fiscal 2022, the total assessed value of exempt property in 
the State was approximately $104.3 billion, including $17.3 billion in Baltimore City. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 41 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3