START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 521

Chapter 521

(House Bill 253)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – On–Farm Composting Facilities – Permit Exemption

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of the Environment to adopt regulations to
exempt an on–farm composting facility from a certain requirement to obtain a permit
if the on–farm composting facility meets certain conditions; requiring the
Department to require the operator of a farm to provide certain notice under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to on–farm composting facilities.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 9–1701(a) and (v)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 9–1725
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

9–1701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(v) (1) “Yard waste” means organic plant waste derived from gardening,
landscaping, and tree trimming activities.

(2) “Yard waste” includes leaves, garden waste, lawn cuttings, weeds, and
prunings.

9–1725.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 521 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) (I) “ACTIVE FOOD SCRAP COMPOSTING” MEANS MATERIAL TO
BE COMPOSTED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(3)(II) OF THIS SECTION AND
SOURCE–SEPARATED ORGANIC MATERIAL BROUGHT ONTO THE FARM AND
COMMINGLED MATERIAL IN THE PROCESS OF BEING COMPOSTED.

(II) “ACTIVE FOOD SCRAP COMPOSTING” DOES NOT INCLUDE
ANY FINAL SOIL AMENDMENT PRODUCED.

(2) (3) “CONTAMINATED FEEDSTOCK” MEANS FEEDSTOCK THAT
CONTAINS MORE THAN 2% BY DRY WEIGHT OF:

(I) MAN–MADE INERT MATERIAL; OR

(II) FILM PLASTIC.

(3) (4) (I) “FARM” MEANS THE SITE OF A BUSINESS OR ACTIVITY
OPERATED FOR THE PRIMARY PURPOSE OF TILLING, CROPPING, KEEPING,
PASTURING, OR PRODUCING AN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT OTHER THAN COMPOST,
INCLUDING LIVESTOCK, POULTRY, PLANTS, TREES, SOD, FOOD, FEED, OR FIBER, BY
IN–GROUND, OUT–OF–GROUND, CONTAINER, OR OTHER CULTURE.

(II) “FARM” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE SITE OF A BUSINESS OR
ACTIVITY OPERATED FOR THE PRIMARY PURPOSE OF PRODUCING COMPOST.

(4) (5) (I) “LIQUID FEEDSTOCK” MEANS GREASE, OIL, OR SOME
OTHER LIQUID.

(II) “LIQUID FEEDSTOCK” DOES NOT INCLUDE FOOD SCRAPS
THAT CONTAIN SOME LIQUID.

(5) (6) (I) “OFF–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK” MEANS TYPE 2
FEEDSTOCK THAT IS GENERATED OFF–SITE.

(II) “OFF–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK” DOES NOT INCLUDE:
~~ANIMAL~~

1. ANIMAL MORTALITIES; OR

2. INDUSTRIAL ANIMAL PROCESSING RESIDUALS.

(6) (7) (I) “ON–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK” MEANS TYPE 2
FEEDSTOCK THAT IS GENERATED ON–SITE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 521

(II) “ON–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK” INCLUDES ANIMAL
MORTALITIES.

~~(7)~~ (8) “TYPE 1 FEEDSTOCK” MEANS:

(I) YARD WASTE, AS DEFINED IN § 9–1701 OF THIS SUBTITLE;
AND

(II) OTHER MATERIALS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT TO
POSE A LOW LEVEL OF RISK FROM HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES, HUMAN PATHOGENS,
AND PHYSICAL CONTAMINANTS.

~~(8)~~ (9) “TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK” MEANS:

(I) SOURCE–SEPARATED ORGANICS FROM RESIDENTIAL
CURBSIDE OR DROP–OFF PROGRAMS AND NONRESIDENTIAL SOURCES, INCLUDING
PRECONSUMER AND POSTCONSUMER FOOD SCRAPS AND NONRECYCLABLE PAPER;
AND

(II) DEPARTMENT–APPROVED ANIMAL MANURE AND BEDDING,
WITH DEPARTMENT APPROVAL BASED ON FACTORS SUCH AS MOISTURE CONTENT
AND PATHOGEN RISK.

(B) A person may operate a composting facility in the State only in accordance
with this part and any regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under this part.

[(b)] (C) (1) The Department shall adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this part.

(2) [Regulations] THE REGULATIONS adopted under paragraph (1) of this
subsection may:

(i) Establish conditions under which a person may construct and
operate a composting facility in the State;

(ii) Establish a tiered system of permits or approvals for composting
facilities based on the type of feedstock, size of the facility, and other factors determined by
the Department to be appropriate;

(iii) Establish design and operational conditions for composting
facilities to protect public health and the environment and to minimize nuisances;

(iv) Establish exceptions to any requirement to obtain a composting
facility permit or approval;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 521 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v) Exempt certain organic materials that are composted from being
designated as solid wastes; ~~and~~

(VI) REQUIRE THAT A NEW COMPOSTING FACILITY BE
CONSTRUCTED AND OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH:

1. ANY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

2. A NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN, IF REQUIRED
UNDER COMAR 15.20.07; AND

3. A. A SOIL CONSERVATION AND WATER QUALITY
PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH COMAR 26.04.11.06 THAT DESCRIBES THE
COMPOSTING FACILITY COMPONENTS AND DESIGN, SCHEDULE FOR STORAGE AND
UTILIZATION OF THE MATERIALS, SYSTEM MAINTENANCE, AND OPERATIONAL
PROCEDURES; OR

B. AN AGRICULTURAL WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH COMAR 26.04.11.06 THAT DESCRIBES THE
COMPOSTING FACILITY COMPONENTS AND DESIGN, SCHEDULE FOR STORAGE AND
UTILIZATION OF THE MATERIALS, SYSTEM MAINTENANCE, AND OPERATIONAL
PROCEDURES; AND

(vi) (VII) Establish any other provisions the Department deems
necessary to implement the provisions of this subtitle related to composting.

(3) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
EXEMPT AN OPERATOR OF AN ON–FARM COMPOSTING FACILITY FROM THE
REQUIREMENT TO OBTAIN A PERMIT UNDER COMAR 26.04.11.06 IF THE ON–FARM
COMPOSTING FACILITY:

(I) USES 40,000 10,000 SQUARE FEET OF AREA OR LESS FOR
ACTIVE FOOD SCRAP COMPOSTING;

(II) COMPOSTS ONLY ONE OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING:

1. ORGANIC MATERIALS GENERATED ON–SITE OR AT
ANOTHER FARM CONTROLLED BY THE SAME ~~OPERATOR~~ OWNER OR LESSEE OF THE
FARM;

2. ANIMAL MANURE AND BEDDING, GENERATED
ON–SITE;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 521

3. TYPE 1 FEEDSTOCK, REGARDLESS OF THE PLACE OF
GENERATION;

4. OFF–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK THAT IS:

A. NOT CONTAMINATED OR LIQUID;

B. IMMEDIATELY MIXED WITH CARBONACEOUS TYPE 1
FEEDSTOCK; AND

C. INCORPORATED INTO ACTIVE COMPOSTING WITHIN
24 HOURS AFTER ARRIVING ON–SITE; OR

5. ON–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK;

(III) 1. RECORDS THE:

A. AMOUNT AND SOURCE OF OFF–SITE TYPE 2
FEEDSTOCK SOURCE–SEPARATED ORGANICS BEING COMPOSTED; AND

B. DATE AND TIME THE OFF–SITE TYPE 2 FEEDSTOCK
SOURCE–SEPARATED ORGANICS ARRIVES ON THE FARM; AND

2. RETAINS THE RECORDS FOR 3 5 YEARS; AND

3. PROVIDES THE RECORDS TO THE DEPARTMENT ON
REQUEST FOR THE PURPOSE OF INSPECTION; AND

(IV) MEETS ANY OTHER CONDITION FOR A PERMIT EXEMPTION
SPECIFIED IN REGULATIONS.

(4) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
SUBMIT A REPORT, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT ANALYZES THE IMPACT OF ON–FARM
COMPOSTING FACILITIES IN MARYLAND, INCLUDING:

(I) THE AMOUNT OF FOOD WASTE DIVERTED FROM LANDFILLS;

(II) AN ESTIMATE OF THE AMOUNT OF FINISHED SOIL
AMENDMENT PRODUCED BY ON–FARM COMPOSTING FACILITIES OPERATING UNDER
THIS SECTION;

(III) OPERATIONAL CHALLENGES EXPERIENCED BY ON–FARM
COMPOSTING FACILITIES;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 521 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS THAT HAVE
ARISEN AS A RESULT OF THE EXPANSION OF FACILITIES UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(V) RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FEASIBILITY OF EXPANDING
FACILITIES TO ALLOW FOR UP TO 40,000 SQUARE FEET TO BE USED FOR FOOD SCRAP
COMPOSTING ACTIVITIES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) This Act is not intended to alter the rules or requirements for farms or
composting facilities operating without a composting permit in accordance with regulations
in effect on January 1, 2023.

(b) The Department of the Environment shall require the operator of a farm to
provide written notice to the Department before conducting on–farm composting without a
permit in accordance with this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6