START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 422

Chapter 422

(House Bill 218)

AN ACT concerning

Howard County – Alcoholic Beverages – Repeal of Petition of Support
Requirement

Ho. Co. 12–23

FOR the purpose of repealing the requirement that an application for an alcoholic
beverages license in Howard County include certain petitions of support signed by
certain individuals; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Howard
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 4–110 and 23–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 23–1401(b) and 23–1407
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 23–1406
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

4–110.

The application shall also include a petition of support signed by at least 10 residents
who are owners of real estate and registered voters of the precinct in which the business is
to be conducted stating:

(1) the length of time each of the residents has been acquainted with the
applicant or, if the applicant is a corporation, acquainted with the individuals making the
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 422 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

application;

(2) that they have examined the application, have good reason to believe
that the statements contained in the application are true, and in their judgment the
applicant is a suitable person to obtain the license; and

(3) that they are familiar with the premises on which the proposed
business is to be conducted and that they believe the premises are suitable for the conduct
of business as a retail dealer.

23–102.

This title applies only in Howard County.

23–1401.

(b) Section 4–110 (“Required information on application — Petition for support”)
of Division I of this article does not apply in the county [and is superseded by § 23–1406 of
this subtitle].

[23–1406.

(a) At least one of the applicants shall include with the application a petition of
support signed by at least three residents who are owners of real property and registered
voters in the district where the business is to be conducted stating that the applicant:

(1) is known personally to the residents; and

(2) subject to subsection (b) of this section, is a resident of the county at the
time the applicant presents the application to the residents.

(b) The Board may waive the residency requirement for an applicant if the
applicant:

(1) is the purchaser of a business already in operation; or

(2) has owned the premises for which a license is sought for at least 2 years
immediately preceding the filing of the application.]

23–1407.

(a) At least one of the applicants for a license shall be a resident of the county.

(b) In the determination of the Board, each applicant shall:

(1) be of good character; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 422

(2) include the following information with the application:

(i) a statement that the applicant is at least 18 years old; and

(ii) a checklist and police consent form.

(C) THE BOARD MAY WAIVE THE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR AN
APPLICANT IF THE APPLICANT:

(1) IS THE PURCHASER OF A BUSINESS ALREADY IN OPERATION; OR

(2) HAS OWNED THE PREMISES FOR WHICH A LICENSE IS SOUGHT FOR
AT LEAST 2 YEARS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE FILING OF THE APPLICATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3