START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 649

Chapter 649

(House Bill 243)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City Young Readers Program ~~–~~ ~~Expansion~~ ~~and~~ and Young Readers
Matching Grant Program – Alterations
(Young Readers Program ~~Expansion~~ Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of ~~altering~~ transferring the Baltimore City Young Readers Program ~~to~~ ~~be~~
~~the~~ ~~Statewide~~ ~~Young~~ ~~Readers~~ ~~Program;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~within~~ and the
Young Readers Matching Grant Program to the Maryland State Library Agency;
~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~purpose~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program;~~ and requiring the State Librarian to administer
the ~~Program;~~ programs; altering the purpose of the programs; authorizing public
libraries to apply for ~~program~~ ~~grants~~ grants from the Young Readers Matching Grant
Program; ~~requiring~~ ~~program~~ ~~grant~~ ~~applicants~~ ~~to~~ ~~prioritize~~ ~~the~~ ~~distribution~~ ~~of~~ ~~books~~
~~to~~ ~~children~~ ~~in~~ ~~low–income~~ ~~zip~~ ~~codes~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~applicants’~~ ~~area~~ ~~of~~ ~~service;~~ and
generally relating to the Baltimore City Young Readers Program and the Young
Readers Matching Grant Program.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~
~~Section~~ ~~8–1401~~ ~~through~~ ~~8–1403~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing
Article – Human Services
Section 8–1401
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY transferring
Article – Human Services
Section 8–1402 and 8–1403
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
to be
Article – Education
Section 23–110 and 23–111, respectively,
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–110 and 23–111
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 649 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Section 2 of this Act)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 8–1401 of Article – Human Services of the Annotated Code of Maryland be
repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ASSEMBLY~~
~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND,~~ That Section(s) 8–1402 and 8–1403 of Article – Human Services of the
Annotated Code of Maryland be transferred to be Section(s) 23–110 and 23–111,
respectively, of Article – Education of the Annotated Code of Maryland.

SECTION ~~1.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ASSEMBLY~~
~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND,~~ That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~ Education

~~8–1401.~~

~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle,~~ ~~“early~~ ~~reader~~ ~~organization”~~ ~~means~~ ~~a~~ ~~nonprofit~~ ~~organization:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~tax~~ ~~exempt~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~501(c)(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Internal~~ ~~Revenue~~ ~~Code;~~ ~~and~~

(2) whose mission is to [mail] DISTRIBUTE to children free, high–quality
~~books~~ ~~designed~~ ~~to~~ ~~aid~~ ~~the~~ ~~development~~ ~~of~~ ~~reading~~ ~~skills.~~

~~8–1402.~~ 23–110.

(a) (1) In this section, “Program” means the [Baltimore City] STATEWIDE
Young Readers Program THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS INDICATED.

(2) “EARLY READER ORGANIZATION” MEANS A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION:

(I) THAT IS TAX EXEMPT UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL
REVENUE CODE; AND

(II) WHOSE MISSION IS TO DISTRIBUTE TO CHILDREN FREE,
HIGH–QUALITY BOOKS DESIGNED TO AID THE DEVELOPMENT OF READING SKILLS.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE BALTIMORE CITY YOUNG READERS
PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 649

(b) There is a [Baltimore City] STATEWIDE Young Readers Program in the
[Division] ~~MARYLAND~~ STATE LIBRARY AGENCY.

(c) The purpose of the Program is to work with an early reader organization to
[mail] DISTRIBUTE free, high–quality books to children in [Baltimore City] MARYLAND.

(d) The [Deputy Director] STATE LIBRARIAN shall:

(1) administer ADMINISTER the Program; and

(2) carry CARRY out the Program in partnership with an early reader
organization partner.

(e) For each fiscal year, the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an
appropriation of $200,000 to the Program.

~~8–1403.~~ 23–111.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Affiliated service” means a book–gifting service performed by a
nonprofit organization that is tax exempt under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
or a unit of State, county, or municipal government that forms an affiliated partnership
with an early reader organization.

(3) “EARLY READER ORGANIZATION” MEANS A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION:

(I) THAT IS TAX EXEMPT UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL
REVENUE CODE; AND

(II) WHOSE MISSION IS TO DISTRIBUTE TO CHILDREN FREE,
HIGH–QUALITY BOOKS DESIGNED TO AID THE DEVELOPMENT OF READING SKILLS.

(4) “Program” means the Young Readers Matching Grant Program.

(b) There is a Young Readers Matching Grant Program in the [Division]
~~MARYLAND~~ STATE LIBRARY AGENCY.

(c) The purpose of the Program is to provide grants to PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND
affiliated services to:

(1) support SUPPORT the establishment and operation of affiliated
services; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 649 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) contribute CONTRIBUTE an amount equal to the amount of funding
provided for the operation of an affiliated service.

(d) The [Deputy Director] STATE LIBRARIAN shall administer the Program.

(e) (1) [An] A PUBLIC LIBRARY OR AN affiliated service may submit an
application for a program grant on the form that the [Deputy Director] STATE LIBRARIAN
requires.

(2) An application for a program grant shall include a plan to ensure that
the PUBLIC LIBRARY OR THE affiliated service is able to gift books to eligible children,
[including] PRIORITIZING children in low–income zip codes within its area of service.

(3) A program grant shall be disbursed to A PUBLIC LIBRARY OR an
affiliated service that qualifies for the Program.

(F) THE STATE LIBRARY BOARD SHALL:

(1) ON ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EVERY OTHER YEAR
THEREAFTER, REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
THE PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE; AND

(2) COLLECT COLLECT STATISTICS AND OTHER INFORMATION
NECESSARY FOR THIS PURPOSE.

[(f)] (G) For each fiscal year, the Governor shall include in the annual budget
bill an appropriation of [$250,000] $500,000 $350,000 to the Program.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4