START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 237 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 237 
(Delegates Atterbeary and Metzgar) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Sales and Use Tax Exemption - Redevelopment Areas in Baltimore County - 
Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date of a sales and use tax exemption for the sale of 
specified construction materials and warehousing equipment in Baltimore County from 
June 30, 2026, to June 30, 2036. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues continue to decrease through FY 2036. Expenditures 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 603 and 604 of 2016 exempted from the State sales and use tax 
the sale of construction material or warehousing equipment, if the material or equipment is 
purchased by a person solely for use in a specified target redevelopment area in 
Baltimore County, and the buyer provides the vendor with evidence of eligibility for the 
exemption issued by the Comptroller. 
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $6.2 billion in fiscal 2023 and 2024, according to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 237/ Page 2 
December 2022 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax rates in 
surrounding states and the District of Columbia. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
*An additional state tax of:  (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia and 
the Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, and 
Patrick counties; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in localities in the Historic Triangle. The sales and use tax rate 
for food and personal hygiene products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues continue to decrease through fiscal 2036. The 
amount of the decrease depends on the value of eligible construction material and 
warehousing equipment that is purchased for use on specified privately owned property in 
Baltimore County. 
 
In fiscal 2021, the State collected $102.4 million in sales taxes from various building and  
construction related categories in Baltimore County.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses located in the area designated will continue to  
benefit from decreased costs for materials and equipment. Conversely, any small 
businesses that are competitors of these businesses and do not qualify will be at a 
competitive disadvantage due to higher material and equipment costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 237/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 174 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3