START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 248 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 248 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Class B-ECF/DS (Education Conference Facility/Dining 
Service) License - Towson University 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore County Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
Class B Education Conference Facility/Dining Service (ECF/DS) beer, wine, and liquor 
(BWL) license to an individual who is authorized by Towson University (TU) in addition 
to its authority to issue the license to the University of Maryland, Baltimore County 
(UMBC). The bill makes other conforming changes to specify that the provisions of the 
license apply to either UMBC or TU as appropriate. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.       
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County revenues increase by $2,500 in FY 2024 due to 
application and license fees and by $2,000 annually thereafter due to additional license 
fees. Baltimore County can handle any additional enforcement activity with existing 
resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board may issue a Class B ECF/DS BWL license to an individual who 
is (1) authorized by UMBC to act on behalf of the campus under the license and be subject 
to specified penalties, conditions, and restrictions and (2) a resident of the State. The annual 
license fee is $2,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 248/ Page 2 
A Class B ECF/DS license authorizes the holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for 
on-premises consumption from multiple designated outlets on UMBC’s campus only at 
university-related events catered by the university’s campus dining services contractor. 
Beer, wine, and liquor purchased at a designated outlet must be consumed within the 
confines of that outlet and may not be transported to another outlet. All profits must be 
deposited in the auxiliary services account of the university.  
 
The board (1) may regulate the manner in which beer, wine, and liquor are dispensed under 
the license; (2) must designate the exact campus locations for the outlets for the sale of 
beer, wine, and liquor before issuing the license; (3) must maintain a map and description 
of the designated outlets for verification on the renewal of the license; and (4) must require 
UMBC to report to the board at least five days before a university-related event at which 
beer, wine, or liquor is intended to be sold or served. The license holder may sell beer, 
wine, and liquor during the hours and days as established for a Class B BWL license in 
Baltimore County.  
 
Additional Comments:  Baltimore County advises that only one Class B ECD/DS 
BWL license has currently been issued in the county to UMBC. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 347 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; University System of Maryland; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2