START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 304

Chapter 304

(House Bill 288)

AN ACT concerning

~~Food~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Facilities~~ Grocery Stores and Restaurants – Automated External
Defibrillator Program
(Joe Sheya Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring the ~~owner~~ ~~and~~ ~~operator~~ owners and operators of ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~food~~ ~~service~~ ~~facility~~ certain grocery stores and restaurants, beginning on a certain
date, to ~~develop~~ ~~and,~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~ ~~implement~~ ~~an~~ ~~automated~~ ~~external~~
~~defibrillator~~ ~~program~~ ~~that~~ ~~meets~~ ~~certain~~ ~~requirements~~ place an automated external
defibrillator in a certain area and maintain the functionality of the automated
external defibrillator, granting certain immunities to grocery stores, restaurants,
and individuals for certain acts or omissions under certain circumstances; altering
the definition of “facility” for the purpose of excluding certain restaurants and
grocery stores from the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program;
requiring the Maryland Department of Health and the Maryland Institute for
Emergency Medical Services Systems jointly to adopt certain regulations; and
generally relating to an automated external defibrillator program for ~~food~~ ~~service~~
~~facilities.~~ grocery stores and restaurants.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 13–517(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 21–330.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

13–517.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Automated external defibrillator (AED)” means a medical heart
monitor and defibrillator device that:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 304 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) Is cleared for market by the federal Food and Drug
Administration;

(ii) Recognizes the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation or
rapid ventricular tachycardia;

(iii) Determines, without intervention by an operator, whether
defibrillation should be performed;

(iv) On determining that defibrillation should be performed,
automatically charges; and

(v) 1. Requires operator intervention to deliver the electrical
impulse; or

2. Automatically continues with delivery of electrical
impulse.

(3) “Certificate” means a certificate issued by the EMS Board to a
registered facility.

(4) (I) “Facility” means an agency, association, corporation, firm,
partnership, or other entity.

(II) “FACILITY” DOES NOT INCLUDE A GROCERY STORE OR
RESTAURANT THAT IS SUBJECT TO § 21–330.3 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL
ARTICLE.

(5) “Jurisdictional emergency medical services operational program”
means the institution, agency, corporation, or other entity that has been approved by the
EMS Board to provide oversight of emergency medical services for each of the local
government and State and federal emergency medical services programs.

(6) “Program” means the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator
Program.

(7) “Regional administrator” means the individual employed by the
Institute as regional administrator in each EMS region.

(8) “Regional council” means an EMS advisory body as created by the Code
of Maryland Regulations 30.05.

(9) “Regional council AED committee” means a committee appointed by the
regional council consisting of:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 304

(i) The regional medical director;

(ii) The regional administrator; and

(iii) Three or more individuals with knowledge of and expertise in
AEDs.

(10) “Registered facility” means an organization, business association,
agency, or other entity that meets the requirements of the EMS Board for registering with
the Program.

Article – Health – General

21–330.3.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR (AED)” MEANS A
MEDICAL HEART MONITOR AND DEFIBRILLATOR DEVICE THAT:

(I) IS CLEARED FOR MARKET BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION;

(II) RECOGNIZES THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF
VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION OR RAPID VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA;

(III) DETERMINES, WITHOUT INTERVENTION BY AN OPERATOR,
WHETHER DEFIBRILLATION SHOULD BE PERFORMED;

(IV) ON DETERMINING THAT DEFIBRILLATION SHOULD BE
PERFORMED, AUTOMATICALLY CHARGES; AND

(V) 1. REQUIRES OPERATOR INTERVENTION TO DELIVER
THE ELECTRICAL IMPULSE; OR

2. AUTOMATICALLY CONTINUES WITH DELIVERY OF THE
ELECTRICAL IMPULSE.

(3) “GROCERY STORE” MEANS A STORE THAT HAS:

(I) ALL MAJOR FOOD DEPARTMENTS, INCLUDING PRODUCE,
MEAT, SEAFOOD, DAIRY, AND CANNED AND PACKAGED GOODS; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 304 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) 1. AT LEAST ONE OF THE MAJOR FOOD DEPARTMENTS;
AND

2. AT LEAST 12,000 SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR SPACE.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A FOOD SERVICE FACILITY:

(1) A GROCERY STORE THAT HAS AN ANNUAL GROSS INCOME OF
$400,000 $10,000,000 OR LESS; OR

(2) A RESTAURANT WITH:

(I) AN ANNUAL GROSS INCOME OF $1,000,000 OR LESS,
EXCLUSIVE OF SALES FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION; OR

(II) A SEATING CAPACITY OF LESS THAN 100 INDIVIDUALS.

(B) (C) THE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2024, EACH OWNER AND OPERATOR
OF A ~~FOOD~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~FACILITY~~ GROCERY STORE OR RESTAURANT SHALL ~~DEVELOP~~
AND, BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2025, IMPLEMENT AN AUTOMATED EXTERNAL
DEFIBRILLATOR PROGRAM THAT MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF §
13–517 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE:

(1) PLACE AN AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR IN A
PROMINENT AREA, ACCESSIBLE TO EMPLOYEES AND CUSTOMERS; AND

(2) MAINTAIN THE FUNCTIONALITY OF THE AUTOMATED EXTERNAL
DEFIBRILLATOR.

(D) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER IMMUNITIES AVAILABLE UNDER
STATUTORY OR COMMON LAW:

(1) A GROCERY STORE OR RESTAURANT IS NOT CIVILLY LIABLE FOR
ANY ACT OR OMISSION IN THE PROVISION OF AUTOMATED EXTERNAL
DEFIBRILLATION IF THE GROCERY STORE OR RESTAURANT HAS SATISFIED THE
REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS SECTION;

(2) AN INDIVIDUAL IS NOT CIVILLY LIABLE FOR ANY ACT OR
OMISSION IF:

(I) THE INDIVIDUAL IS ACTING IN GOOD FAITH WHILE
RENDERING AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATION TO ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 304

WHO IS A VICTIM OR REASONABLY BELIEVED BY THE INDIVIDUAL TO BE A VICTIM OF
A SUDDEN CARDIAC ARREST;

(II) THE ASSISTANCE OR AID IS PROVIDED IN A REASONABLY
PRUDENT MANNER; AND

(III) THE AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATION IS PROVIDED
WITHOUT FEE OR OTHER COMPENSATION; AND

(3) A GROCERY STORE, RESTAURANT, OR INDIVIDUAL IS NOT CIVILLY
LIABLE FOR FAILING TO RENDER AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATION TO AN
INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A VICTIM OR IS REASONABLY BELIEVED TO BE A VICTIM OF A
SUDDEN CARDIAC ARREST.

(C) (E) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEMS JOINTLY SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS
THAT:

(1) ESTABLISH GUIDELINES FOR PERIODIC INSPECTIONS AND
ANNUAL MAINTENANCE OF THE AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS; AND

(2) ASSIST THE OWNER AND OPERATOR OF A FOOD SERVICE FACILITY
GROCERY STORE OR RESTAURANT IN CARRYING OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
SECTION.; AND

(3) REQUIRE EACH GROCERY STORE AND RESTAURANT SUBJECT TO
THIS SECTION TO REGISTER WITH THE MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEMS IN ORDER TO:

(I) MAKE ITS LOCATION PUBLICLY AVAILABLE TO EMERGENCY
DISPATCHERS; AND

(II) RECEIVE MAINTENANCE AND RECALL NOTICES FROM THE
MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEMS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical
Services Systems shall report to the Senate Finance Committee, the House Health and
Government Operations Committee, and the House Economic Matters Committee, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 304 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) the grocery stores and restaurants that registered automated external
defibrillators in accordance with regulations adopted under § 21–330.3 of the Health –
General Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act; and

(2) the number of adverse cardiac events that required the use of an
automated external defibrillator experienced in the grocery stores and restaurants that
registered the automated external defibrillators.

(b) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical
Services Systems, in collaboration with the Maryland Restaurant Association and the
Maryland Retailers Association, shall evaluate the impact of expanding the scope of §
21–330.3 of the Health – General Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, to include
more restaurants and grocery stores and report its findings and recommendations to the
Senate Finance Committee, the House Health and Government Operations Committee, and
the House Economic Matters Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6