START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 315

Chapter 315

(House Bill 235)

AN ACT concerning

~~Property~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~Deadline~~ ~~Extension~~ ~~for~~ ~~Homeowners~~ ~~to~~ ~~Redeem~~ ~~Property~~
~~Involved~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Sale~~
Tax Sales – Owner–Occupied Property – Foreclosure, Notice, and
Reimbursement of Expenses

FOR the purpose of prohibiting in all counties, rather than Baltimore City only, a holder of
a certificate of sale from filing a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption for
owner–occupied residential property until a certain period of time after the date of
sale; prohibiting in all counties, rather than Baltimore City only, a certain notice
from being sent to certain persons with an interest in owner–occupied residential
property sold at tax sale until a certain period of time after the date of sale; extending
in all counties except Talbot County, rather than in Baltimore City only, the amount
of time that has to pass after a tax sale before the plaintiff or the holder of a
certificate of sale ~~of~~ ~~the~~ for owner–occupied residential property may be reimbursed
for certain expenses when the property is redeemed; and generally relating to tax
sales.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 14–833(a)(2) and (4)(i)2. and 14–843(a)(3) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 14–843(a)(1) and (2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

14–833.

(a) (2) Except as provided in subsections (a–1), (e), (f), and (g) of this section,
at any time after 9 months from the date of sale of owner–occupied residential property
[located in Baltimore City], a holder of any certificate of sale may file a complaint to
foreclose all rights of redemption of the property to which the certificate relates.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 315 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) (i) 2. [In Baltimore City, for] FOR owner–occupied residential
property, the first of the two notices required under this subsection may not be sent until 7
months after the date of sale.

14–843.

(a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, on redemption, the
plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in
any action or in preparation for any action to foreclose the right of redemption as provided
in this section.

(2) The plaintiff or holder of a certificate of sale is not entitled to be
reimbursed for any other expenses or attorney’s fees that are not included in this section.

(3) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, if an
action to foreclose the right of redemption has not been filed, and the property is redeemed
more than [4] 6 months after the date of the tax sale, the holder of a certificate of sale may
be reimbursed for the following expenses actually incurred:

1. costs for recording the certificate of sale;

2. a title search fee, not to exceed $250;

3. the postage and certified mailing costs for the notices
required under § 14–833(a–1) of this subtitle; and

4. reasonable attorney’s fees, not to exceed $500.

(ii) In Baltimore City, for FOR owner–occupied residential property,
if an action to foreclose the right of redemption has not been filed, and the property is
redeemed more than 7 months after the date of the tax sale, the holder of a certificate of
sale may be reimbursed for the following expenses actually incurred:

1. costs for recording the certificate of sale;

2. a title search fee, not to exceed $250;

3. the postage and certified mailing costs for the notices
required under § 14–833(a–1) of this subtitle; and

4. reasonable attorney’s fees, not to exceed $500.

(b) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph and
paragraph (2) of this subsection, in Allegany County, Anne Arundel County, Baltimore
City, Baltimore County, Calvert County, Caroline County, Carroll County, Cecil County,
Charles County, Dorchester County, Frederick County, Garrett County, Harford County,

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 315

Howard County, Kent County, Montgomery County, Prince George’s County, Queen Anne’s
County, St. Mary’s County, Somerset County, Washington County, Wicomico County, and
Worcester County, the plaintiff or holder of a certificate of sale may not be reimbursed for
expenses incurred within [4] 6 months after the date of sale.

(ii) In Baltimore City, for FOR owner–occupied residential property,
the plaintiff or holder of a certificate of sale may not be reimbursed for expenses incurred
within 7 months after the date of sale.

(2) This subsection does not apply to property for which the holder:

(i) may file a complaint any time after 60 days from the date of sale,
pursuant to § 14–833(e) of this subtitle; or

(ii) must file a complaint within 3 months from the date of sale,
pursuant to § 14–833(c)(2) of this subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
January 1, 2024, and shall be applicable to all certificates of sale issued on or after January
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3