START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 253

Chapter 253

(House Bill 283)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Gender–Affirming Treatment
(Trans Health Equity Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring, beginning on a certain date, the Maryland Medical
Assistance Program to provide medically necessary gender–affirming treatment in a
nondiscriminatory manner; requiring that the gender–affirming treatment be
assessed according to nondiscriminatory criteria that are consistent with current
clinical standards; prohibiting the Program from issuing an adverse benefit
determination related to gender–affirming treatment unless a health care provider
with experience prescribing or delivering gender–affirming treatment has reviewed
and confirmed the appropriateness of the determination; and generally relating to
gender–affirming treatment and the Maryland Medical Assistance Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xx) and (xxi)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xxii) and 15–151
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–103.

(a) (1) The Secretary shall administer the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 253 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The Program:

(xx) Beginning on July 1, 2023, shall provide, subject to federal
approval and limitations of the State budget, community violence prevention services in
accordance with 15–141.3 of this subtitle; [and]

(xxi) Beginning on January 1, 2023, shall provide, subject to the
limitations of the State budget, and as permitted by federal law, coverage for self–measured
blood pressure monitoring for all Program recipients diagnosed with uncontrolled high
blood pressure, including:

1. The provision of validated home blood pressure monitors;
and

2. Reimbursement of health care provider and other staff
time used for patient training, transmission of blood pressure data, interpretation of blood
pressure readings and reporting, and the delivery of co–interventions, including
educational materials or classes, behavioral change management, and medication
management; AND

(XXII)BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1, 2024, SHALL PROVIDE
GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–151 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

15–151.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT” MEANS ANY
MEDICALLY NECESSARY TREATMENT CONSISTENT WITH CURRENT CLINICAL
STANDARDS OF CARE PRESCRIBED BY A LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER FOR
THE TREATMENT OF A CONDITION RELATED TO THE INDIVIDUAL’S GENDER
IDENTITY.

(II) “GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT” INCLUDES:

1. HORMONE THERAPY, HORMONE BLOCKERS, AND
PUBERTY BLOCKERS;

2. HAIR ALTERATION FOR THE PURPOSES OF ALTERING
SECONDARY SEX CHARACTERISTICS AND SURGICAL SITE PREPARATION;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 253

3. ALTERATIONS TO VOICE, VOICE THERAPY, AND VOICE
LESSONS;

4. ALTERATIONS TO ABDOMEN, CHEST, TRUNK, AND
BUTTOCKS;

5. ALTERATIONS TO THE FACE AND NECK;

6. ALTERATIONS TO THE GENITALS AND GONADS;

7. LASER TREATMENT FOR SCARS FROM
GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT;

8. STANDARD FERTILITY PRESERVATION PROCEDURES,
AS SET FORTH IN § 15–810.1 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE;

9. REVISIONS TO PREVIOUS TREATMENTS AND
REVERSAL OF TREATMENTS;

10. COMBINATIONS OF GENDER–AFFIRMING
PROCEDURES; AND

11. OTHER TREATMENTS AS PRESCRIBED TO SUPPRESS
THE DEVELOPMENT OF ENDOGENOUS SECONDARY SEX CHARACTERISTICS, ALIGN
THE INDIVIDUAL’S APPEARANCE OR PHYSICAL BODY WITH GENDER IDENTITY, AND
ALLEVIATE SYMPTOMS OF CLINICALLY SIGNIFICANT DISTRESS RESULTING FROM
GENDER DYSPHORIA.

(III) “GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT” MAY INCLUDE
TREATMENT DESCRIBED IN THE CURRENT CLINICAL STANDARDS OF CARE FOR
GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT PUBLISHED BY THE WORLD PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR TRANSGENDER HEALTH.

(3) “GENDER IDENTITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 20–101 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(B) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT THE PROGRAM
PROVIDE GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT TO ALL PROGRAM RECIPIENTS FOR
WHOM GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT IS MEDICALLY NECESSARY, INCLUDING
TRANSGENDER, NONBINARY, INTERSEX, TWO–SPIRIT, AND OTHER GENDER DIVERSE
INDIVIDUALS.

(C) (1) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR MEDICALLY
NECESSARY GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT IN A NONDISCRIMINATORY MANNER.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 253 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT SHALL BE ASSESSED
ACCORDING TO NONDISCRIMINATORY CRITERIA THAT ARE CONSISTENT WITH
CURRENT CLINICAL STANDARDS OF CARE.

(3) THE PROGRAM MAY NOT DENY OR LIMIT COVERAGE FOR
GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT WHEN THAT TREATMENT IS:

(I) PRESCRIBED TO A PROGRAM RECIPIENT BECAUSE OF,
RELATED TO, OR CONSISTENT WITH THE RECIPIENT’S GENDER IDENTITY;

(II) MEDICALLY NECESSARY; AND

(III) PRESCRIBED IN ACCORDANCE WITH CURRENT CLINICAL
STANDARDS OF CARE.

(4) THE PROGRAM MAY NOT DENY OR LIMIT COVERAGE FOR
GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT BASED ON THE PROGRAM RECIPIENT’S GENDER
IDENTITY.

(5) THE PROGRAM MAY NOT EXCLUDE GENDER–AFFIRMING
TREATMENT, INCLUDING REVISIONS TO PRIOR GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT,
ON THE BASIS THAT THE TREATMENT IS A COSMETIC SERVICE.

(6) THE PROGRAM MAY NOT ESTABLISH A CATEGORICAL EXCLUSION
FOR A PARTICULAR GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT.

(7) THE PROGRAM MAY NOT ISSUE AN ADVERSE BENEFIT
DETERMINATION DENYING OR LIMITING ACCESS TO GENDER–AFFIRMING
TREATMENT UNLESS A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WITH EXPERIENCE PRESCRIBING
OR DELIVERING GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT HAS REVIEWED AND CONFIRMED
THE APPROPRIATENESS OF THE ADVERSE BENEFIT DETERMINATION.

(D) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024,
EACH MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATION SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT A
REPORT THAT INCLUDES, FOR EACH HEALTH CARE PROVIDER OFFERING
GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT WITH WHICH THE MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATION
HAS AN ACTIVE CONTRACT AND WHO THAT CONSENTS TO THE INCLUSION:

(I) THE NAME AND LOCATION OF EACH THE HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER OFFERING GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT WITH WHICH THE MANAGED
CARE ORGANIZATION HAS AN ACTIVE CONTRACT; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 253

(II) THE TYPES OF GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT PROVIDED
BY EACH THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDER; AND

(III) WHETHER THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDER CONSENTS TO
BEING PUBLICLY LISTED AS PART OF THE DEPARTMENT’S ANNUAL REPORT
REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) (I) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN
2025, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COMPILE AN ANNUAL REPORT ON GEOGRAPHIC
ACCESS TO GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT ACROSS THE STATE.

(II) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE, FOR EACH HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER OFFERING GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT TO PROGRAM RECIPIENTS
AND WHOSE CONSENT TO THE INCLUSION IS INDICATED IN A REPORT SUBMITTED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

1. THE NAME AND LOCATION OF EACH THE HEALTH
CARE PROVIDER OFFERING GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT TO PROGRAM
~~RECIPIENTS;~~

2. THE MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS THAT HAVE
ACTIVE CONTRACTS WITH EACH THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDER; AND

3. THE TYPES OF GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT
PROVIDED BY EACH THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDER.

(III) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH THE REPORT IN A
CONSPICUOUS MANNER ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT AND EACH MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATION
SHALL INCLUDE THE NAME, LOCATION, AND TYPES OF SERVICES FOR EACH
PROVIDER OFFERING GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT IN THEIR PROVIDER
DIRECTORIES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5