START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 786

Chapter 786

(House Bill 210)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore County – Board of Education – Member Elections and Appointments

FOR the purpose of requiring the members of the Baltimore County Board of Education to
be elected or appointed to the Board in certain years; providing for the termination
of the terms of certain appointed members of the Board and the appointment of
certain members of the Board in a certain year; and generally relating to the
Baltimore County Board of Education and member elections and appointments.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–2B–01
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–2B–04
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–2B–01.

(a) The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of:

(1) Seven nonpartisan elected members;

(2) Four appointed members; and

(3) One student member.

(b) (1) Of the 11 elected and appointed members of the county board:

(i) One member shall be elected from each of the seven councilmanic
districts in the county, established by the County Council of Baltimore County, by the
voters of that district; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 786 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Four members shall be appointed by the Governor from the
county at large.

(2) (i) The seven elected members shall be elected at a general election
IN GUBERNATORIAL ELECTION YEARS in accordance with § 3–2B–02 of this subtitle.

(ii) The four appointed members shall be appointed by the Governor
IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION YEARS from a list of nominees submitted by the Baltimore
County School Board Nominating Commission as provided in § 3–2B–03 of this subtitle:

1. On the expiration of the term of an incumbent appointed
member within 30 days after the general election; or

2. Within the 30–day period otherwise required under this
subtitle.

(3) (i) A member from a school board district shall be at least 21 years
old, a resident of that district for at least 2 years, and a registered voter of the county before
the election.

(ii) A member from a district who does not maintain residency in
that district may not continue as a member of the county board and the office shall be
deemed vacant.

(iii) If the boundary line of a district is changed, the term of an
incumbent member of the county board who no longer resides in the district because of the
change is not affected during this term.

(4) (i) A member may not be elected or appointed to serve on the county
board for more than three consecutive terms.

(ii) A member who has served three consecutive 4–year terms may
not be elected or appointed to the county board until at least 4 years have elapsed since the
end of the member’s last term on the county board.

(5) During an election year:

(i) The Governor may not appoint as a member of the county board
an individual who files a certificate of candidacy for election to the county board; and

(ii) An individual who files a certificate of candidacy for election to
the county board may not seek appointment to the county board by the Governor through
nomination by the Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission.

3–2B–04.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 786

(a) Except for the student member, a member serves for a term of 4 years
beginning on the first Monday in December after the member’s election or appointment and
until a successor is elected or appointed and qualifies.

(b) (1) An individual who takes office to fill a vacancy for an elected or
appointed member serves for the remainder of the term for which the appointment was
made and until a successor is elected or appointed and qualifies.

(2) The Governor shall act within 30 days to make any appointment to the
county board.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The terms of the four appointed members of the Baltimore County Board of
Education whose terms are scheduled to expire on December 1, 2026, shall terminate at
the end of December 1, ~~2024~~ 2028.

(b) The Governor shall appoint four members to the Board in accordance with §
3–2B–01 of the Education Article in ~~2024~~ 2028, and the four appointed members shall serve
for a term of 4 years beginning December 2, ~~2024~~ 2028, until a successor is appointed and
qualifies.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3