START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 239 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 239 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Policy Task Force 
 
 
This bill establishes an Accessory Dwelling Unit Policy Task Force staffed by the 
Maryland Department of Planning (MDP). The task force must report to the Governor and 
the General Assembly by November 1, 2023, on its activities and report its findings and 
recommendations by June 1, 2024. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and terminates 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2024 only. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must:   
 
 
survey and document a representative sampling of State and local codes, laws, 
ordinances, and policies regarding the development and operation of accessory 
dwelling units (ADUs) in areas zoned for single-family residential use, including 
those codes, laws, ordinances, and policies that address residential growth in these 
areas;  
 
study available best practices for streamlining or standardizing the application 
process for permits necessary to build or operate an ADU; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 239/ Page 2 
 
make legislative or other policy recommendations, including a list of best practices 
for local governments in the State, that holistically address (1) the practical issues 
associated with the development of ADUs on owner-occupied land zoned for 
single-family residential use and (2) the impacts on local housing markets, 
neighborhood livability, and other policies and projects related to ADUs. 
 
“Accessory dwelling unit” means a secondary dwelling unit on the same lot, parcel, or tract 
as a primary dwelling unit that is constructed (1) attached to, or through the conversion of, 
a portion of the primary dwelling unit; (2) attached to, or through the full or partial 
conversion of, an accessory structure located on the same lot, parcel, or tract as the primary 
dwelling unit; or (3) as a new building, detached from the primary dwelling unit and any 
existing accessory structure. 
 
The bill establishes the membership of the task force. The Governor must designate the 
chair of the task force. Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled 
to reimbursement for expenses under the standard State travel regulations. 
 
Current Law:  There are no statewide requirements governing ADUs. State law specifies 
that it is the policy of the State that (1) the orderly development and use of land and 
structures requires comprehensive regulation through implementation of planning and 
zoning controls and (2) planning and zoning controls must be implemented by local 
government. State law incudes various provisions authorizing local governments to 
regulate the location, size, and use of structures through zoning regulations. 
 
While statewide information is not readily available, it appears that numerous local 
governments in Maryland authorize ADUs in some manner. For illustrative purposes only, 
the City of Annapolis permits ADUs in most residential zoning districts and may allow 
ADUs as a special exception in other residential zoning districts. The Code of the 
City of Annapolis specifies limits on the number (one per lot) and size of ADUs, and other 
applicable limits and requirements. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2024 only, 
for MDP to hire a consultant to assist the department in (1) providing a national perspective 
for the task force’s work and (2) supporting the task force’s development of 
recommendations. This estimate assumes that although the bill takes effect June 1, 2023, 
MDP does not incur costs until fiscal 2024. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 239/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 382 (Senator M. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3