START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 261

Chapter 261

(House Bill 271)

AN ACT concerning

9–8–8 Trust Fund – Funding

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to include a certain appropriation in the budget
bill for a certain fiscal year to the 9–8–8 Trust Fund; and generally relating to the
9–8–8 Trust Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–5A–01 and 7.5–5A–02
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

7.5–5A–01.

In this subtitle, “Fund” means the 9–8–8 Trust Fund.

7.5–5A–02.

(a) There is a 9–8–8 Trust Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide reimbursement for costs associated with:

(1) Designating and maintaining 9–8–8 as the universal telephone number
for a national suicide prevention and mental health crisis hotline in accordance with the
federal National Suicide Hotline Designation Act of 2020; and

(2) Developing and implementing a statewide initiative for the
coordination and delivery of the continuum of behavioral health crisis response services in
the State, including:

(i) Crisis call centers;

(ii) Mobile crisis team services;

(iii) Crisis stabilization centers; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 261 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) Other acute behavioral health care services.

(c) The Department shall administer the Fund.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

(2) Interest earnings of the Fund; and

(3) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(f) The Fund may be used only for carrying out the purpose of the Fund.

(g) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(h) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

(i) Money expended from the Fund for carrying out the purpose of the Fund is
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be
appropriated for carrying out the purpose of the Fund.

(j) No part of the Fund may revert or be credited to:

(1) The General Fund of the State; or

(2) Any other special fund of the State.

(k) The Fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as provided in
§ 2–1220 of the State Government Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, for fiscal year 2025, the
Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $12,000,000 to the
9–8–8 Trust Fund established under § 7.5–5A–02 of the Health – General Article.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 261

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3