START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 209 
(Delegate Watson) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Corporations and Associations - Revisions 
 
 
This bill alters numerous miscellaneous provisions of the Corporations and Associations 
Article, including those relating to:  (1) the issuance of stock or convertible securities as 
part of a conversion; (2) stock certificates, scrip, and limited liability company (LLC) 
certificates issued in bearer form; (3) remote participation at stockholders’ meetings; 
(4) conversions of a close corporation; (5) directors of a nonstock corporation; 
(6) dissolution of a real estate investment trust (REIT); and (7) the Maryland Control Share 
Acquisition Act and statutory trusts. The bill also makes other technical and clarifying 
changes. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Issuance of Stock or Convertible Securities as Part of a Conversion  
 
Under current law, a board of directors must generally adopt a resolution meeting specified 
requirements before issuing stock or convertible securities. However, these provisions do 
not apply to the issuance of stock or convertible securities as part of a consolidation, 
merger, or share exchange (including when a wholly owned subsidiary of the corporation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 209/ Page 2 
is a party). The bill adds a conversion to the type of transactions where the provisions do 
not apply.  
 
Stock Certificates, Scrip, and Limited Liability Certificates Issued in Bearer Form 
 
Under current law, a corporation is not prohibited from issuing a stock certificate or a 
certificate representing scrip in bearer form. An LLC’s operating agreement may establish 
the right to have and a procedure for having a member’s membership interest evidenced by 
a certificate issued by the LLC in bearer form.  
 
The bill prohibits issuing a stock certificate, a certificate representing scrip, or an 
LLC membership certificate in bearer form. “Bearer form” means that the stock, scrip, or 
LLC membership certificate is not registered “on the books” of the corporation or LLC, 
and it is payable to the person who possesses (or “bears”) the certificate as proof of rightful 
ownership. Under the bill, for scrip issued without a certificate, on request by a scripholder, 
the corporation must deliver to the scripholder (without charge), a statement in writing or 
by electronic transmission of the information required to be on a stock certificate, as 
specified.       
 
Remote Participation at Stockholders’ Meetings   
 
Under current law and if specified requirements are met, stockholders and proxy holders 
who are not physically present at a stockholders’ meeting may, by remote communication, 
be considered present in person and may vote at the stockholders’ meeting whether the 
meeting is held at a designated place or solely by remote communication. The bill clarifies 
that such a meeting may also be held partially by remote communication.  
 
Conversions of a Close Corporation 
 
Under current law, a consolidation, merger, share exchange, or transfer of assets of a close 
corporation must be made in accordance with the provisions of Title 3 of the Corporations 
and Associations Article; however, approval of a proposed consolidation or merger, a 
transfer of assets, or an acquisition of stock in a share exchange requires the affirmative 
vote of every stockholder of the corporation. The bill specifies that these provisions also 
apply to a conversion of a close corporation.  
 
Directors of a Nonstock Corporation  
 
Under current law, the charter or bylaws of a nonstock corporation may, among other 
provisions, prescribe the tenure and conditions of service of its directors, as specified. The 
bill establishes that the charter or bylaws of a nonstock corporation may also provide that 
an individual may serve as a director by reason of serving in a specified office or position 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 209/ Page 3 
within or outside the corporation and prescribe that the individual must serve as a director 
during the individual’s service in the specified office or position. 
 
Dissolution of a Real Estate Investment Trust  
 
Under current law, a REIT may terminate its existence by voluntary dissolution and the 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) must be notified of the effective 
date of the dissolution. Under current law, a REIT may also curtail or cease its trust 
activities by partially or completely distributing its assets; the bill repeals this provision.  
 
The bill further requires that in order to terminate its existence, a REIT must file a notice 
of termination with SDAT that includes (1) the name of the REIT; (2) a statement that the 
termination of the REIT by voluntary dissolution was approved in the manner and by the 
vote required by law and by the declaration of trust of the REIT, as well as a statement 
detailing the manner of approval; (3) all other provisions the board of the REIT considers 
necessary to dissolve and terminate the REIT; and (4) a statement that the REIT is dissolved 
and terminated.   
 
The bill further specifies who must execute the notice of termination, and that the REIT is 
generally dissolved and terminated on the later of (1) the time that SDAT accepts the notice 
of termination for record or (2) the time established by the notice of termination, not to 
exceed 30 days after the notice is accepted for record by SDAT. However, the REIT 
continues to exist for the purpose of (1) paying, satisfying, and discharging any existing 
debts or obligations; (2) collecting and distributing assets; and (3) taking all other actions 
required to liquidate and wind up its business and affairs. 
 
The Maryland Control Share Acquisition Act and Statutory Trusts 
 
The bill specifies that the Maryland Control Share Acquisition Act (Title 3, Subtitle 7 of 
the Corporations and Associations Article) applies to a statutory trust formed on or after 
October 1, 2023, that is a closed‐end investment company as defined in the Investment 
Company Act of 1940. The bill also specifies that the governing instrument of a statutory 
trust formed before October 1, 2023, that is a closed‐end investment company as defined 
in the Investment Company Act of 1940, may provide that the Maryland Control Share 
Acquisition Act applies to the statutory trust. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill implements recommendations of the Maryland State Bar 
Association, whose Committee on Corporation Law regularly reviews the Corporations 
and Associations Article in an attempt to clarify unclear provisions and eliminate outdated 
language.           
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 209/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 58 (Senators West and Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Securities Division); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4