START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 263 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 263 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
St. Mary's County - Gaming - Senior Activity Centers 
 
 
This bill authorizes senior activity centers in St. Mary’s County to conduct gaming events, 
bunco games, or card games. A senior activity center is a community or neighborhood 
facility in which a broad spectrum of services (as specified) are organized and provided to 
senior citizens and their spouses. A senior activity center may not award a money prize 
exceeding $50 to a winner each session nor charge a participant more than $25 to play  
one session. Any proceeds from a gaming event, bunco game, or card game must be used 
to support future programming at the senior activity center. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Negligible. St. Mary’s County finances are not substantially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A qualified organization in St. Mary’s County may conduct a gaming event 
(a carnival, bazaar, or raffle) for the exclusive benefit of a qualified organization if an 
individual or a group of individuals does not benefit financially from the gaming event or 
receive any of the proceeds from the gaming event for personal use or benefit. Qualified 
organizations include volunteer fire companies and bona fide religious, fraternal, civic, war 
veterans’, and charitable organizations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 263/ Page 2 
A qualified organization must keep accurate records of proceeds and expenditures 
involving gaming devices. On request, a qualified organization must allow the 
State’s Attorney for the county, a State Police officer, the designee, and the sheriff or 
deputy sheriff to examine these records. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  While the bill may draw some gaming revenues away from the State 
lottery and casino facilities, the impact is likely small enough that overall gaming revenues 
are not materially affected. State Police operations are not substantially affected. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  St. Mary’s County does not anticipate significant changes to revenue 
or expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2