START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 202

Chapter 202

(House Bill 261)

AN ACT concerning

~~Public~~ Eligible Projects – ~~Global~~ ~~Warming~~ ~~Potential~~ ~~of~~ ~~Materials~~ Procurement
of Construction Materials
(Buy Clean Maryland Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring producers of eligible materials to submit certain declarations
to the Department of General Services by a certain date; requiring the Department
to assess and ~~to~~ establish a maximum acceptable global warming potential for
certain categories of eligible materials used in certain eligible projects; requiring the
Department to review the maximum acceptable global warming potential for each
category of eligible materials and authorizing the Department to make certain
adjustments according to a certain schedule; prohibiting the Department from
increasing the maximum acceptable global warming potential for a category of
eligible materials; requiring a unit of State government to specify the eligible
materials that will be used in an eligible project in the solicitation for an eligible
project; requiring a successful bidder or offeror of an eligible project to submit certain
information about each eligible material proposed to be used in an eligible project;
prohibiting a contractor from installing any eligible materials on an eligible project
until the contractor submits the required information for the eligible material;
authorizing the Department to waive certain requirements concerning the use of
eligible materials on eligible projects under certain circumstances; providing that the
Department shall strive to achieve a continuous reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions over time; establishing an Environmental Product Declaration Assistance
Fund for a certain purpose; and generally relating to the global warming potential
of materials in ~~public~~ eligible projects.

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 4–901 through 4–905 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Buy Clean
Maryland Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

SUBTITLE 9. BUY CLEAN MARYLAND ACT.

4–901.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 202 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ELIGIBLE MATERIAL” MEANS ANY CEMENT OR CONCRETE MIXTURE
USED IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF A PUBLIC AN ELIGIBLE PROJECT.

(C) (1) “ELIGIBLE PROJECT” MEANS A PUBLIC PROJECT AS DEFINED
INCLUDES MEANS A CAPITAL PROJECT DESCRIBED IN § 3–602 3–602.1(C) OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(2) “ELIGIBLE PROJECT” DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY MAINTENANCE
PROGRAM FOR THE UPKEEP OF A PUBLIC AN ELIGIBLE PROJECT.

(D) “GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL” MEANS THE DEGREE THAT A GIVEN
MASS OF A CHEMICAL CONTRIBUTES TO GLOBAL WARMING OVER A GIVEN TIME
PERIOD WHEN COMPARED TO THE SAME MASS OF CARBON DIOXIDE.

(E) “GREENHOUSE GAS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–1202 OF THE
ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

4–902.

IN ADMINISTERING THIS SUBTITLE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL STRIVE TO
ACHIEVE A CONTINUOUS REDUCTION OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS OVER TIME.

4–903.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2024, PRODUCERS OF ELIGIBLE
MATERIALS SHALL SUBMIT ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATIONS TO THE
DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ANALYZE ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT
DECLARATIONS AND ASSESS GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL FOR ELIGIBLE
MATERIALS USED IN AN ELIGIBLE PROJECT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(B) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025 2026, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, ESTABLISH A
MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL FOR EACH CATEGORY OF
ELIGIBLE MATERIALS USED IN AN ELIGIBLE PROJECT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SECTION.

~~(B)~~ (C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 202

(1) BASE THE MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL
ON THE INDUSTRY AVERAGE OF GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL EMISSIONS FOR THAT
MATERIAL;

(2) DETERMINE THE INDUSTRY AVERAGE OF GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL EMISSIONS, WHICH MAY INCLUDE TRANSPORTATION–RELATED
EMISSIONS, BY CONSULTING NATIONALLY OR INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED
DATABASES OF ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATIONS; AND

(3) EXPRESS THE MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL AS A NUMBER THAT STATES THE MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL
WARMING POTENTIAL FOR EACH CATEGORY OF ELIGIBLE MATERIALS, CONSISTENT
WITH CRITERIA IN AN ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION.

~~(C)~~ (D) THE DEPARTMENT MAY:

(1) ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL SUBCATEGORIES WITHIN EACH
CATEGORY OF ELIGIBLE MATERIAL WITH DISTINCT MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL
WARMING POTENTIAL LIMITS;

(2) ESTABLISH A MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL FOR EACH MATERIAL CATEGORY IN THE AGGREGATE; AND

(3) CONSULT WITH ANY OTHER RELEVANT UNIT OF STATE
GOVERNMENT WHEN ESTABLISHING A MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL FOR EACH CATEGORY OF ELIGIBLE MATERIALS USED IN AN ELIGIBLE
PROJECT.

(D) (E) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, BY
JANUARY 1, 2028 2029, AND EVERY 3 YEARS THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL REVIEW THE MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL FOR
EACH CATEGORY OF ELIGIBLE MATERIALS AND MAY ADJUST THE POTENTIAL FOR
ANY CATEGORY TO REFLECT INDUSTRY CONDITIONS.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT ADJUST THE GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL UPWARD FOR ANY CATEGORY OF ELIGIBLE MATERIAL.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

4–904.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 202 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) FOR ANY SOLICITATION FOR A CONTRACT FOR AN ELIGIBLE
PROJECT, A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT SHALL SPECIFY THE ELIGIBLE
MATERIALS THAT WILL BE USED IN THE PROJECT AND THE REASONABLE MINIMUM
USAGE THRESHOLDS BELOW WHICH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION DO NOT
APPLY.

(2) A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT MAY INCLUDE IN A SOLICITATION
FOR AN ELIGIBLE PROJECT A GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL FOR ANY ELIGIBLE
MATERIAL THAT IS LOWER THAN THE MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL FOR THAT MATERIAL AS DETERMINED UNDER § 4–903 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REQUIRE A SUCCESSFUL BIDDER OR
OFFEROR OF AN ELIGIBLE PROJECT TO SUBMIT, FOR EACH ELIGIBLE MATERIAL
PROPOSED TO BE USED IN THE ELIGIBLE PROJECT:

(1) A CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION, TYPE III,
AS DEFINED BY THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION
STANDARD 14025; OR

(2) A SIMILARLY ROBUST LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT METHOD THAT
INCLUDES UNIFORM STANDARDS IN DATA COLLECTION.

(C) A CONTRACTOR MAY NOT INSTALL ANY ELIGIBLE MATERIALS ON THE
ELIGIBLE PROJECT UNTIL THE CONTRACTOR SUBMITS A FACILITY–SPECIFIC
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION FOR THAT ELIGIBLE MATERIAL AS
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) IF AN ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION IS NOT AVAILABLE FOR
AN ELIGIBLE MATERIAL, THE CONTRACTOR SHALL NOTIFY THE UNIT AND USE AN
ALTERNATIVE ELIGIBLE MATERIAL WITH AN ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT
DECLARATION.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT MAY WAIVE THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION
IF IT DETERMINES THAT REQUIRING THE RELEVANT ELIGIBLE MATERIALS WOULD:

(1) BE TECHNICALLY INFEASIBLE;

(2) RESULT IN A SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN PROJECT COST;

(3) RESULT IN A SIGNIFICANT DELAY IN PROJECT COMPLETION; OR

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 202

(4) RESULT IN ONLY ONE SOURCE OR MANUFACTURER BEING ABLE
TO PROVIDE THE NECESSARY MATERIALS.

4–905.

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT AN ANNUAL REPORT, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT
INCLUDES:

(1) WHAT THE DEPARTMENT HAS LEARNED ABOUT HOW TO IDENTIFY
AND QUANTIFY EMBODIED CARBON IN BUILDING MATERIALS, INCLUDING LIFE
CYCLE COSTS; AND

(2) ANY OBSTACLES THE DEPARTMENT, BIDDERS, OR OFFERORS
HAVE ENCOUNTERED IN IDENTIFYING AND QUANTIFYING EMBODIED CARBON IN
BUILDING MATERIALS.

(B) THE REPORT SUBMITTED ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025, SHALL
INCLUDE A DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD THAT THE DEPARTMENT USED TO
DEVELOP THE MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL FOR EACH
CATEGORY OF ELIGIBLE MATERIALS.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) There is an Environmental Product Declaration Assistance Fund.

(2) The purpose of the Fund is to award grants to producers of eligible
materials to support the development, standardization, and transparency of environmental
product declarations for construction materials and products.

(b) The Department of Commerce shall administer the Fund.

(c) The Fund shall consist of money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund.

~~SECTION~~ ~~4.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Green~~ ~~Building~~ ~~Council~~ ~~shall~~ ~~examine:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~environmental~~ ~~product~~ ~~declarations~~ ~~to~~ ~~measure~~ ~~the~~ ~~climate~~
~~impact~~ ~~of~~ ~~construction~~ ~~materials~~ ~~produced~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~State,~~ ~~including~~ ~~glass,~~ ~~steel,~~ ~~and~~ ~~wood;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~performance~~ ~~incentives~~ ~~to~~ ~~encourage~~ ~~adoption~~ ~~of~~ ~~low–carbon~~
~~materials~~ ~~and~~ ~~methods~~ ~~by~~ ~~manufacturers~~ ~~that~~ ~~provide~~ ~~construction~~ ~~materials~~ ~~for~~
~~State–funded~~ ~~projects;~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 202 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(3)~~ ~~the~~ ~~establishment~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~expedited~~ ~~product~~ ~~evaluation,~~ ~~testing,~~ ~~and~~
~~approval~~ ~~protocol~~ ~~for~~ ~~low–carbon~~ ~~products;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~the~~ ~~implementation~~ ~~of~~ ~~performance–based~~ ~~specification~~ ~~standards~~ ~~for~~
~~construction~~ ~~materials,~~ ~~including~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~that~~ ~~a~~ ~~structural~~ ~~material~~ ~~achieve~~ ~~specified~~
~~performance–based~~ ~~outcomes~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~structural~~ ~~material,~~ ~~including~~ ~~outcomes~~
~~related~~ ~~to~~ ~~strength,~~ ~~durability,~~ ~~permeability,~~ ~~or~~ ~~other~~ ~~attributes~~ ~~related~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~function~~ ~~of~~
~~building~~ ~~material~~ ~~for~~ ~~applied~~ ~~uses;~~ ~~and~~

~~(5)~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~methods~~ ~~of~~ ~~compliance,~~ ~~including~~ ~~specifications~~ ~~based~~ ~~on~~
~~maximum~~ ~~potential~~ ~~for~~ ~~global~~ ~~warming.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~In~~ ~~examining~~ ~~the~~ ~~items~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(a)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Green~~ ~~Building~~ ~~Council~~ ~~shall~~ ~~consult~~ ~~with:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~any~~ ~~relevant~~ ~~associations~~ ~~that~~ ~~set~~ ~~industry~~ ~~standards~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~procurement~~ ~~of~~ ~~low–carbon~~ ~~construction~~ ~~products;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~affected~~ ~~contractors~~ ~~and~~ ~~subcontractors~~ ~~to~~ ~~consider~~ ~~both~~ ~~environmental~~
~~and~~ ~~health~~ ~~and~~ ~~safety~~ ~~impacts.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~September~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Green~~ ~~Building~~ ~~Council~~ ~~shall~~
~~report~~ ~~its~~ ~~findings~~ ~~and~~ ~~recommendations~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~and,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly.~~

SECTION ~~3.~~ ~~5.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall
take effect July 1, ~~2025~~ 2026.

SECTION ~~6.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 3 of this Act shall
take effect July 1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 6 months and,
at the end of December 31, 2024, Section 3 of this Act shall be abrogated and of no further
force and effect.

SECTION ~~4.~~ ~~7.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in
~~Section~~ ~~3~~ Sections ~~5~~ ~~and~~ ~~6~~ 4 and 5 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6