START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 260 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 260 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Sign Language Interpreters Act 
 
   
This bill establishes a regulatory framework for the licensure of individuals who provide 
sign language interpretation services in the State. The State Board of Sign Language 
Interpreters is established in the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (ODHH). 
Beginning January 1, 2025, an individual must be licensed by the board before providing 
sign language interpretation services in the State. The Sign Language Interpreters Fund is 
established to collect associated revenues and pay for the board’s costs. In fiscal 2025 only, 
the Governor must appropriate $100,000 in general funds to the board. Subject to the 
evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act, the 
board terminates July 1, 2033. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $94,300 in FY 2024 for 
one-time-only programming costs for the Judiciary. General/special fund expenditures 
increase by $159,500 in FY 2024 for ODHH personnel to begin implementation; out-years 
reflect additional ODHH personnel. General funds are needed for expenditures not covered 
by fee revenues; $100,000 in general fund expenditures is mandated in FY 2025. Special 
fund revenues from fees may increase minimally in FY 2024 and are assumed to increase 
by $90,000 in FY 2025; out-years reflect additional licensees and renewals. Minimal 
increase in general fund revenues and potential minimal increase in expenditures due to the 
bill’s penalty provisions. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
SF Revenue 
- 
$90,000 
$118,000 
$171,000 
$224,000 
GF Expenditure 
$94,300 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/SF Exp. 
$159,500 
$374,000 
$376,800 
$393,600 
$414,400 
Net Effect 
($253,800) 
($284,000) 
($258,800) 
($222,600) 
($190,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 260/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Circuit courts may be affected to the extent that the bill limits the number 
of available sign language interpreters for court cases, which may create operational delays 
and/or increased costs for such services. Potential minimal increase in expenditures due to 
the bill’s penalty provisions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
General Requirements, Definitions, and Exclusions 
 
“Provide sign language interpretation services” means to convey the meaning of a message 
that is expressed in (1) an oral or signed language by rendering the message in American 
Sign Language (ASL) or (2) ASL by rendering the message in an oral or signed language. 
It includes providing sign language interpretation services in a video remote interpreting 
setting. 
 
The licensure requirement does not apply in limited circumstances, such as to an individual 
who provides sign language interpretation services as an uncompensated volunteer and in 
a setting in which a sign language interpreter is not otherwise required by law or provides 
sign language interpretation services to prevent undue harm in the event of an emergency 
until a licensed sign language interpreter becomes available. 
 
State Board of Sign Language Interpreters 
 
The State Board of Sign Language Interpreters is established in ODHH, subject to specified 
conditions and requirements for board membership and appointment. The board exercises 
its powers, duties, and functions subject to the authority of the Governor. A member of the 
board may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. 
ODHH must provide appropriate staff to assist the board in carrying out its duties.  
 
Board Duties and Regulatory Requirements 
 
Principal among its duties, the board must license qualified individuals to provide sign 
language interpretation services and set by regulation reasonable fees for the issuance and 
renewal of licenses. By July 1, 2024, the board must establish and publish licensing 
requirements for sign language interpreting in all settings. Additionally, the board must: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 260/ Page 3 
 
develop and implement a public awareness campaign to inform the public and 
relevant professionals of the licensing requirements under the bill;  
 
establish a visiting sign language interpreter registry; 
 
develop and maintain a web portal to accept license applications and related 
documentation, complaints, and registrations of visiting sign language interpreters;  
 
develop and maintain a publicly searchable database of sign language interpreters; 
 
adopt regulations to govern sign language interpretation services provided in a video 
remote interpreting setting;  
 
adopt regulations that allow deaf and hard of hearing individuals to choose whether 
sign language interpretation services be provided to them in a video remote 
interpreting setting or through in-person interpreting;  
 
promote the profession of sign language interpreting through various channels, 
including by providing workshops and trainings to raise public awareness and to 
facilitate professional development; and  
 
reasonably seek additional funding sources.  
 
The board may establish criteria for the development of portfolios and requirements in the 
following specialist areas:  (1) legal settings; (2) medical settings; (3) behavioral health 
settings; (4) language pairs other than ASL and spoken English; (5) conference 
interpreting; (6) tactile and low-vision sign language interpretation services; 
(7) intralinguistic translations and sign language interpretation; and (8) any other areas 
determined to be necessary by the board. 
 
Sign Language Interpreters Fund 
 
The Sign Language Interpreters Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by the 
director of ODHH. The board must set by regulation reasonable fees for the issuance and 
renewal of licenses and other services. The fund must be used exclusively to cover the 
actual documented direct and indirect costs of fulfilling the duties of the board, as specified. 
Fee revenue collected by the board accrues to the fund; investment earnings accrue to the 
general fund. Expenditures from the fund may only be made in accordance with the State 
budget. 
 
Licensure 
 
The bill establishes two categories for licensure:  a standard license and a provisional 
license. The standard license requires an individual to have a valid nationally or regionally 
recognized certification or other certification approved by the board, in addition to any 
other qualifications established by the board. The license fee and term must be set by the 
board (until established by the board in regulation, initial license fees are $150).  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 260/ Page 4 
The board may waive the certification requirements for applicants who (1) are licensed to 
provide sign language interpretation services in another state; (2) can furnish satisfactory 
evidence that, at the time the applicant was licensed in the other state, the qualifications for 
licensure in the other state were substantially equivalent to Maryland’s; and (3) the other 
state waives the qualifications of licensees from Maryland to a similar extent as Maryland 
waives the qualification requirements for individuals licensed in that state. 
 
A provisional license requires an individual to have taken and passed a nationally or 
regionally recognized knowledge and ethics exam or other exam approved by the board, 
plus satisfy any other requirements established by the board. A provisional licensee may 
not provide services in a legal, medical, or behavioral health setting, except as specified. 
The license fee must be set by the board. The license term is two years, and the license may 
be renewed one time (there is also a five-year limit on total provisional license duration).  
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
Office of Deaf and Hard of Hearing:  In its annual report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly, ODHH must provide information on the activities of the board, 
including (1) the number of sign language interpreters licensed by the board and (2) the 
number of complaints received by the board, differentiated by the type of complaint. 
 
Judiciary:  By January 1, 2026, and annually thereafter for two years, the Judiciary must 
provide a report to specified committees of the General Assembly on:   
 
 
the number of cases in Maryland courts in which a sign language interpreter was 
requested or required; 
 
the average number of days needed to secure a sign language interpreter for a case; 
 
the number of cases postponed in order to secure a sign language interpreter; and 
 
the number of cases in which a sign language interpreter was used who, due to an 
emergency situation, was not licensed by ODHH. 
 
Prohibited Actions and Penalties 
 
The bill specifies prohibited actions for individuals and licensees, subject to specified 
enforcement actions by the board or a court of competent jurisdiction. The board may use 
a restorative justice program in lieu of taking final action on a complaint against a licensee. 
The board must adopt regulations for the use of such programs.  
 
An individual who violates any provision of Title 9, Subtitle 24, Part III (Sign Language 
Interpreters) of the State Government Article is guilty of a misdemeanor. On conviction, a 
first-time offender is subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 260/ Page 5 
a repeat offender is subject to a fine of at least $500 and up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment 
for up to 90 days.  
 
Current Law:  Sign language interpreters are not required to be licensed in Maryland. The 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts) advises that its Court Interpreter Program, 
which maintains a registry from which courts must assign an interpreter if one is available, 
requires new ASL interpreters to be nationally certified to join the registry.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Judiciary 
 
Expenditures:  The Judiciary advises that the bill’s reporting requirement necessitates 
one-time programming changes to the Judicial Information System. Thus, general fund 
expenditures increase by $94,269 in fiscal 2024 only. 
 
The bill likely affects the Judiciary to the extent that it limits the number of available sign 
language interpreters for court cases, which may create operational delays and/or increase 
the cost of providing the service. The Judiciary advises that it may have to eliminate the 
use of remote sign language interpreters, or at least pay higher hourly rates to secure their 
services, as it is likely that requiring remote providers to have a Maryland license will 
reduce the number of interpreters for hire. If the use of remote sign language interpreters 
is eliminated or curtailed, courts may be forced to delay certain hearings for deaf and hard 
of hearing individuals until in-person interpreters can be scheduled. 
 
Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s monetary 
penalty provisions from cases heard in the District Court after licensing is required 
(beginning in fiscal 2025). This impact is expected to diminish in the out-years as more 
sign language interpreters comply with the bill; by fiscal 2028, most are assumed to be 
properly licensed.  
 
Office of Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
 
Expenditures:  ODHH general and special fund expenditures increase by $159,546 in 
fiscal 2024 to hire personnel to begin implementation of the new board and regulatory 
program. As additional personnel are needed in fiscal 2025 when licensing must 
commence, general and special fund expenditures increase by $373,994 that year (with 
$100,000 of the general fund expenditures mandated and another $183,994 needed to cover 
costs). Special fund revenues may increase negligibly in fiscal 2024 if the board is prepared 
to issue licenses in advance of the required timeframe. Fees are expected to generate 
$90,000 in special fund revenues in fiscal 2025, when licensure is required, escalating to 
$224,000 in fiscal 2028. As fee revenues are not required to cover expenditures under the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 260/ Page 6 
bill, there is a persistent and significant funding gap between fee revenues and total 
expenditures – necessitating supplementation with general funds each year; however, that 
gap narrows as more licenses are issued. Accordingly, under the assumptions below, for 
the remainder of the period covered by this fiscal and policy note (fiscal 2026 through 
2028), general fund expenditures cover approximately $258,800 to $190,400 of total costs 
(which range from approximately $376,800 to $414,400).  
 
ODHH must provide staff for the board, and the director of ODHH must administer the 
Sign Language Interpreters Fund. This analysis phases in implementation costs during 
fiscal 2024 and 2025 and assumes that general fund support for the board flows through 
the special fund. 
 
General and special fund expenditures increase by $159,546 in fiscal 2024, which reflects 
the hiring of one deputy director and one part-time (50%) general counsel, effective  
October 1, 2023, to begin implementation of the bill. General and special fund expenditures 
increase to $373,994 in fiscal 2025 (when the bill’s delayed licensure requirement takes 
effect) to reflect the cost of hiring one interpreter coordinator and one compliance officer, 
effective July 1, 2024, to handle licensure applications, provide workshops and trainings, 
and assist with the continued implementation of the bill. The estimate includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, travel costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
New Positions 
1.5 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$145,125 
$357,018 
Other Operating Expenses 
    14,421 
    16,976 
ODHH Implementation Costs 
$159,546 
$373,994 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
and annual increases in operating expenses.  
 
Revenues:  This analysis assumes, based on ODHH projections, that licenses are issued for 
a one-year term, with the first set of licenses (750) issued in fiscal 2025. In fiscal 2026, 
another 250 interpreters become licensed and the initial 750 licensees renew. In each of the 
next two years, 500 new licenses are issued, and all existing licenses are assumed to be 
renewed. ODHH anticipates establishing a $100 licensing fee in regulations; given the 
requirement to have regulations in place before licensure activity commences, this analysis 
assumes payment of $100 for each new and renewal license. Thus, special fund revenues 
from licensure fees increase by $75,000 in fiscal 2025, increasing to $200,000 by 
fiscal 2028. If licensing activity is able to commence before the end of fiscal 2024, license 
revenues increase minimally that year, and the temporary fee of $150 is likely paid 
(assuming the regulations have not yet taken effect). Any such licensees must renew the 
following year. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 260/ Page 7 
The delayed uptake in licensure reflects ODHH’s expectation that many interpreters will 
initially attempt to work without a license. ODHH anticipates that, as enforcement actions 
are taken against these individuals, there will be a significant increase in unlicensed sign 
language interpreters applying for licenses. Additionally, ODHH anticipates that there will 
be a rapid increase in remote sign language interpreters, especially those located out of 
State, applying for licenses as they gain awareness of the licensing requirement and 
businesses gradually shift toward using licensed interpreters. 
 
The board is required to promote the profession of sign language interpreting, including by 
providing workshops and trainings to raise public awareness and to facilitate professional 
development. ODHH anticipates that workshops and trainings will generate minimal 
revenues. In fiscal 2025, ODHH estimates that its workshops, which will include monthly 
workshops and quarterly weekend-long workshops, will generate a total of $15,000 in 
revenues. In subsequent years, revenue projections increase as additional individuals 
become licensed and enroll in workshops.  
 
Exhibit 1 shows estimated annual special fund revenues from licensure fees and 
workshops and trainings in fiscal 2024 through 2028.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Annual Special Fund Revenues from 
Licensure and Workshops/Trainings 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
 
 
New 
Licenses 
Renewal 
Licenses 
Licensure 
Revenues 
Workshops/ 
Trainings 
Revenues 
Total 
Revenues 
FY 2024 
- 
0 
$- 
$0 
$- 
FY 2025 
750 
- 
$75,000 
$15,000 
$90,000 
FY 2026 
250 
750 
$100,000 
$18,000 
$118,000 
FY 2027 
500 
1,000 
$150,000 
$21,000 
$171,000 
FY 2028 
500 
1,500 
$200,000 
$24,000 
$224,000 
 
1 Although general fund expenditures, including the $100,000 mandated appropriation, would also 
technically accrue to the special fund, this analysis only reflects the fee revenues doing so. 
 
Source:  Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 260/ Page 8 
Other Effects 
 
The Maryland School for the Deaf is likely affected to the extent that the bill limits the 
number of available sign language interpreters for student instruction and support, which 
may create operational delays and/or increase the cost of providing educational services to 
its students. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that small businesses have employees that currently 
provide sign language interpretation services, those employees must become licensed 
beginning January 1, 2025. Any delay in initial implementation of licensing could 
potentially disrupt the ability of these businesses to continue providing such services. 
Conversely, all businesses, including small businesses, benefit from enhanced assurance 
that sign language interpretation services are being provided by qualified individuals. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1107 and SB 748 of 2022 and HB 535 and SB 431 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 346 (Senator King, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Budget and Management; Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8