START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 271 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 271 
(Delegates Kelly and Bagnall) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
9–8–8 Trust Fund – Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include in the fiscal 2025 annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $12.0 million to the 9-8-8 Trust Fund. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures and special fund revenues 
increase by $12.0 million in FY 2025 only due to the mandated appropriation. Special fund 
expenditures increase by a likely significant, but indeterminate amount beginning in 
FY 2025 for authorized purposes, including the cost to hire staff in FY 2025, as discussed 
below. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2025.   
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$12.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$12.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may increase significantly for jurisdictions 
that provide behavioral health crisis response services, as discussed below.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful, as discussed below.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 271/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 and the federal National Suicide 
Hotline Designation Act of 2020, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) designated 
9-8-8 as the State’s behavioral health crisis hotline on July 16, 2022.  
 
Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 also established the 9-8-8 Trust Fund to provide 
reimbursement for costs associated with designating and maintaining 9-8-8 as the universal 
telephone number for a national suicide prevention and mental health crisis hotline and 
developing and implementing a statewide initiative for the coordination and delivery of the 
continuum of behavioral health crisis response services. The fund may also be used for 
behavioral health crisis response services in the State, including (1) crisis call centers; 
(2) mobile crisis team (MCT) services; (3) crisis stabilization centers; and (4) other acute 
behavioral health care services. The fiscal 2023 budget includes $5.0 million in general 
funds for costs related to 9-8-8 implementation. Per Chapters 145 and 146, the Governor 
must include $5.5 million for the fund in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2024.  
 
MDH administers the fund and must submit a report by December 1 each year that includes 
(1) the amount of funds transferred and distributed from the fund; (2) the additional 
services provided by the funding in each local jurisdiction; (3) the amount of any unspent 
funds in the fund; and (4) the reasons why any unspent funds were not spent.  
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund consisting of money appropriated to the fund in the 
State budget, interest earnings of the fund, and any other money accepted for the benefit of 
the fund. Money expended from the fund is supplemental to and is not intended to supplant 
funding that would otherwise be appropriated for the fund’s purpose. The fund is subject 
to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits pursuant to the State Government Article.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures and special fund revenues to the 
9-8-8 Trust Fund increase by $12.0 million in fiscal 2025, reflecting the bill’s mandated 
appropriation. Special fund expenditures from the trust fund increase by a likely 
significant, but indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2025, to the extent that MDH 
expends money from the fund for authorized purposes in statute, including the hiring of 
one administrator to assist with the ongoing implementation and maintenance of 9-8-8.  
 
Thus, special fund personnel expenditures increase by $94,023 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date and the fiscal 2025 mandated 
appropriation. The estimate reflects the cost of hiring one administrator, as specified. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
The information and assumptions used in calculating the estimate are stated below: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 271/ Page 3 
 
the administrator position begins July 1, 2024, at the start of fiscal 2025, due to the 
additional $12.0 million mandated appropriation in fiscal 2025; 
 
9-8-8 implementation and maintenance is ongoing; thus, a permanent rather than 
contractual position is necessary despite the bill’s mandated appropriation for 
fiscal 2025 only;  
 
the $12.0 million mandated appropriation to the 9-8-8 Trust Fund will likely be 
expended over multiple fiscal years; and  
 
the 9-8-8 Trust Fund may be used to fund the necessary staff for continued 
implementation and maintenance of 9-8-8 as the universal telephone number for a 
national suicide prevention and mental health crisis hotline. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$86,338 
Operating Expenses 
7,685 
FY 2025 Personnel Expenditures 
$94,023 
 
Future year personnel expenditures ($91,290 in fiscal 2026, increasing to $100,398 in 
fiscal 2028) reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase for jurisdictions that 
operate crisis call centers, MCT services, crisis stabilization services, and other acute 
behavioral health care services to the extent that money is awarded from the 
9-8-8 Trust Fund in accordance with the State budget and expended to implement 
behavioral health crisis response services in the State.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide acute behavioral health care 
services may receive funding from the 9-8-8 Trust Fund for costs associated with delivering 
behavioral health crisis response services in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 3 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 271/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4