START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 425

Chapter 425

(House Bill 263)

AN ACT concerning

St. Mary’s County – Gaming – ~~Devices~~ ~~and~~ ~~Events~~ Senior Activity Centers

FOR the purpose of ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~definitions~~ ~~of~~ ~~“gaming~~ ~~device”~~ ~~and~~ ~~“gaming~~ ~~event”~~ ~~for~~
~~purposes~~ ~~of~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~law~~ ~~governing~~ ~~gaming~~ ~~in~~ ~~St.~~ ~~Mary’s~~ ~~County;~~ authorizing a
certain senior activity center to conduct gaming events, bunco games, and card
games in St. Mary’s County, subject to certain limitations; requiring any money that
remains after prizes are awarded to be used to support future programming at the
senior activity center; and generally relating to gaming in St. Mary’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 13–2101(a) and (e) ~~and~~ ~~13–2111~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Criminal~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~13–2101(d)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(e)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Law
Section 13–2116
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

13–2101.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) (1) “GAMING DEVICE” MEANS:

(I) A GAMING TABLE AT WHICH A GAME OF CHANCE IS PLAYED
FOR MONEY OR ANY OTHER THING OR CONSIDERATION OF VALUE; OR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 425 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A GAME OR DEVICE AT WHICH MONEY OR ANY OTHER THING
OR CONSIDERATION OF VALUE IS BET, WAGERED, OR GAMBLED.

(2) “Gaming device” includes a paddle wheel, wheel of fortune, chance book,
~~bingo,~~ ~~Nevada~~ ~~card,~~ ~~and~~ ~~a~~ ~~stamp~~ ~~machine.~~

[(2)] (3) “Gaming device” does not include a slot machine, as defined in §
~~12–301~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article.~~

(e) “Gaming event” means a carnival, bazaar, [or] raffle, BINGO GAME, CARD
GAME, OR ANY OTHER EVENT AT WHICH A GAMING DEVICE IS OPERATED.

~~13–2111.~~

~~A~~ ~~qualified~~ ~~organization~~ ~~may~~ ~~hold~~ ~~a~~ ~~gaming~~ ~~event~~ ~~and~~ ~~may~~ ~~operate~~ ~~a~~ ~~gaming~~ ~~device~~
~~if~~ ~~an~~ ~~individual~~ ~~or~~ ~~group~~ ~~of~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~does~~ ~~not:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~benefit~~ ~~financially~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~operation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~gaming~~ ~~device;~~ ~~or~~

~~(2)~~ ~~receive~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~operation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~gaming~~ ~~device~~ ~~any~~ ~~proceeds~~ ~~for~~
~~personal~~ ~~use~~ ~~or~~ ~~benefit.~~

13–2116.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “SENIOR ACTIVITY CENTER” MEANS A COMMUNITY OR
NEIGHBORHOOD FACILITY IN WHICH A BROAD SPECTRUM OF SERVICES ARE
ORGANIZED AND PROVIDED TO SENIOR CITIZENS AND THEIR SPOUSES, INCLUDING
HEALTH, SOCIAL, NUTRITIONAL, EDUCATIONAL, AND RECREATIONAL SERVICES.

(B) A SENIOR ACTIVITY CENTER MAY CONDUCT A GAMING EVENT, BUNCO
GAME, OR CARD GAME IN THE CENTER.

(C) A SENIOR ACTIVITY CENTER MAY NOT:

(1) AWARD A PRIZE OF MONEY EXCEEDING $50 TO A WINNER IN EACH
SESSION; OR

(2) CHARGE A PARTICIPANT MORE THAN $25 TO PLAY ONE SESSION.

(D) ANY MONEY THAT REMAINS AFTER PRIZES ARE AWARDED SHALL BE
USED TO SUPPORT FUTURE PROGRAMMING AT THE SENIOR ACTIVITY CENTER.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 425

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3