START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 267 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 267 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Maryland Child Abduction Prevention Act 
 
 
This bill authorizes a court to order abduction prevention measures in a child custody 
proceeding if the court finds that the evidence establishes a credible risk of abduction of 
the child and establishes procedures by which a party or another individual or entity, as 
specified, may file a petition seeking such measures. The bill also authorizes a court to 
issue an ex parte warrant for physical custody of the child if the court finds that there is a 
credible risk of abduction and establishes related requirements and procedures. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances but may have 
an operational effect on the Judiciary, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances but 
may have an operational effect on the circuit courts, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Select Definitions 
 
“Abduction” is the wrongful removal or wrongful retention of a child. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 267/ Page 2 
“Wrongful removal” means a taking of a child that breaches rights of custody or visitation 
provided or recognized under the laws of the State. 
 
“Wrongful retention” means a keeping or concealing of a child that breaches rights of 
custody or visitation provided or recognized under the laws of the State. 
 
Abduction Prevention Measures – In General 
 
A court, on its own motion, may order abduction prevention measures in a child custody 
proceeding if the court finds that the evidence establishes a credible risk of abduction of 
the child. A party to a child custody determination or another individual or entity having 
standing, as specified, may file a petition seeking abduction prevention measures to protect 
the child. 
 
A petition may be filed only in a court that has jurisdiction to make a child custody 
determination with respect to the child at issue under Title 9.5 of the Family Law Article 
(the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act (UCCJEA)). A court in the 
State must have temporary emergency jurisdiction under UCCJEA if the court finds a 
credible risk of abduction. Specified provisions of UCCJEA apply to cooperation and 
communications among courts in a proceeding under the bill. 
 
Contents of Petition 
 
A petition must (1) be verified and include a copy, if available, of any existing child custody 
determination and (2) subject to specified exceptions regarding the disclosure of 
identifying information that jeopardizes the health, safety, or liberty of a child or party, 
contain specified information, including a statement as to whether a party to the proceeding 
has been arrested for a crime related to domestic violence, stalking, or child abuse and 
neglect. 
 
The petition must also specify the risk factors for abduction, including relevant factors as 
specified in the bill. These factors, which the court must consider in determining whether 
there is a credible risk of abduction, include (among other items), any evidence that the 
petitioner or respondent:   
 
 
has previously abducted or attempted to abduct the child; 
 
has threatened to abduct the child; 
 
has recently engaged in activities that may indicate a planned abduction (e.g., 
abandoning employment, selling a residence or terminating a lease, applying for a 
passport or obtaining travel documents, etc.); 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 267/ Page 3 
 
has strong familial, financial, emotional, or cultural ties to another state or country 
(or lacks such ties to the State or the United States); 
 
is likely to take the child to a country that meets specified criteria, such as not having 
an official U.S. diplomatic presence or having laws or practices that would restrict 
the child’s ability to leave the country after the child reaches the age of majority 
because of a child’s gender, nationality, or religion; 
 
has used multiple names to attempt to mislead or defraud; or 
 
has engaged in any other conduct the court considers relevant to the risk of 
abduction. 
 
Court Orders 
 
If a petition is filed, the court may enter an order that must include (1) the basis for the 
court’s exercise of jurisdiction; (2) the manner in which notice and an opportunity to be 
heard were given to the persons entitled to notice of the proceeding; (3) a detailed 
description of each party’s custody and visitation rights and residential arrangements for 
the child; (4) a provision stating that a violation of the order may subject the party in 
violation to civil and criminal penalties; and (5) identification of the child’s country of 
habitual residence at the time the order is issued. 
 
If, at a hearing, the court finds a credible risk of abduction of the child, the court must enter 
an abduction prevention order. Such an order must include the provisions required above 
and measures and conditions that are reasonably calculated to prevent abduction of the 
child, as specified, giving due consideration to the custody and visitation rights of the 
parties. The court must consider the age of the child, the potential harm to the child from 
an abduction, the legal and practical difficulties of returning the child to the jurisdiction if 
abducted, and the reasons for the potential abduction (including evidence of domestic 
violence, stalking, or child abuse or neglect). Furthermore, the court must consider any 
evidence that the respondent believed in good faith that the respondent’s conduct was 
necessary to avoid imminent harm to the child or respondent and any other evidence that 
may be relevant to whether the respondent may be permitted to remove or retain the child. 
 
An abduction prevention order may include, among other provisions:   
 
 
an imposition of travel restrictions that require that a party traveling with the child 
outside a designated geographic area provide the other party with specified travel 
documents and contact information; 
 
a prohibition on the respondent, directly or indirectly, removing the child from the 
State, the country, or another geographic area without permission of the court or the 
petitioner’s written consent; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 267/ Page 4 
 
a requirement that a party register the order in another state as a prerequisite to 
allowing the child to travel to that state; and 
 
specified protections regarding the child’s passport, including a prohibition on the 
respondent applying on behalf of the child for a new or replacement passport or visa. 
 
In an abduction prevention order, the court may impose conditions on the exercise of 
custody or visitation that (1) limit visitation or require that visitation with the child by the 
respondent be supervised until the court finds that supervision is no longer necessary (and 
order the respondent to pay the costs of any supervision; (2) require the respondent to post 
a bond or provide other security in an amount sufficient to serve as a financial deterrent to 
abduction, as specified; and (3) require the respondent to obtain education on the 
potentially harmful effects to the child from abduction. 
 
An abduction prevention order remains in effect until the earliest of (1) the time stated in 
the order; (2) the emancipation of the child; (3) the child attaining age 18; or (4) the time 
the order is modified, revoked, vacated, or superseded by a court with jurisdiction pursuant 
to UCCJEA. 
 
Ex Parte Warrants and Other Remedies 
 
To prevent imminent abduction of a child, a court may (1) issue a warrant to take physical 
custody of the child, as specified; (2) direct the use of law enforcement to take any action 
reasonably necessary to locate the child, obtain return of the child, or enforce a custody 
determination under the laws of the State; or (3) grant any other relief allowed under State 
law. The specified remedies (including those included in the orders referenced above) are 
cumulative and do not affect the availability of other remedies to prevent abduction. 
 
If a petition contains allegations, and the court finds that there is a credible risk of 
abduction, the court may issue an ex parte warrant for physical custody of the child. The 
respondent must be afforded an opportunity to be heard at the earliest possible time after 
the warrant is executed, but no later than the next business day (unless a hearing on the 
next business day is impossible). A prosecutor or other authority, as specified, may seek a 
warrant to take physical custody of a child. 
 
Among other requirements, an ex parte warrant must direct law enforcement officers to 
take physical custody of the child immediately and provide for the safe interim placement 
of the child pending further order of the court. If feasible, prior to issuing a warrant and 
before determining interim placement for the child, the court may order a search of relevant 
databases to determine if either the petitioner or the respondent has a history of domestic 
violence, stalking, or child abuse or neglect. A warrant to take physical custody issued by 
the State or another state is enforceable in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 267/ Page 5 
The petition and the warrant must be served on the respondent when or immediately after 
the child is taken into physical custody. In specified circumstances, the court may authorize 
law enforcement officers to enter private property to take physical custody of the child 
and/or to make a forcible entry at any hour. If the court finds, after a hearing, that a 
petitioner sought an ex parte warrant for the purpose of harassment or in bad faith, the court 
may award the respondent reasonable attorney’s fees, costs, and expenses.  
 
Current Law:  Federal law prohibits a parent from removing a child from the United States 
or retaining a child in another country with intent to obstruct another parent’s custodial 
rights. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, in conjunction with the U.S. Department of 
State and other federal agencies, has established a program that seeks to prevent the 
departure of a child from the United States when presented with a valid, enforceable court 
order that prohibits the child’s removal from the country (the Prevent Abduction Program). 
 
UCCJEA provides interstate enforcement provisions for child custody orders and sets forth 
provisions for one state to establish jurisdiction in order to eliminate competing custody 
orders between states. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill’s provisions regarding hearings on the next business 
day following the execution of an ex parte warrant may result in operational impacts for 
the Judiciary and the circuit courts, as some courts may have difficulty accommodating 
such hearings without affecting the court’s ability to handle other matters scheduled for 
that day. The Judiciary further notes that some of the bill’s pertinent definitions 
(e.g., “abduction,” “wrongful retention,” etc.) are broad and could be used to initiate the 
process set forth in the bill for custody and visitation disputes that are more frequent in 
nature and involve potentially justifiable conduct (such as unforeseen delays in dropping 
off a child to the other parent following a scheduled visitation). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 383 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; U.S. Department of Homeland Security; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 267/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer K. Botts 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6