START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 240 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 240 
(Delegates Otto and Anderton) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Special Death Benefits - Applicability 
 
 
This bill requires the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) 
to administer a special death benefit under specified circumstances. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2023, and terminates December 31, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply only to one individual, it has no discernible 
effect on State pension liabilities or employer contributions. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to an individual who:   
 
 
was a correctional officer who died by homicide on or after June 1, 2001; 
 
was a member of the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) at the time 
of death; and 
 
whose death was determined by evidence to have arisen out of or in the course of 
actual performance of the individual’s duties. 
 
By December 31, 2023, the surviving spouse of an individual described above may apply 
for a special death benefit. Upon receiving an application for a special death benefit from 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 240/ Page 2 
the surviving spouse, the SRPS board must administer the special death benefit in 
accordance with current law and subject to further conditions. Specifically, the special 
death benefit must include a lump sum payment of the special death benefit that would 
have been paid from the deceased member’s date of death through the date that the special 
death benefit is awarded by the SRPS board, with interest calculated at 4% per year, 
compounded annually. The lump sum payment must be reduced by the CORS member’s 
annual earnable compensation that was paid as a general death benefit, with interest 
calculated at 4% per year, compounded annually. 
 
Current Law:  In general, the SRPS board must pay a death benefit to beneficiaries of an 
active member of SRPS after the board receives proof that the active member has died. The 
death benefit consists of a return of the member’s accumulated contributions as a lump sum 
payment. If the member died in the course of the performance of duty or had at least 
one year of eligibility service in SRPS, the beneficiaries receive a second payment equal 
to the member’s annual earnable compensation. 
 
The SRPS board must pay a special death benefit to the beneficiaries of an active member 
of CORS if the CORS member died (1) without willful negligence by the member and 
(2) with death arising out of or in the course of the actual performance of duty. If the 
CORS member is survived by a spouse, a child younger than 26, a disabled child, or a 
dependent parent, the special death benefit consists of:   
 
 
the member’s accumulated contributions; and 
 
an allowance of two-thirds of the member’s average final compensation. 
 
This special death benefit only applies to an individual who dies while employed as a 
member of CORS on or after January 1, 2006. Further, if a special death benefit is paid, 
the general death benefit described above cannot be paid to any beneficiaries. 
 
Additional Comments:  In June 2001, Correctional Officer Gregory Collins was shot 
while driving home from his shift at the Eastern Correctional Institution (ECI), which 
caused his car to swerve off the road and hit a tree. He died as a result of his injuries. At 
the time, his surviving spouse received a general death benefit. In June 2019, 
John M. Ingersoll, Jr. was arrested for the crime. He was convicted in June 2021 of 
first- and second-degree murder and sentenced to life without parole plus 20 years. The 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services advises that Mr. Ingersoll admitted 
that he received orders to kill Correctional Officer Collins from Dead Man Incorporated, a 
gang Mr. Ingersoll was affiliated with while serving a sentence at ECI. This new 
information would have made Officer Collins’ spouse eligible for a special death benefit 
except that he died before January 1, 2006. Moreover, Officer Collins’ spouse had already  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 240/ Page 3 
received the general death benefit and, therefore, could not qualify for a special death 
benefit. This bill allows her to receive an adjusted special death benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 244 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; State 
Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3