START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 206 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 206 
(Delegate Ivey) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Early Childhood Education - Prekindergarten Programs - Montessori Schools 
and Programs 
 
 
This bill establishes specific eligibility requirements for Montessori schools and 
Montessori programs under the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant program and the publicly 
funded full-day prekindergarten program in regard to staff qualifications and 
student-to-staff ratio. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering eligibility requirements for Montessori schools and programs 
is not anticipated to materially affect State funding under the Prekindergarten Expansion 
Grant program or the publicly funded full-day prekindergarten program. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that Montessori schools and programs are small 
businesses, they may benefit from the specific eligibility requirements established under 
the bill. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for the 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant program and the publicly funded full-day 
prekindergarten program. Specifically, to receive a grant for prekindergarten services 
under the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant program or the publicly funded full-day 
prekindergarten program, Montessori schools or Montessori programs (in addition to other 
specified requirements) must:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 206/ Page 2 
 
maintain a student-to-classroom personnel ratio of no more than 10 to 1, with a 
maximum of 20 students per classroom if all of the students are younger than age 5; 
 
maintain a student-to-classroom personnel ratio of no more than 14 to 1, with a 
maximum of 28 students per classroom if some of the students are at least age 5; 
and 
 
require a teacher to hold a bachelor’s degree and a Montessori credential issued by 
(1) the Association Montessori Internationale; (2) the American Montessori 
Society; or (3) a program accredited by the Montessori Accreditation Council for 
Teacher Education. 
 
Current Law:  Under existing requirements for the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant 
program, a qualified provider must certify to the Maryland State Department of Education 
that (in addition to other requirements) the provider, for each classroom funded, will 
(1) maintain a student‐to‐classroom personnel ratio of no more than 10 to 1 with a 
maximum of 20 children per classroom and (2) provide in each classroom at least 
one teacher certified in early childhood education by the State and at least one teacher’s 
aide who has at least a high school degree. 
 
Publicly funded full‐day prekindergarten providers, in addition to other requirements, must 
also have a student‐to‐classroom personnel ratio of no more than 10 to 1 with a maximum 
of 20 children per classroom. Numerous alterations to publicly funded prekindergarten 
programs (including those applicable to the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant) are also 
being phased in as part of Chapter 36 of 2021 (the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future), 
including provisions regarding minimum staff qualifications for eligibility. For example, 
beginning in the 2025‐2026 school year, all prekindergarten providers must have high staff 
qualifications, including teachers who, at a minimum, hold (1) State certification for 
teaching in early childhood education or (2) a bachelor’s degree in any field and are 
pursuing residency through the Maryland Approved Alternative Preparation Program, 
which includes early childhood coursework, clinical practice, and evidence of pedagogical 
content knowledge. In addition (also beginning in the 2025‐2026 school year), teaching 
assistants must have at least (1) a Child Development Associate certificate or (2) an 
associate’s degree. 
 
Chapter 201 of 2022 allows an individual to be eligible for a certificate to teach students 
in a public Montessori school if the individual (1) holds a valid credential from a specified 
Montessori teacher preparation program and (2) holds a bachelor’s degree in any field. The 
State Board of Education may require an individual to successfully pass an examination to 
be certified; however, beyond this examination, these teachers may not be required to meet 
any additional requirements to be certified to teach students in a Montessori school. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 206/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1305 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3