START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 214 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 214 
(Delegate Kelly, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Commission on Public Health - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Commission on Public Health to make recommendations to improve 
the delivery of “foundational public health services” in the State. The commission must 
assess the foundational public health capabilities of the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) and local health departments (LHDs), as specified. Based on this assessment, the 
commission must make recommendations for reform in specified areas. By 
December 1, 2023, the commission must submit an interim report on its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and specified committees of the General Assembly; a 
final report is due by December 1, 2024. Two representatives of State academic institutions 
with expertise in public health systems must cochair the commission, and staff support for 
the commission must be provided by the academic institutions represented by the cochairs. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. Any impact on MDH can be absorbed within existing 
budgeted resources; likewise, other State agencies can consult with the commission within 
existing budgeted resources. However, higher education expenditures for State academic 
institutions with expertise in public health systems may increase in FY 2024 and 2025 to 
provide staff support to the commission, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Any impact on LHDs can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 214/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Foundational public health services” includes:  
 
 
foundational areas, specifically communicable disease control; chronic disease and 
injury prevention; environmental public health; maternal, child, and family health; 
and access to and linkage with clinical care; and 
 
foundational capabilities, specifically assessment and surveillance, community 
partnership development, equity, organizational competencies, policy development 
and support, accountability and performance management, emergency preparedness 
and response, and communications. 
 
Commission Membership and Workgroups 
 
The commission comprises (1) one member of the Senate, appointed by the President of 
the Senate; (2) one member of the House, appointed by the Speaker of the House; (3) the 
Deputy Secretary for Public Health and the Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health (or 
their designees); (4) the Director of the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities 
(or designee); and (5) specified members appointed by the Governor. Gubernatorial 
appointees include (1) three local health officers, as specified; (2) two representatives from 
State academic institutions with expertise in public health systems; (3) a faculty member 
from a public health program at a historically Black college or university; and (4) at least 
three but no more than five members of the public with demonstrated interest in public 
health and experience in at least one of four areas (health equity, information 
technology (IT), workforce, and population health). 
 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under the standard State travel regulations per the State budget. 
 
The commission must be cochaired by the following members:  (1) one of the three local 
health officers; (2) one of the two representatives from State academic institutions with 
expertise in public health systems; and (3) the faculty member from a public health 
program at a historically Black college or university. 
 
The commission must consult with specified State entities as appropriate and necessary. 
Further, the commission must establish workgroups on funding, governance and 
organizational capabilities, workforce, data and IT, and communication and public 
engagement. Each workgroup must include two members of the commission and members 
of the public with relevant experience in the subject matter of the workgroup, as specified. 
The purpose of the workgroups is to foster broad engagement and provide expertise to 
inform the work and recommendations of the commission. To the extent practicable and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 214/ Page 3 
consistent with federal and State law, membership in the commission and workgroups must 
reflect the racial, ethnic, and gender diversity of the State. 
 
Assessment 
 
The commission must assess the foundational public health capabilities of MDH and 
LHDs. In conducting the required assessment, the commission must explain the impact of 
the foundational public health capabilities on the State’s ability to (1) address foundational 
public health areas, including as the foundational public health areas relate to behavioral 
health and (2) respond to COVID-19, overdoses, maternal and infant mortality, and other 
major public health challenges, as appropriate. The commission must provide public 
outreach to hold a minimum of three public meetings in different areas of the State that 
include an opportunity for public comment. The commission may (1) request deidentified 
and publicly available data from MDH, LHDs, and the State-designated health data utility 
and (2) request interviews with State and local health officials. 
 
Recommendations 
 
The commission must make recommendations for reform in the following areas:  
(1) organization of MDH and LHDs; (2) IT, information exchange, and data and analytics; 
(3) workforce, including human resources and use of the Medical Reserve Corps for public 
health; (4) procurement, including contractor oversight; (5) funding; (6) communication 
and public engagement; and (7) any other area the commission considers appropriate. 
Recommendations must include the funding or legislation required to implement the 
recommendation, if any. The commission must justify how each recommendation 
contributes to the provision of foundational public health services and make a draft of its 
recommendations available for public comment for 30 days. The commission must use best 
efforts to reach consensus on its recommendations. 
 
Interim and Final Reports 
 
The commission’s final report must include a response to any substantive public comment 
received on draft recommendations and an opportunity for dissenting comments if the 
commission does not reach consensus on its recommendations. By December 1, 2023, the 
commission must submit an interim report to the Governor and specified committees of 
the General Assembly; the final report is due by December 1, 2024, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s public health system consists of MDH and 24 LHDs. MDH 
oversees public health through various administrations. The Health Systems and 
Infrastructure Administration works to maintain and improve the health of Marylanders by 
assuring access to primary care services and school health programs, assuring the quality 
of health services, and supporting local health systems’ alignment to improve population 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 214/ Page 4 
health. The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration provides public health 
leadership through community-based public health efforts in partnership with LHDs, 
providers, community-based organizations, and public and private-sector agencies. Under 
the Catastrophic Health Emergency Disease Surveillance and Response Program, the 
Secretary of Health has emergency public health powers that may be used to monitor 
diseases; investigate exposure to deadly agents; and treat, prevent, or reduce the effects of 
exposure to deadly agents. 
 
LHDs in each county and Baltimore City function as the local health agency with primary 
responsibility for policy development, assessment, and assurance of public health in each 
jurisdiction. With the exception of Baltimore City, each county is required to establish a 
local board of health that sets and implements health policy at the local level. A local health 
officer, who is nominated by each county and appointed by the Secretary of Health, serves 
as the executive director of the board, appoints LHD staff, and enforces policies adopted 
by the Secretary and the local jurisdiction. In Baltimore City, the health commissioner is 
appointed by the mayor. LHDs implement various programs in the areas of maternity care, 
infant and child care, family planning, cancer control, and AIDS education and research. 
State, local, and federal dollars support LHD operations. State and federal funding is 
provided to LHDs through the Targeted Local Health Program and individual grant 
agreements between LHDs and various MDH administrations. Statute mandates an annual 
formula for determining State funding allocations for LHDs. The formula adjustment factor 
is calculated by combining an inflation factor with a population growth factor. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, staff support for the commission must be provided 
by the academic institutions represented by two of the three cochairs of the commission 
(one of whom must be a representative from a State academic institution with expertise in 
public health systems and one of whom must be a faculty member from a public health 
program at a historically Black college or university). As these representatives are 
appointed by the Governor and not yet known, the ability of a particular institution to 
absorb any costs associated with staffing the commission cannot be reliably estimated at 
this time. Further, the bill does not specify that the State academic institutions must be 
public institutions of higher education; accordingly, a private academic institution may be 
represented on the commission. Thus, higher education expenditures may increase in 
fiscal 2024 and 2025 for any public institution(s) – whose representative serves as 
cochair – to provide staff support, particularly given the requirement for workgroups to be 
established and public meetings to be held around the State. Nevertheless, any public 
institution(s) represented can likely provide staff support with existing resources. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 214/ Page 5 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 281 (Senator Lam, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Independent College and 
University Association; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5