START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 242 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 242 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Massage Therapy - Definition, Registration, and Reimbursement 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “massage therapy” to clarify what the scope of practice 
does not include. The bill repeals language specifying that a nonprofit health service plan, 
insurer, health maintenance organization (HMO), or person acting as a third-party 
administrator is not required to reimburse a licensed massage therapist or registered 
massage practitioner for any services rendered. The bill also extends by one year the date 
after which the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners may no longer issue a 
registered massage practitioner credential (and related provisions). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners can implement the bill’s 
changes with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary: 
 
Licensure 
 
Chapters 705 and 706 of 2022 phase-out the registered massage practitioner credential. 
Until October 31, 2026, an individual may practice massage therapy in the State if the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 242/ Page 2 
individual is either (1) licensed by the board or (2) registered by the board to practice 
massage therapy in a non-health care setting. Beginning November 1, 2026, an individual 
must be licensed by the board to practice massage therapy in the State. By 
October 31, 2026, the board must convert the registration of an individual registered as a 
massage practitioner to a license to practice massage therapy if the individual complies 
with regulations adopted by the board. An individual registered by the board on 
October 1, 2023 (extended to October 1, 2024, under the bill), must be considered, in all 
respects, registered as a registered massage practitioner by the board for the remainder of 
the individual’s registration.  
 
Qualifications 
 
To qualify as a licensed massage therapist, an individual must (1) be of good moral 
character; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) graduate from an institution of postsecondary 
education approved by the Maryland Higher Education Commission with at least 
750 contact hours of education in a curriculum endorsed by the Commission on Massage 
Therapy Accreditation (COMTA) or an equivalent entity and approved by the board; 
(4) complete 750 contact hours of education in a board-approved program with specified 
areas of content; (5) pass a board-approved examination; and (6) submit to a criminal 
history records check (CHRC). 
 
On or before September 30, 2023 (extended to September 30, 2024 under the bill), to 
qualify as a registered massage therapy practitioner, an individual must (1) be of good 
moral character; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) graduate from a program for the study of 
massage therapy that has a curriculum endorsed by the board and COMTA or an equivalent 
entity and accredited by an institutional accreditation agency recognized by the 
U.S. Department of Education with at least 600 contact hours of classroom instruction in 
specified areas of content; (4) pass an examination approved by the board; and (5) submit 
to a CHRC.  
 
Definitions 
 
“Massage therapy” means the use of manual techniques on soft tissues of the human body 
including stroking, kneading, tapping, stretching, compression, vibration, and friction, with 
or without the aid of heat limited to hot packs and heating pads, cold water, or nonlegend 
topical applications, for the purpose of improving circulation, enhancing muscle relaxation, 
relieving muscular pain, reducing stress, or promoting health and well-being. 
 
“Massage therapy” includes hands-on application, consisting of pressure or movement on 
an individual, to specifically affect the electromagnetic energy or energetic field of the 
human body if this practice includes use of specified manual techniques. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 242/ Page 3 
“Massage therapy” does not include (1) the diagnosis or treatment of illness, disease, or 
injury; (2) the adjustment, manipulation, or mobilization of any of the articulations of the 
osseous structures of the human body or spine; or (3) except as otherwise provided, the 
laying on of hands, consisting of pressure or movement on an individual who is fully 
clothed, except for footwear, to specifically affect the electromagnetic energy or energetic 
field of the human body. The bill repeals the treatment of illness from the definition of 
what is not included in the definition of massage therapy.  
 
Reimbursement 
 
Subtitle 4, Title 6 of the Health Occupations Article does not require a nonprofit health 
service plan, insurer, HMO, or a person acting as a third-party administrator to reimburse 
a licensed massage therapist or registered massage practitioner for any services rendered 
even though the services are within the scope of practice of the licensed massage therapist 
or registered massage practitioner. The bill repeals this provision. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 216 (Senators Ellis and Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
Enrolled - May 11, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 11, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3