START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 235 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 235 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Sales - Owner-Occupied Property - Foreclosure, Notice, and Reimbursement 
of Expenses 
 
 
This bill makes extended time periods that are only applicable to owner-occupied 
residential property in Baltimore City under current law – that govern when a complaint to 
foreclose the right to redeem a property sold in a tax sale can first be filed, when a related 
notice can first be sent, and when related expenses can be reimbursed – applicable to 
owner-occupied residential property statewide. As a result, in jurisdictions other than 
Baltimore City, the bill (1) increases the amount of time that must pass – after an 
owner-occupied residential property is sold at a tax sale and before a holder of a certificate 
of sale can first file a foreclosure complaint – from six months to nine months, and 
(2) increases the amount of time that must pass – after an owner-occupied residential 
property is sold at a tax sale and before the holder of a certificate of sale can first send a 
required foreclosure notice and be reimbursed for expenses relating to filing a foreclosure 
complaint – from four months to seven months. The bill takes effect January 1, 2024,  
and only applies to certificates of sale issued on or after January 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 235/ Page 2 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Redemption and Complaint to Foreclose 
 
An owner or other person that has an estate or interest in property sold by a tax collector 
may redeem the property at any time until the right of redemption has been finally 
foreclosed. In general, a holder of a certificate of sale is not authorized to file a complaint 
to foreclose the right of redemption earlier than six months after the date of the tax sale. 
For owner-occupied residential property in Baltimore City, that time period is nine months 
instead of six months.  
 
The person redeeming the property must pay the collector (1) the total lien amount paid at 
the tax sale for the property together with interest; (2) any taxes, interest, and penalties paid 
by any holder of the certificate of sale; (3) except if the property is owner-occupied 
residential property in Baltimore City, any delinquent taxes, interest, and penalties accruing 
after the date of the tax sale; and (4) in the manner and by the terms required by the 
collector, any expenses or fees for which the plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale 
is entitled to reimbursement. Statute specifies the various expenses or fees, which the 
plaintiff or the holder of a certificate of sale may be reimbursed for, specifically those 
incurred in any action or in preparation for any action to foreclose the right of redemption. 
 
Notices Sent by the Holder of the Certificate of Sale  
 
Subject to limited exceptions, the holder of a certificate of sale must send two specified 
notices before filing a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption of the property to 
which the certificate relates. The notices are sent to (1) the person last listed as owner of 
the property on the collector’s tax roll and (2) the current mortgagee (or assignee of a 
mortgagee of record, or servicer of the current mortgage) or the current holder of a 
beneficial interest in a deed of trust recorded against the property. The holder of the 
certificate of sale may not file a complaint to foreclose the right of redemption until at least  
two months after sending the first notice and at least 30 days after sending the 
second notice. 
 
The first of the two notices may not be sent until four months after the date of the tax sale. 
In Baltimore City, for owner-occupied residential property, the first of the two notices may 
not be sent until seven months after the date of the tax sale.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 235/ Page 3 
 
 
The notices must include, among other things: 
 
 
a statement of the fact of the issuance of a certificate of sale; 
 
a statement that the owner, a mortgage holder, or any other person that has an estate 
or interest in the property may redeem the property at any time until the right of 
redemption has been finally foreclosed; 
 
a statement that the holder of the certificate of sale may file an action to foreclose 
the right of redemption at any time after two months from the date of the first notice;  
 
statements describing what must be paid to redeem the property; and 
 
the name, address, and telephone number of the holder of the certificate of sale, or 
the holder’s agent or attorney, and the collector who made the sale. 
 
Reimbursement for Expenses  
 
If an action to foreclose the right of redemption has not been filed, and the property is 
redeemed more than four months after the date of the tax sale, the holder of a certificate of 
sale may be reimbursed for the following expenses actually incurred:  (1) the cost of 
recording the certificate of sale; (2) a title search fee up to $250; (3) the postage and 
certified mail costs for sending required notices; and (4) reasonable attorney’s fees up to 
$500. Statute specifies additional expenses and fees that the plaintiff or holder of a 
certificate of sale may be reimbursed for if an action to foreclose the right of redemption 
has been filed. 
 
In general, the plaintiff or holder of a certificate of sale may not be reimbursed for expenses 
incurred within four months after the date of sale.  
 
In Baltimore City, for owner-occupied residential property, these statutory periods are 
seven months instead of four months.  
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report, 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. The office was established in 2020 pursuant 
to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 235/ Page 4 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4