START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 229

Chapter 229

(House Bill 249)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Property Tax – Retroactive Exemption

FOR the purpose of authorizing a person who applies for certain property tax exemptions
for real property in Baltimore City to request that the exemption be applied
retroactively for a certain period of time, subject to certain requirements; requiring
Baltimore City and the State to pay a refund of excess real property taxes paid due
to a retroactive exemption that is granted; and generally relating to property tax
exemptions.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 7–204.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

7–204.2.

(A) A PERSON WHO APPLIES FOR AN EXEMPTION UNDER § 7–202 OR § 7–204
OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR REAL PROPERTY IN BALTIMORE CITY MAY REQUEST THAT
THE EXEMPTION BE APPLIED RETROACTIVELY FOR A PERIOD OF UP TO 3 TAXABLE
YEARS, ENDING WITH THE TAXABLE YEAR IN WHICH THE APPLICATION IS FILED.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION AND NOTWITHSTANDING
ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE:

(1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL GRANT AN EXEMPTION FOR ALL
ELIGIBLE TAXABLE YEARS TO A PERSON WHO REQUESTS A RETROACTIVE
EXEMPTION UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(2) BALTIMORE CITY AND THE STATE SHALL PAY A REFUND TO THE
PERSON FOR ANY EXCESS TAXES PAID DUE TO A RETROACTIVE EXEMPTION
GRANTED UNDER THIS SECTION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 229 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) A RETROACTIVE EXEMPTION GRANTED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER
THIS SECTION:

(1) IS SUBJECT TO THE REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF THE BALTIMORE
CITY SOLICITOR AND BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; AND

(2) MAY BE GRANTED ONLY ON A SHOWING OF GOOD CAUSE AS TO WHY
THE EXEMPTION WAS NOT APPLIED FOR IN A TIMELY MANNER.

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2023, AND EACH DECEMBER 1 THROUGH
DECEMBER 1, 2027, THE BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE SHALL
SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, A REPORT THAT INDICATES:

(1) THE NUMBER OF REQUESTS FOR A RETROACTIVE EXEMPTION
UNDER THIS SECTION THAT THE BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
RECEIVED AND APPROVED DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR; AND

(2) ANY AMOUNTS REFUNDED FOR A RETROACTIVE EXEMPTION
UNDER THIS SECTION.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~June~~
~~1,~~ ~~2023.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted. It shall remain effective through December 31, 2026, and, at the end of December
31, 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2