START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

Chapter 761

(House Bill 267)

AN ACT concerning

Family Law – ~~Custody~~ ~~and~~ ~~Visitation~~ ~~–~~ ~~Notice~~ ~~of~~ ~~Intent~~ ~~to~~ ~~Travel~~
(Maryland Child Abduction Prevention Act)

FOR the purpose of ~~authorizing~~ ~~a~~ ~~court~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~custody~~ ~~or~~ ~~visitation~~ ~~proceeding~~ ~~to~~ ~~require~~ ~~a~~
~~party~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~certain~~ ~~notice~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~intent~~ ~~to~~ ~~travel~~ ~~internationally~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~child;~~
authorizing a court to order child abduction prevention measures in certain child
custody proceedings; authorizing certain parties to petition the court for child
abduction prevention measures; ~~authorizing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~custody~~ ~~settlements~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~
~~amended~~ ~~to~~ ~~permit~~ ~~international~~ ~~travel~~ ~~in~~ ~~limited~~ ~~circumstances;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~
~~traveling~~ ~~parent~~ ~~to~~ ~~disclose~~ ~~certain~~ ~~information~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~nontraveling~~ ~~parent~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~
~~request~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~nontraveling~~ ~~parent~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ ~~applying~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~
~~retroactively~~ establishing requirements for a petition under this Act; providing
factors for determining whether a credible risk of child abduction exists; establishing
requirements for an abduction prevention order; authorizing a court to issue a
warrant for physical custody of a child; and generally relating to child abduction and
the Maryland Child Abduction Prevention Act.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Family~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~9–106~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 9.5–101(a), (d), (e), and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Family Law
Section 9.7–101 through ~~9.7–108~~ 9.7–111 to be under the new title “Title 9.7.
Maryland Child Abduction Prevention Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Family Law

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~9–106.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Except~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~custody~~ ~~or~~
~~visitation~~ ~~proceeding~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~may~~ ~~include~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~condition~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~custody~~ ~~or~~ ~~visitation~~ ~~order~~ ~~a~~
~~requirement~~ ~~that~~ ~~either~~ ~~party~~ ~~provide~~ ~~advance~~ ~~written~~ ~~notice~~ ~~of~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~90~~ ~~days~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
court, the other party, or both, of the intent to:

(I) relocate the permanent residence of the party or the child either
within or outside the State; OR

(II) TRAVEL OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES WITH THE CHILD.

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~court~~ ~~may~~ ~~prescribe~~ ~~the~~ ~~form~~ ~~and~~ ~~content~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~If~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~orders~~ ~~that~~ ~~notice~~ ~~be~~ ~~given~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~other~~ ~~party,~~ ~~a~~ ~~mailing~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~by~~ ~~certified~~ ~~mail,~~ ~~return~~ ~~receipt~~ ~~requested,~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~last~~ ~~known~~ ~~address~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~other~~
~~party~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~deemed~~ ~~sufficient~~ ~~to~~ ~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement.~~

(4) If either party files a petition regarding a proposed relocation OR
INTENT TO TRAVEL within 20 days of the written notice of the relocation OR TRAVEL
~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection,~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~shall~~ ~~set~~ ~~a~~ ~~hearing~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~petition~~
~~on~~ ~~an~~ ~~expedited~~ ~~basis.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~On~~ ~~a~~ ~~showing~~ ~~that~~ ~~notice~~ ~~would~~ ~~expose~~ ~~the~~ ~~child~~ ~~or~~ ~~either~~ ~~party~~ ~~to~~ ~~abuse~~ ~~as~~
~~defined~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~ ~~4–501~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~ ~~or~~ ~~for~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~good~~ ~~cause~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~shall~~ ~~waive~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~
~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~

(c) If either party is required to relocate OR TRAVEL in less than the 90–day
~~period~~ ~~specified~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement,~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~may~~ ~~consider~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~defense~~ ~~to~~ ~~any~~ ~~action~~
~~brought~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~that:~~

(1) relocation OR TRAVEL was necessary due to financial or other
~~extenuating~~ ~~circumstances;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~required~~ ~~notice~~ ~~was~~ ~~given~~ ~~within~~ ~~a~~ ~~reasonable~~ ~~time~~ ~~after~~ ~~learning~~
of the necessity to relocate OR TRAVEL.

~~(d)~~ ~~The~~ ~~court~~ ~~may~~ ~~consider~~ ~~any~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~factor~~ ~~in~~
~~determining~~ ~~the~~ ~~merits~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~subsequent~~ ~~proceeding~~ ~~involving~~ ~~custody~~ ~~or~~ ~~visitation.~~

9.5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

(d) (1) “Child custody determination” means a judgment, decree, or other order
of a court providing for the legal custody, physical custody, or visitation with respect to a
child.

(2) “Child custody determination” includes a permanent, temporary,
initial, and modification order.

(3) “Child custody determination” does not include an order relating to
child support or other monetary obligation of an individual.

(e) (1) “Child custody proceeding” means a proceeding in which legal custody,
physical custody, or visitation with respect to a child is an issue.

(2) “Child custody proceeding” includes a proceeding for divorce,
separation, neglect, abuse, dependency, guardianship, paternity, termination of parental
rights, and protection from domestic violence, in which the issue may appear.

(3) “Child custody proceeding” does not include a proceeding involving
juvenile delinquency, contractual emancipation, or enforcement under Subtitle 3 of this
title.

(g) “Court” means an entity authorized under the law of a state to establish,
enforce, or modify a child custody determination.

TITLE 9.7. MARYLAND CHILD ABDUCTION PREVENTION ACT.

9.7–101.

(A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ABDUCTION” MEANS: THE WRONGFUL REMOVAL OR WRONGFUL
RETENTION OF A CHILD.

(1) A TAKING OF A CHILD THAT BREACHES RIGHTS OF CUSTODY OR
VISITATION PROVIDED OR RECOGNIZED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE; OR

(2) A KEEPING OR CONCEALING OF A CHILD THAT BREACHES RIGHTS
~~OF~~ ~~CUSTODY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~VISITATION~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RECOGNIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LAWS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~STATE.~~

(C) “CHILD” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS.

(D) “CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
9.5–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) “CHILD CUSTODY PROCEEDING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
9.5–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(F) “COURT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9.5–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(G) “PETITION” INCLUDES A MOTION OR ITS EQUIVALENT.

(H) “RECORD” MEANS INFORMATION THAT IS INSCRIBED ON A TANGIBLE
MEDIUM OR THAT IS STORED IN AN ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEDIUM AND IS
RETRIEVABLE IN PERCEIVABLE FORM.

(H) (I) (1) “STATE” MEANS A STATE OF THE UNITED STATES, THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, PUERTO RICO, THE U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS, OR ANY
TERRITORY OR INSULAR POSSESSION SUBJECT TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE
UNITED STATES.

(2) “STATE” INCLUDES A FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED NATIVE
AMERICAN NATION OR TRIBE.

(J) (1) “TRAVEL DOCUMENT” MEANS A RECORD RELATING TO A TRAVEL
ITINERARY, INCLUDING A TRAVEL TICKET OR PASS OR A RESERVATION FOR
TRANSPORTATION OR ACCOMMODATIONS.

(2) “TRAVEL DOCUMENT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A PASSPORT OR VISA.

(K) “WRONGFUL REMOVAL” MEANS A TAKING OF A CHILD THAT BREACHES
RIGHTS OF CUSTODY OR VISITATION PROVIDED OR RECOGNIZED UNDER THE LAWS
OF THE STATE.

(L) “WRONGFUL RETENTION” MEANS A KEEPING OR CONCEALING OF A
CHILD THAT BREACHES RIGHTS OF CUSTODY OR VISITATION PROVIDED OR
RECOGNIZED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE.

9.7–102.

(A) EXCLUDING § 101(C) OF THE FEDERAL ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES IN
GLOBAL AND NATIONAL COMMERCE ACT, THIS TITLE MODIFIES, LIMITS, AND
SUPERSEDES THE FEDERAL ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES IN GLOBAL AND NATIONAL
COMMERCE ACT.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

(B) THIS TITLE DOES NOT AUTHORIZE DELIVERY OF ANY OF THE NOTICES
DESCRIBED IN § 103(B) OF THE FEDERAL ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES IN GLOBAL
AND NATIONAL COMMERCE ACT.

9.7–103.

SECTIONS 9.5–109 THROUGH 9.5–111 OF THIS ARTICLE APPLY TO
COOPERATION AND COMMUNICATIONS AMONG COURTS IN A PROCEEDING UNDER
THIS TITLE.

9.7–104.

(A) A COURT ON ITS OWN MOTION MAY ORDER ABDUCTION PREVENTION
MEASURES IN A CHILD CUSTODY PROCEEDING IF THE COURT FINDS THAT THE
EVIDENCE ESTABLISHES A CREDIBLE RISK OF ABDUCTION OF THE CHILD.

(B) A PARTY TO A CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION OR ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL OR ENTITY HAVING A RIGHT UNDER THE LAW OF A STATE TO SEEK A
CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION FOR THE CHILD MAY FILE A PETITION SEEKING
ABDUCTION PREVENTION MEASURES TO PROTECT THE CHILD UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) A PROSECUTOR OR PUBLIC AUTHORITY UNDER § 9.5–315 OF THIS
ARTICLE MAY SEEK A WARRANT TO TAKE PHYSICAL CUSTODY OF A CHILD UNDER §
9.7–109 OF THIS TITLE OR TAKE OTHER APPROPRIATE PREVENTION MEASURES.

~~9.7–104.~~ 9.7–105.

(A) A PETITION UNDER THIS TITLE MAY BE FILED ONLY IN A COURT THAT
HAS JURISDICTION TO MAKE A CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION WITH RESPECT TO
THE CHILD AT ISSUE UNDER THE UNIFORM CHILD CUSTODY JURISDICTION AND
ENFORCEMENT ACT UNDER TITLE 9.5 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) A COURT IN THIS STATE SHALL HAVE TEMPORARY EMERGENCY
JURISDICTION UNDER § 9.5–204 OF THIS ARTICLE IF THE COURT FINDS A CREDIBLE
RISK OF ABDUCTION OF A CHILD.

9.7–106.

(A) (1) A PETITION UNDER THIS TITLE SHALL BE VERIFIED AND INCLUDE
A COPY OF ANY EXISTING CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION, IF AVAILABLE.

(2) THE PETITION SHALL SPECIFY THE RISK FACTORS FOR
ABDUCTION ~~AND~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~INCLUDE~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LIKELIHOOD~~
~~OF~~ ~~ABDUCTION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DIFFICULTY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RETURNING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~OTHER~~
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

RELEVANT INFORMATION AS DETERMINED BY THE U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER
PROTECTION’S PREVENT ABDUCTION PROGRAM AND THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE INCLUDING THE RELEVANT FACTORS DESCRIBED IN § 9.7–107 OF THIS TITLE.

(C) (B) SUBJECT TO § 9.5–209(E) OF THIS ARTICLE, IF REASONABLY
ASCERTAINABLE, THE PETITION SHALL CONTAIN:

(1) THE NAME, DATE OF BIRTH, AND GENDER OF THE CHILD;

(2) THE CUSTOMARY ADDRESS AND CURRENT PHYSICAL LOCATION
OF THE CHILD;

(3) THE IDENTITY, CUSTOMARY ADDRESS, AND CURRENT PHYSICAL
LOCATION OF THE RESPONDENT;

(4) A STATEMENT OF WHETHER A PRIOR ACTION TO PREVENT
ABDUCTION OR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE HAS BEEN FILED BY A PARTY OR OTHER
INDIVIDUAL OR ENTITY HAVING CUSTODY OF THE CHILD AND THE DATE, LOCATION,
AND DISPOSITION OF THE ACTION;

(5) A STATEMENT OF WHETHER A PARTY TO THE PROCEEDING HAS
BEEN ARRESTED FOR A CRIME RELATED TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, STALKING, OR
CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT AND THE DATE, LOCATION, AND DISPOSITION OF THE
CASE; AND

(6) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE
COURT FOR A CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION UNDER § 9.5–209 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~9.7–105.~~

(A) MEDIATED CUSTODY SETTLEMENTS MAY NOT BE AMENDED TO PERMIT
~~INTERNATIONAL~~ ~~TRAVEL~~ ~~UNLESS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMENDMENT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~UNDERSTOOD~~ ~~AND~~ ~~AGREED~~
~~TO~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PARTIES~~ ~~OR~~ ~~UNLESS~~ ~~THERE~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~BEEN~~ ~~A~~ ~~SIGNIFICANT~~ ~~CHANGE~~ ~~OF~~
~~CIRCUMSTANCES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~MAKES~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMENDMENT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BEST~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~CHILD.~~

(B) THE COURT SHALL CONSIDER BOTH DOCUMENTARY AND TESTIMONIAL
~~EVIDENCE.~~

(C) THE COURT SHALL CONSIDER THE DIFFICULTY OF REGAINING CUSTODY
OF THE CHILD AND THE RISK OF ABDUCTION.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

(D) THE COURT MAY CONSIDER EMERGENCY PETITIONS FOR A REHEARING
ON TRAVEL PERMISSION IF THERE IS A SIGNIFICANT CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES,
~~INCLUDING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DIFFICULTY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~REGAINING~~ ~~CUSTODY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~OR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RISK~~
OF ABDUCTION.

(E) THE COURT SHALL GRANT PETITIONS FOR A REHEARING ON TRAVEL
~~PERMISSIONS~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~REQUIRING~~ ~~EVIDENCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~SIGNIFICANT~~
CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES.

(F) (1) FOR DIVORCED PARENTS WHERE AT LEAST ONE PARENT HAS
HELD FOREIGN CITIZENSHIP, PRIOR TO THE TRAVELING PARENT REQUESTING
INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL CONSENT OF THE OTHER PARENT, THE FOLLOWING ARE
~~DISCOVERABLE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~PRESENTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TRAVELING~~ ~~PARENT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
NONTRAVELING PARENT IF REQUESTED BY THE NONTRAVELING PARENT:

(I) THE PRESENT EMPLOYER’S NAME AND ADDRESS, TIME
WORKING FOR PRESENT EMPLOYER, SALARY, AND THE LAST W–2 AVAILABLE;

(II) A FINANCIAL STATEMENT WITH THE PREVIOUS 12 MONTHS
OF STATEMENTS FROM ALL ACCOUNTS AT ALL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS;

(III) THE PRESENT ADDRESS; AND

(IV) THE LEASE OR BOTH THE DEED AND 12 MONTHS OF
MORTGAGE STATEMENTS FOR THE PRIMARY PERMANENT RESIDENCE.

(2) A PARENT PROVIDING DOCUMENTS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
~~SHALL~~ ~~DECLARE~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~OATH~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DOCUMENTS~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~FULL~~ ~~AND~~ ~~COMPLETE~~ ~~TO~~
THE BEST OF THE PARENT’S KNOWLEDGE.

~~9.7–106.~~

IN DETERMINING WHETHER TRAVEL ABROAD MAY BE ALLOWED, THE COURT
~~SHALL~~ ~~CONSIDER~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LIKELIHOOD~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ABDUCTION~~
~~OR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DIFFICULTY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RETURNING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~RELEVANT~~
INFORMATION AS DETERMINED BY THE U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION’S
PREVENT ABDUCTION PROGRAM AND THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE.

9.7–107.

(A) IN DETERMINING WHETHER THERE IS A CREDIBLE RISK OF ABDUCTION
OF A CHILD, THE COURT SHALL CONSIDER ANY EVIDENCE THAT THE PETITIONER OR
RESPONDENT:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) HAS PREVIOUSLY ABDUCTED OR ATTEMPTED TO ABDUCT THE
CHILD;

(2) HAS THREATENED TO ABDUCT THE CHILD;

(3) HAS RECENTLY ENGAGED IN ACTIVITIES THAT MAY INDICATE A
PLANNED ABDUCTION, INCLUDING:

(I) ABANDONING EMPLOYMENT;

(II) SELLING A PRIMARY RESIDENCE;

(III) TERMINATING A LEASE;

(IV) CLOSING A BANK OR OTHER FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNT, LIQUIDATING ASSETS, HIDING OR DESTROYING FINANCIAL DOCUMENTS,
OR CONDUCTING ANY UNUSUAL FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES;

(V) APPLYING FOR A PASSPORT OR VISA OR OBTAINING TRAVEL
DOCUMENTS FOR THE RESPONDENT, A FAMILY MEMBER, OR THE CHILD; OR

(VI) SEEKING TO OBTAIN THE CHILD’S BIRTH CERTIFICATE OR
SCHOOL OR MEDICAL RECORDS;

(4) HAS ENGAGED IN DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, STALKING, OR CHILD
ABUSE OR NEGLECT;

(5) HAS REFUSED TO FOLLOW A CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION;

(6) LACKS STRONG FAMILIAL, FINANCIAL, EMOTIONAL, OR CULTURAL
TIES TO THE STATE OR THE UNITED STATES;

(7) HAS STRONG FAMILIAL, FINANCIAL, EMOTIONAL, OR CULTURAL
TIES TO ANOTHER STATE OR COUNTRY;

(8) IS LIKELY TO TAKE THE CHILD TO A COUNTRY THAT:

(I) IS NOT A PARTY TO THE HAGUE CONVENTION ON THE CIVIL
ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION AND DOES NOT PROVIDE FOR THE
EXTRADITION OF AN ABDUCTING PARENT OR FOR THE RETURN OF AN ABDUCTED
CHILD;

(II) IS A PARTY TO THE HAGUE CONVENTION ON THE CIVIL
ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION BUT:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

1. THE HAGUE CONVENTION ON THE CIVIL ASPECTS OF
INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION IS NOT IN FORCE BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND THAT COUNTRY;

2. IS NONCOMPLIANT ACCORDING TO THE MOST RECENT
COMPLIANCE REPORT ISSUED BY THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE; OR

3. LACKS LEGAL MECHANISMS FOR IMMEDIATELY AND
EFFECTIVELY ENFORCING A RETURN ORDER UNDER THE HAGUE CONVENTION ON
THE CIVIL ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION;

(III) POSES A RISK THAT THE CHILD’S PHYSICAL OR EMOTIONAL
HEALTH OR SAFETY WOULD BE ENDANGERED IN THE COUNTRY BECAUSE OF
SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES RELATING TO THE CHILD OR BECAUSE OF HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS COMMITTED AGAINST CHILDREN;

(IV) HAS LAWS OR PRACTICES THAT WOULD:

1. ENABLE THE RESPONDENT, WITHOUT DUE CAUSE, TO
PREVENT THE PETITIONER FROM CONTACTING THE CHILD;

2. RESTRICT THE PETITIONER FROM FREELY
TRAVELING TO OR EXITING FROM THE COUNTRY BECAUSE OF THE PETITIONER’S
GENDER, NATIONALITY, MARITAL STATUS, OR RELIGION; OR

3. RESTRICT THE CHILD’S ABILITY LEGALLY TO LEAVE
THE COUNTRY AFTER THE CHILD REACHES THE AGE OF MAJORITY BECAUSE OF A
CHILD’S GENDER, NATIONALITY, OR RELIGION;

(V) IS INCLUDED BY THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF
STATE ON A CURRENT LIST OF STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM;

(VI) DOES NOT HAVE AN OFFICIAL UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC
PRESENCE IN THE COUNTRY; OR

(VII) IS ENGAGED IN ACTIVE MILITARY ACTION OR WAR,
INCLUDING A CIVIL WAR, TO WHICH THE CHILD MAY BE EXPOSED;

(9) IS UNDERGOING A CHANGE IN IMMIGRATION OR CITIZENSHIP
STATUS THAT WOULD ADVERSELY AFFECT THE RESPONDENT’S ABILITY TO REMAIN
IN THE UNITED STATES LEGALLY;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(10) HAS HAD AN APPLICATION FOR UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP
DENIED;

(11) HAS FORGED OR PRESENTED MISLEADING OR FALSE EVIDENCE
ON GOVERNMENT FORMS OR SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS TO OBTAIN OR ATTEMPT TO
OBTAIN A PASSPORT, A VISA, TRAVEL DOCUMENTS, A SOCIAL SECURITY CARD, A
DRIVER’S LICENSE, OR ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT–ISSUED IDENTIFICATION CARD
OR HAS MADE A MISREPRESENTATION TO THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT;

(12) HAS USED MULTIPLE NAMES TO ATTEMPT TO MISLEAD OR
DEFRAUD; OR

(13) HAS ENGAGED IN ANY OTHER CONDUCT THE COURT CONSIDERS
RELEVANT TO THE RISK OF ABDUCTION.

(B) IN A HEARING ON A PETITION UNDER THIS TITLE, THE COURT SHALL
CONSIDER ANY EVIDENCE THAT THE RESPONDENT BELIEVED IN GOOD FAITH THAT
THE RESPONDENT’S CONDUCT WAS NECESSARY TO AVOID IMMINENT HARM TO THE
CHILD OR RESPONDENT AND ANY OTHER EVIDENCE THAT MAY BE RELEVANT TO
WHETHER THE RESPONDENT MAY BE PERMITTED TO REMOVE OR RETAIN THE
CHILD.

9.7–108.

(A) IF A PETITION IS FILED UNDER THIS TITLE, THE COURT MAY ENTER AN
ORDER THAT SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE BASIS FOR THE COURT’S EXERCISE OF JURISDICTION;

(2) THE MANNER IN WHICH NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY TO BE
HEARD WERE GIVEN TO THE PERSONS ENTITLED TO NOTICE OF THE PROCEEDING;

(3) A DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF EACH PARTY’S CUSTODY AND
VISITATION RIGHTS AND RESIDENTIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CHILD;

(4) A PROVISION STATING THAT A VIOLATION OF THE ORDER MAY
SUBJECT THE PARTY IN VIOLATION TO CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES; AND

(5) IDENTIFICATION OF THE CHILD’S COUNTRY OF HABITUAL
RESIDENCE AT THE TIME OF THE ISSUANCE OF THE ORDER.

(B) (1) IF, AT A HEARING ON A PETITION UNDER THIS TITLE OR ON THE
COURT’S OWN MOTION, THE COURT AFTER REVIEWING THE EVIDENCE FINDS A

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

CREDIBLE RISK OF ABDUCTION OF THE CHILD, THE COURT SHALL ENTER AN
ABDUCTION PREVENTION ORDER.

(2) AN ORDER ENTERED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE
THE PROVISIONS REQUIRED BY SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AND MEASURES
AND CONDITIONS, INCLUDING THOSE IN SUBSECTIONS (C), (D), AND (E) OF THIS
SECTION, THAT ARE REASONABLY CALCULATED TO PREVENT ABDUCTION OF THE
CHILD, GIVING DUE CONSIDERATION TO THE CUSTODY AND VISITATION RIGHTS OF
THE PARTIES.

(3) THE COURT SHALL CONSIDER THE AGE OF THE CHILD, THE
POTENTIAL HARM TO THE CHILD FROM AN ABDUCTION, THE LEGAL AND PRACTICAL
DIFFICULTIES OF RETURNING THE CHILD TO THE JURISDICTION IF ABDUCTED, AND
THE REASONS FOR THE POTENTIAL ABDUCTION, INCLUDING EVIDENCE OF
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, STALKING, OR CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.

(C) AN ABDUCTION PREVENTION ORDER MAY INCLUDE ONE OR MORE OF
THE FOLLOWING:

(1) AN IMPOSITION OF TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS THAT REQUIRE THAT A
PARTY TRAVELING WITH THE CHILD OUTSIDE A DESIGNATED GEOGRAPHIC AREA
PROVIDE THE OTHER PARTY WITH THE FOLLOWING:

(I) THE TRAVEL ITINERARY OF THE CHILD;

(II) A LIST OF PHYSICAL ADDRESSES AND TELEPHONE
NUMBERS AT WHICH THE CHILD CAN BE REACHED AT SPECIFIED TIMES; AND

(III) COPIES OF ALL TRAVEL DOCUMENTS;

(2) A PROHIBITION ON THE RESPONDENT DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY:

(I) REMOVING THE CHILD FROM THE STATE, THE UNITED
STATES, OR ANOTHER GEOGRAPHIC AREA WITHOUT PERMISSION OF THE COURT OR
THE PETITIONER’S WRITTEN CONSENT;

(II) REMOVING OR RETAINING THE CHILD IN VIOLATION OF A
CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION;

(III) REMOVING THE CHILD FROM SCHOOL OR A CHILD CARE OR
SIMILAR FACILITY; OR

(IV) APPROACHING THE CHILD AT ANY LOCATION OTHER THAN
A SITE DESIGNATED FOR SUPERVISED VISITATION;
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) A REQUIREMENT THAT A PARTY REGISTER THE ORDER IN
ANOTHER STATE AS A PREREQUISITE TO ALLOWING THE CHILD TO TRAVEL TO THAT
STATE;

(4) WITH REGARD TO THE CHILD’S PASSPORT:

(I) A DIRECTION THAT THE PETITIONER PLACE THE CHILD’S
NAME IN THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE’S CHILD PASSPORT
ISSUANCE ALERT PROGRAM;

(II) A REQUIREMENT THAT THE RESPONDENT SURRENDER TO
THE COURT OR THE PETITIONER’S ATTORNEY ANY UNITED STATES OR FOREIGN
PASSPORT ISSUED IN THE CHILD’S NAME, INCLUDING A PASSPORT ISSUED IN THE
NAME OF BOTH THE PARENT AND THE CHILD; AND

(III) A PROHIBITION ON THE RESPONDENT APPLYING ON
BEHALF OF THE CHILD FOR A NEW OR REPLACEMENT PASSPORT OR VISA;

(5) AS A PREREQUISITE TO EXERCISING CUSTODY OR VISITATION, A
REQUIREMENT THAT THE RESPONDENT PROVIDE:

(I) TO THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE’S OFFICE
OF CHILDREN’S ISSUES AND THE RELEVANT FOREIGN CONSULATE OR EMBASSY, AN
AUTHENTICATED COPY OF THE ORDER DETAILING PASSPORT AND TRAVEL
RESTRICTIONS FOR THE CHILD;

(II) TO THE COURT:

1. PROOF THAT THE RESPONDENT HAS PROVIDED THE
INFORMATION IN ITEM (I) OF THIS ITEM; AND

2. AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT IN A RECORD FROM THE
RELEVANT FOREIGN CONSULATE OR EMBASSY THAT NO PASSPORT APPLICATION
HAS BEEN MADE, OR PASSPORT ISSUED, ON BEHALF OF THE CHILD;

(III) TO THE PETITIONER, PROOF OF REGISTRATION WITH THE
UNITED STATES EMBASSY OR OTHER UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC PRESENCE IN
THE DESTINATION COUNTRY AND WITH THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY FOR THE HAGUE
CONVENTION ON THE CIVIL ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION, IF
THAT CONVENTION IS IN EFFECT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE
DESTINATION COUNTRY, UNLESS ONE OF THE PARTIES OBJECTS; AND

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

(IV) A WRITTEN WAIVER UNDER THE FEDERAL PRIVACY ACT, 5
U.S.C. § 552A, WITH RESPECT TO ANY DOCUMENT, APPLICATION, OR OTHER
INFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE CHILD AUTHORIZING ITS DISCLOSURE TO THE
COURT AND THE PETITIONER; AND

(6) ON THE PETITIONER’S REQUEST, A REQUIREMENT THAT THE
RESPONDENT OBTAIN AN ORDER FROM THE RELEVANT FOREIGN COUNTRY
CONTAINING TERMS IDENTICAL TO THE CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATION ISSUED
IN THE UNITED STATES.

(D) IN AN ABDUCTION PREVENTION ORDER THE COURT MAY IMPOSE
CONDITIONS ON THE EXERCISE OF CUSTODY OR VISITATION THAT:

(1) (I) LIMIT VISITATION OR REQUIRE THAT VISITATION WITH THE
CHILD BY THE RESPONDENT BE SUPERVISED UNTIL THE COURT FINDS THAT
SUPERVISION IS NO LONGER NECESSARY; AND

(II) ORDER THE RESPONDENT TO PAY THE COSTS OF ANY
SUPERVISION;

(2) REQUIRE THE RESPONDENT TO POST A BOND OR PROVIDE OTHER
SECURITY IN AN AMOUNT SUFFICIENT TO SERVE AS A FINANCIAL DETERRENT TO
ABDUCTION, THE PROCEEDS OF WHICH MAY BE USED TO PAY FOR THE REASONABLE
EXPENSES OF RECOVERY OF THE CHILD, INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S
FEES AND COSTS IF THERE IS AN ABDUCTION; AND

(3) REQUIRE THE RESPONDENT TO OBTAIN EDUCATION ON THE
POTENTIALLY HARMFUL EFFECTS TO THE CHILD FROM ABDUCTION.

(E) TO PREVENT IMMINENT ABDUCTION OF A CHILD, A COURT MAY:

(1) ISSUE A WARRANT TO TAKE PHYSICAL CUSTODY OF THE CHILD
UNDER § 9.7–109 OF THIS TITLE OR UNDER ANY OTHER LAW OF THE STATE;

(2) DIRECT THE USE OF LAW ENFORCEMENT TO TAKE ANY ACTION
REASONABLY NECESSARY TO LOCATE THE CHILD, OBTAIN RETURN OF THE CHILD,
OR ENFORCE A CUSTODY DETERMINATION UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE; OR

(3) GRANT ANY OTHER RELIEF ALLOWED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE
STATE.

(F) THE REMEDIES PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION ARE CUMULATIVE AND DO
NOT AFFECT THE AVAILABILITY OF OTHER REMEDIES TO PREVENT ABDUCTION.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9.7–109.

(A) IF A PETITION UNDER THIS TITLE CONTAINS ALLEGATIONS, AND THE
COURT FINDS THAT THERE IS A CREDIBLE RISK OF ABDUCTION, THE COURT MAY
ISSUE AN EX PARTE WARRANT FOR PHYSICAL CUSTODY OF THE CHILD.

(B) (1) THE RESPONDENT IN A PETITION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL BE AFFORDED AN OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD AT THE EARLIEST
POSSIBLE TIME AFTER THE EX PARTE WARRANT IS EXECUTED, BUT NOT LATER THAN
THE NEXT BUSINESS DAY, UNLESS A HEARING ON THE NEXT BUSINESS DAY IS
IMPOSSIBLE.

(2) IF A HEARING UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS
NOT POSSIBLE, THE COURT SHALL HOLD THE HEARING ON THE FIRST BUSINESS DAY
POSSIBLE.

(C) AN EX PARTE WARRANT UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL:

(1) RECITE THE FACTS ON WHICH A DETERMINATION OF A CREDIBLE
RISK OF IMMINENT WRONGFUL REMOVAL OF THE CHILD IS BASED;

(2) DIRECT LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO TAKE PHYSICAL
CUSTODY OF THE CHILD IMMEDIATELY;

(3) STATE THE DATE AND TIME FOR THE HEARING ON THE PETITION;
AND

(4) PROVIDE FOR THE SAFE INTERIM PLACEMENT OF THE CHILD
PENDING FURTHER ORDER OF THE COURT.

(D) IF FEASIBLE, BEFORE ISSUING A WARRANT AND BEFORE DETERMINING
THE PLACEMENT OF THE CHILD AFTER THE WARRANT IS EXECUTED, THE COURT
MAY ORDER A SEARCH OF THE RELEVANT DATABASES OF THE NATIONAL CRIME
INFORMATION CENTER SYSTEM AND SIMILAR DATABASES TO DETERMINE IF
EITHER THE PETITIONER OR RESPONDENT HAS A HISTORY OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE,
STALKING, OR CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.

(E) THE PETITION AND WARRANT MUST BE SERVED ON THE RESPONDENT
WHEN OR IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE CHILD IS TAKEN INTO PHYSICAL CUSTODY.

(F) (1) A WARRANT TO TAKE PHYSICAL CUSTODY OF A CHILD ISSUED BY
THIS STATE OR ANOTHER STATE IS ENFORCEABLE IN THIS STATE.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

(2) IF THE COURT FINDS THAT A LESS INTRUSIVE REMEDY WILL NOT
BE EFFECTIVE, THE COURT MAY AUTHORIZE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO
ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY TO TAKE PHYSICAL CUSTODY OF THE CHILD.

(3) IF REQUIRED BY EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES, A COURT MAY
AUTHORIZE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO MAKE A FORCIBLE ENTRY AT ANY
HOUR.

(G) IF THE COURT FINDS, AFTER A HEARING, THAT A PETITIONER SOUGHT
AN EX PARTE WARRANT UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR THE
PURPOSE OF HARASSMENT OR IN BAD FAITH, THE COURT MAY AWARD THE
RESPONDENT REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES, COSTS, AND EXPENSES.

(H) THIS TITLE DOES NOT AFFECT THE AVAILABILITY OF RELIEF IN OTHER
PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.

9.7–110.

AN ABDUCTION PREVENTION ORDER REMAINS IN EFFECT UNTIL THE
EARLIEST OF:

(1) THE TIME STATED IN THE ORDER;

(2) THE EMANCIPATION OF THE CHILD;

(3) THE CHILD TURNING 18 YEARS OLD; OR

(4) THE TIME THE ORDER IS MODIFIED, REVOKED, VACATED, OR
SUPERSEDED BY A COURT WITH JURISDICTION UNDER §§ 9.5–201 THROUGH
9.5–203 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~9.7–108.~~ 9.7–111.

THIS TITLE MAY BE CITED AS THE MARYLAND CHILD ABDUCTION
PREVENTION ACT.

SECTION 2. ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~construed~~ ~~to~~
~~apply~~ ~~retroactively~~ ~~and~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~applied~~ ~~to~~ ~~and~~ ~~interpreted~~ ~~to~~ ~~affect~~ ~~parents~~ ~~desiring~~ ~~to~~
~~travel~~ ~~internationally~~ ~~with~~ ~~their~~ ~~children~~ ~~and~~ ~~shall~~ ~~require~~ ~~parents~~ ~~desiring~~ ~~to~~ ~~travel~~
~~internationally~~ ~~to~~ ~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 761 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16