START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 39

Chapter 39

(House Bill 279)

AN ACT concerning

Prescription Drug Affordability Board – Upper Payment Limits

FOR the purpose of reestablishing the requirement that the Prescription Drug Affordability
Board, under certain circumstances, draft a plan of action for implementing a process
to set upper payment limits for prescription drug products that it determines have
led or will lead to affordability challenges; reestablishing the authority of the Board
to set upper payment limits, under certain circumstances, for prescription drug
products that are purchased or paid for by or through certain State or local
government entities, plans, or programs; reestablishing a certain appeals process for
persons aggrieved by an upper payment limit set by the Board; reestablishing the
requirement that the Board submit a report to certain committees of the General
Assembly recommending whether the General Assembly should expand the Board’s
authority to set upper payment limits to all purchases and payor reimbursements of
prescription drug products in the State; and generally relating to the setting of upper
payment limits by the Prescription Drug Affordability Board.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 21–2C–13 through 21–2C–16
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

21–2C–13.

(A) IF, UNDER § 21–2C–07 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE BOARD FINDS THAT IT IS
IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE STATE TO ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR SETTING
UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCTS THAT IT
DETERMINES HAVE LED OR WILL LEAD TO AN AFFORDABILITY CHALLENGE, THE
BOARD, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE STAKEHOLDER COUNCIL, SHALL DRAFT A PLAN
OF ACTION FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROCESS THAT INCLUDES THE CRITERIA THE
BOARD SHALL USE TO SET UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS.

(B) THE CRITERIA FOR SETTING UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS SHALL INCLUDE
CONSIDERATION OF:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 39 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE COST OF ADMINISTERING THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG
PRODUCT;

(2) THE COST OF DELIVERING THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCT
TO CONSUMERS; AND

(3) OTHER RELEVANT ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS RELATED TO THE
PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCT.

(C) THE PROCESS FOR SETTING UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS SHALL:

(1) PROHIBIT THE APPLICATION OF AN UPPER PAYMENT LIMIT FOR A
PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCT THAT IS ON THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION PRESCRIPTION DRUG SHORTAGE LIST; AND

(2) REQUIRE THE BOARD TO:

(I) MONITOR THE AVAILABILITY OF ANY PRESCRIPTION DRUG
PRODUCT FOR WHICH IT SETS AN UPPER PAYMENT LIMIT; AND

(II) IF THERE BECOMES A SHORTAGE OF THE PRESCRIPTION
DRUG PRODUCT IN THE STATE, RECONSIDER OR SUSPEND THE UPPER PAYMENT
LIMIT.

(D) (1) IF A PLAN OF ACTION IS DRAFTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE BOARD SHALL SUBMIT THE PLAN OF ACTION TO THE LEGISLATIVE
POLICY COMMITTEE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, FOR ITS APPROVAL.

(2) THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE SHALL HAVE 45 DAYS TO
APPROVE THE PLAN OF ACTION.

(3) IF THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE DOES NOT APPROVE
THE PLAN OF ACTION, THE BOARD SHALL SUBMIT THE PLAN TO THE GOVERNOR AND
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR APPROVAL.

(4) THE GOVERNOR AND THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL HAVE 45
DAYS TO APPROVE THE PLAN OF ACTION.

(5) THE BOARD MAY NOT SET UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS UNLESS THE
PLAN IS APPROVED, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, BY:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 39

(I) THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE; OR

(II) 1. THE GOVERNOR; AND

2. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

21–2C–14.

(A) IF A PLAN OF ACTION IS APPROVED UNDER § 21–2C–13(D) OF THIS
SUBTITLE, THE BOARD MAY SET UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUG
PRODUCTS THAT ARE:

(1) PURCHASED OR PAID FOR BY A UNIT OF STATE OR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT OR AN ORGANIZATION ON BEHALF OF A UNIT OF STATE OR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING:

(I) STATE OR COUNTY CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES;

(II) STATE HOSPITALS; AND

(III) HEALTH CLINICS AT STATE INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
EDUCATION;

(2) PAID FOR THROUGH A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN ON BEHALF OF A
UNIT OF STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING A COUNTY, BICOUNTY, OR
MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN; OR

(3) PURCHASED FOR OR PAID FOR BY THE MARYLAND STATE
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

(B) THE UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS SET UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL:

(1) BE FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCTS THAT HAVE LED OR WILL
LEAD TO AN AFFORDABILITY CHALLENGE; AND

(2) BE SET IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE CRITERIA ESTABLISHED IN
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE BOARD.

(C) (1) THE BOARD SHALL:

(I) MONITOR THE AVAILABILITY OF ANY PRESCRIPTION DRUG
PRODUCT FOR WHICH IT SETS AN UPPER PAYMENT LIMIT; AND
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 39 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IF THERE BECOMES A SHORTAGE OF THE PRESCRIPTION
DRUG PRODUCT IN THE STATE, RECONSIDER WHETHER THE UPPER PAYMENT LIMIT
SHOULD BE SUSPENDED OR ALTERED.

(2) AN UPPER PAYMENT LIMIT SET UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION MAY NOT BE APPLIED TO A PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCT WHILE THE
PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCT IS ON THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION PRESCRIPTION DRUG SHORTAGE LIST.

21–2C–15.

(A) A PERSON AGGRIEVED BY AN UPPER PAYMENT LIMIT SET BY THE
BOARD MAY REQUEST AN APPEAL WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE BOARD MAKES THE
DECISION TO SET THE LIMIT.

(B) THE BOARD SHALL HEAR THE APPEAL AND MAKE A FINAL DECISION
WITHIN 60 DAYS AFTER THE APPEAL IS REQUESTED.

(C) ANY PERSON AGGRIEVED BY A FINAL DECISION OF THE BOARD ISSUED
UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION MAY PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW AS
PROVIDED BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT.

21–2C–16.

ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2026, THE BOARD, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
STAKEHOLDER COUNCIL, SHALL REPORT TO THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE
AND THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON:

(1) THE LEGALITY, OBSTACLES, AND BENEFITS OF SETTING UPPER
PAYMENT LIMITS ON ALL PURCHASES AND PAYOR REIMBURSEMENTS OF
PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCTS IN THE STATE; AND

(2) RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING WHETHER THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY SHOULD PASS LEGISLATION TO EXPAND THE AUTHORITY OF THE BOARD
TO SET UPPER PAYMENT LIMITS TO ALL PURCHASES AND PAYOR REIMBURSEMENTS
OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCTS IN THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 39

each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5