START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 218 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 218 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Alcoholic Beverages - Repeal of Petition of Support 
Requirement  
Ho. Co. 12-23 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement that alcoholic beverage license applicants in 
Howard County include a petition of support containing specified information as part of an 
alcoholic beverages license application. The bill also makes a technical change to preserve 
the ability of the Howard County Board of License Commissioners to waive the residency 
requirement for an applicant under certain circumstances in Howard County. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Howard County can alter the license application process with existing 
resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  At least one of the applicants for an alcoholic beverages license in 
Howard County must include with the application a petition of support signed by at least 
three residents who are owners of real property and registered voters in the district where 
the business is to be conducted stating that the applicant (1) is known personally to the 
residents and (2) subject to exemption by the board, is a resident of the county at the time 
the applicant presents the application to the residents. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 218/ Page 2 
The board may waive the residency requirement for an applicant if the applicant (1) is the 
purchaser of a business already in operation or (2) has owned the premises for which a 
license is sought for at least two years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1307 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2