START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 253 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 253 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - On-Farm Composting Facilities - Permit Exemption 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to establish an 
exemption, by regulation, from the permitting requirements under the Code of Maryland 
Regulations (COMAR) 26.04.11.06 for an operator of an on-farm composting facility that 
(1) uses 10,000 square feet (ft2) of area or less for active food scrap composting; 
(2) composts only one or more of a specified list of feedstocks; (3) records the amount and 
source of specified source-separated organics composted, records the date and time the 
source-separated organics arrives on the farm, retains the records for five years, and 
provides the records to MDE on request; and (4) meets any other conditions specified in 
regulations. The bill also requires MDE’s composting facility regulations to require that a 
new composting facility be constructed and operated in accordance with specified 
requirements. Finally, the bill establishes several related definitions and a reporting 
requirement for MDE. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can promulgate the regulatory changes, generally implement the bill, 
and report to the General Assembly with existing budgeted resources. State revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local governments. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 253/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Among the other requirements necessary for exemption, an on-farm 
composting facility must compost only one or more of the following:  (1) organic materials 
generated on site or at another farm controlled by the same owner or lessee of the farm; 
(2) animal manure and bedding, generated on site; (3) Type 1 feedstock, regardless of the 
place of generation; (4) off-site Type 2 feedstock that is not contaminated or liquidated, is 
immediately mixed with carbonaceous Type 1 feedstock, and is incorporated into active 
composting within 24 hours after arriving on site; or (5) on-site Type 2 feedstock. MDE 
must also require that a farm operator provide written notice to MDE before conducting 
on-farm composting without a permit in accordance with the bill. 
 
In addition to the exemption, the bill requires MDE’s composting facility regulations to 
require that any new composting facility be constructed and operated in accordance with 
(1) any regulations adopted by MDE; (2) a nutrient management plan, if required under 
specified regulations; and (3) either a soil conservation and water quality plan (SCWQP) 
or an agricultural waste management system plan, in accordance with specified regulations, 
that describes the composting facility components and design, schedule for storage and 
utilization of the materials, system maintenance, and operational procedures. 
 
The bill establishes definitions for “contaminated feedstock,” “farm,” “liquid feedstock,” 
“off-site Type 2 feedstock,” “on-site Type 2 feedstock,” “Type 1 feedstock,” and 
“Type 2 feedstock.” “Farm” means the site of a business or activity operated for the 
primary purpose of tilling, cropping, keeping, pasturing, or producing an agricultural 
product other than compost, including livestock, poultry, plants, trees, sod, food, feed, or 
fiber, by in-ground, out-of-ground, container, or other culture. 
 
By December 1, 2028, MDE must submit a report to the General Assembly that analyzes 
the impact of on-farm composting facilities in Maryland. The bill outlines the requirements 
for the report. 
 
The bill explicitly states that it is not intended to alter the rules or requirements for farms 
or composting facilities operating without a composting permit in accordance with 
regulations in effect on January 1, 2023. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 686 of 2013 required MDE to adopt regulations governing the 
permitting and operation of composting facilities. MDE promulgated the required 
regulations in 2014 by establishing Chapter 11 under COMAR 26.04, which specifies 
requirements related to the construction and operation of composting facilities in the State. 
 
Under the regulations, facilities are distinguished as Tier 1, 2, or 3 depending on the 
feedstock materials that are accepted for processing at the facility. Feedstocks are defined 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 253/ Page 3 
as Type 1, 2, or 3. Type 1 feedstocks are considered the least risky in terms of hazardous 
substances, human pathogens, and physical contaminants, and include yard waste and other 
organic materials that MDE determines pose a low level of risk. Type 2 feedstocks are 
generally materials that MDE determines pose a low level of risk from hazardous 
substances and a higher level of risk from physical contaminants and human pathogens, 
compared to Type 1 feedstocks, and include MDE-approved animal manure and bedding, 
animal mortalities (on a temporary emergency basis), and manufactured organic materials 
such as waxed-corrugated cardboard, noncoated paper, and compostable products. 
Type 3 feedstocks are generally materials that MDE determines pose a low level of risk 
from hazardous substances and a higher level of risk from physical contaminants and 
human pathogens, compared to Type 1 and 2 feedstocks. Type 3 feedstocks include sewage 
sludge, biosolids, and used diapers. 
 
Regulation .06 of Chapter 11 generally prohibits a person from operating an on-farm 
composting facility without a permit issued by MDE, subject to several exemptions. There 
is no permit fee. Among other specified exemptions, a facility is exempt from the 
permitting requirement if it (1) composts only organic materials generated on site or at 
another farm controlled by the same operator and complies with other specified 
restrictions; (2) uses only up to 40,000 ft2 of area in support of composting operations; 
(3) is constructed and operated in accordance with a nutrient management plan (if required 
under specified regulations) and either an SCWQP or an agricultural waste management 
system plan that describes the composting facility components and design, schedule for 
storage and utilization of the materials, system maintenance, and operational procedures, 
as specified; and (4) complies with other specified requirements. A facility is also exempt 
if it uses only up to 5,000 ft2 of area in support of composting operations and qualifies as a 
Tier 1 or 2 facility that complies with feedstock, pile size, and other specified regulatory 
requirements. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Many farms in the State are small businesses. Under the bill, any 
on-farm composting facility that is able to engage in composting without having to 
first obtain a permit from MDE benefits from a reduced regulatory burden. Additionally, 
any farm that engages in on-farm composting as a result of the bill may benefit from a 
reduction in solid waste costs. Overall, however, the impact on small businesses is not 
anticipated to be significant. 
 
MDE notes that the bill does not eliminate the requirement for a National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, currently provided under the stormwater 
permit. NPDES permits are issued in accordance with the federal Clean Water Act. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 253/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last three years. See 
SB 229 and HB 184 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 262 (Senator Gallion, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4