START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 316

Chapter 316

(House Bill 236)

AN ACT concerning

Tax Sales – ~~State~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Sale~~ ~~Ombudsman~~ Homeowner Protection Program –
Outreach ~~Campaign~~

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Sale~~ ~~Ombudsman~~ ~~to~~ ~~contract~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~vendor~~ ~~to~~
~~conduct~~ ~~an~~ ~~annual~~ ~~outreach~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~to~~ ~~homeowners~~ ~~in~~ ~~tax~~ ~~sale;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~
~~outreach~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~to~~ ~~consist~~ ~~of~~ ~~making~~ ~~telephone~~ ~~calls~~ ~~to~~ ~~each~~ ~~homeowner~~ ~~whose~~
~~dwelling~~ ~~is~~ ~~sold~~ ~~at~~ ~~a~~ ~~tax~~ ~~sale~~ ~~to~~ ~~inform~~ ~~the~~ ~~homeowner~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~assistance~~ ~~available~~ ~~to~~
~~the~~ ~~homeowner~~ ~~through~~ ~~the~~ ~~Ombudsman’s~~ ~~office;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Department~~
~~of~~ ~~Assessments~~ ~~and~~ ~~Taxation~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~vendor~~ ~~to~~ ~~use~~ ~~any~~ ~~reliable~~ ~~public~~ ~~or~~ ~~private~~
~~source~~ ~~of~~ ~~information~~ ~~to~~ ~~compile~~ ~~the~~ ~~list~~ ~~of~~ ~~homeowners~~ ~~the~~ ~~vendor~~ ~~is~~ ~~required~~ ~~to~~ ~~call~~
~~and~~ ~~those~~ ~~homeowners’~~ ~~telephone~~ ~~numbers;~~ ~~providing~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Homeowner~~
~~Protection~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~exclusive~~ ~~source~~ ~~of~~ ~~funding~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~outreach~~ ~~campaign;~~
expressing the intent of the General Assembly that a certain portion of the balance
in the Homeowner Protection Fund be spent each year to conduct outreach in a
certain manner to homeowners in tax sale to encourage the homeowners to enroll in
the Homeowner Protection Program; authorizing the State Tax Sale Ombudsman to
conduct outreach using State employees and resources or contract with a private
vendor to conduct outreach; requiring that certain State and local government
agencies provide certain information to facilitate outreach at the request of the
Ombudsman; and generally relating to tax sales.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~Property~~
~~Section~~ ~~2–113~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section ~~14–891~~ 14–880 and 14–886
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

~~2–113.~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 316 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “HOMEOWNER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–105 OF THIS
~~ARTICLE.~~

(3) “OMBUDSMAN” MEANS THE STATE TAX SALE OMBUDSMAN
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–112 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) “TELEPHONE NUMBER” INCLUDES A LANDLINE OR MOBILE
TELEPHONE NUMBER.

(5) “VENDOR” MEANS THE PRIVATE ENTITY CONTRACTED BY THE
OMBUDSMAN TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(B) THE OMBUDSMAN SHALL CONTRACT WITH A VENDOR TO CONDUCT AN
~~ANNUAL~~ ~~OUTREACH~~ ~~CAMPAIGN~~ ~~TO~~ ~~HOMEOWNERS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~SALE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCORDANCE~~
WITH THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) THE OUTREACH CAMPAIGN SHALL CONSIST OF MAKING
~~TELEPHONE~~ ~~CALLS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~HOMEOWNER~~ ~~WHOSE~~ ~~DWELLING~~ ~~IS~~ ~~SOLD~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~SALE~~
~~TO~~ ~~INFORM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOMEOWNER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOMEOWNER~~
THROUGH THE OMBUDSMAN’S OFFICE.

(2) EACH CALL SHALL BE MADE BY A LIVE HUMAN CALLER AND MAY
NOT BE PRERECORDED OR AUTOMATED.

(3) THE VENDOR MUST CONTINUE TO PLACE SEPARATE CALLS TO
EACH HOMEOWNER WITH INTERVALS OF AT LEAST 2 DAYS BETWEEN EACH CALL
UNTIL THE VENDOR HAS EITHER:

(I) HAD A CONVERSATION DIRECTLY WITH THE HOMEOWNER;
~~OR~~

(II) MADE AT LEAST THREE SEPARATE CALLS TO THE
~~HOMEOWNER.~~

(4) THE CALLS TO EACH HOMEOWNER SHALL BE MADE:

(I) AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AFTER THE HOMEOWNER’S
DWELLING IS SOLD AT A TAX SALE; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 316

(II) BEFORE THE HOLDER OF THE CERTIFICATE OF SALE FOR
THE HOMEOWNER’S DWELLING MAY FILE A COMPLAINT TO FORECLOSE THE
HOMEOWNER’S RIGHT TO REDEEM THE DWELLING UNDER § 14–833 OF THIS
~~ARTICLE.~~

(5) DURING EACH CALL, THE CALLER SHALL:

(I) PROVIDE A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE ASSISTANCE
AVAILABLE THROUGH THE OMBUDSMAN’S OFFICE, INCLUDING THE HOMEOWNERS’
TAX CREDIT AND THE HOMEOWNER PROTECTION PROGRAM; AND

(II) EXPLAIN TO THE HOMEOWNER WHY IT IS IN THE
HOMEOWNER’S INTEREST TO WORK WITH THE OMBUDSMAN.

(6) THE CALLER MAY LEAVE THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION IN A VOICEMAIL MESSAGE BUT SHALL MAKE
~~SUBSEQUENT~~ ~~CALLS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EFFORT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~SPEAK~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOMEOWNER~~ ~~DIRECTLY~~ ~~IF~~
REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(7) (I) IF THE CALLER SPEAKS TO THE HOMEOWNER, THE CALLER
SHALL OFFER TO TRANSFER THE HOMEOWNER DIRECTLY TO THE OMBUDSMAN’S
~~OFFICE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~AFTER~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~
PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) IF THE CALLER LEAVES A VOICEMAIL MESSAGE FOR THE
~~HOMEOWNER~~ ~~OR~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOMEOWNER~~ ~~DECLINES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~TRANSFERRED~~ ~~DIRECTLY~~ ~~TO~~
THE OMBUDSMAN’S OFFICE, THE CALLER SHALL PROVIDE THE HOMEOWNER WITH
THE OMBUDSMAN’S WEBSITE ADDRESS, E–MAIL ADDRESS, AND TELEPHONE
~~NUMBER.~~

(D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE VENDOR MAY USE ANY RELIABLE
~~PUBLIC~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~SOURCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMPILE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LIST~~ ~~OF~~
~~HOMEOWNERS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~VENDOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CALL~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~AND~~
THOSE HOMEOWNERS’ TELEPHONE NUMBERS.

(2) AT THE REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT OR THE VENDOR, EACH
STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY SHALL PROMPTLY PROVIDE ANY
INFORMATION REQUIRED TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(3) PROMPTLY AFTER EACH COUNTY TAX SALE, THE COLLECTOR
SHALL PROVIDE THE DEPARTMENT OR VENDOR WITH THE LIST OF HOMEOWNERS
WHOSE DWELLINGS WERE SOLD AT THE TAX SALE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 316 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) NOTWITHSTANDING § 13–202 OF THE TAX–GENERAL ARTICLE,
AT THE REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT OR VENDOR, THE COMPTROLLER SHALL
~~PROVIDE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TELEPHONE~~ ~~NUMBER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~HOMEOWNER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~VENDOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~
TO CALL UNDER THIS SECTION IF THE HOMEOWNER INCLUDED THE HOMEOWNER’S
TELEPHONE NUMBER ON A TAX RETURN FILED WITH THE COMPTROLLER.

(5) THE DEPARTMENT OR VENDOR MAY PURCHASE TELEPHONE
NUMBERS OF HOMEOWNERS FROM A PRIVATE SOURCE TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
~~SECTION.~~

~~14–891.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~“Fund”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Homeowner~~ ~~Protection~~ ~~Fund.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~There~~ ~~is~~ ~~a~~ ~~Homeowner~~ ~~Protection~~ ~~Fund.~~

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to finance the Program AND THE OUTREACH
CAMPAIGN UNDER § 2–113 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~(d)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Department~~ ~~shall~~ ~~administer~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund.~~

~~(e)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~is~~ ~~a~~ ~~special,~~ ~~nonlapsing~~ ~~fund~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~§~~ ~~7–302~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~hold~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~separately,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~Comptroller~~ ~~shall~~ ~~account~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund.~~

~~(f)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~consists~~ ~~of:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~tax~~ ~~and~~ ~~interest~~ ~~payments~~ ~~made~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~by~~ ~~homeowners~~
~~enrolled~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~money~~ ~~appropriated~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~budget~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings;~~ ~~and~~

~~(4)~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~money~~ ~~from~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~source~~ ~~accepted~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~benefit~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Fund.~~

~~(g)~~ ~~For~~ ~~each~~ ~~of~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~years~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~2024,~~ ~~and~~ ~~2025,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~shall~~ ~~include~~ ~~in~~
~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~budget~~ ~~bill~~ ~~an~~ ~~appropriation~~ ~~of~~ ~~$750,000~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 316

~~(h)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~only~~ ~~for~~ ~~any~~ ~~expenses~~ ~~associated~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~
Program AND THE OUTREACH CAMPAIGN UNDER § 2–113 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~for~~ ~~any~~ ~~expenses~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
Tax Sale Ombudsman that are not directly related to the Program OR THE OUTREACH
CAMPAIGN UNDER § 2–113 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~(i)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~invest~~ ~~the~~ ~~money~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~same~~
~~manner~~ ~~as~~ ~~other~~ ~~State~~ ~~money~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~invested.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Any~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~credited~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund.~~

~~(j)~~ ~~Expenditures~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~made~~ ~~only~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
~~budget.~~

(k) The Fund is the exclusive source of funding for the Program AND THE
OUTREACH CAMPAIGN UNDER § 2–113 OF THIS ARTICLE.

14–880.

(a) Each year, the Department shall issue a report that includes:

(1) an analysis and summary of the information collected through the
survey under § 14–879 of this part; and

(2) the following information concerning the activities of the State Tax Sale
Ombudsman established under § 2–112 of this article in the preceding taxable year:

(i) the number of homeowners who contacted the Ombudsman;

(ii) the number of homeowners assisted by the Ombudsman to apply
for each of the tax credits under § 9–104 or § 9–105 of this article;

(iii) the number of homeowners assisted by the Ombudsman to apply
for other discount programs or public benefits and a brief summary of those programs and
benefits;

(iv) the number of homeowners referred by the Ombudsman to legal
services, housing counseling, and other social services, and a brief summary of those
services;

(v) the number of homeowners enrolled in the Homeowner
Protection Program under Part VII of this subtitle;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 316 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(vi) a summary of the implementation of the Homeowner Protection
Program under Part VII of this subtitle, INCLUDING OUTREACH TO HOMEOWNERS
UNDER § 14–886(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(vii) any statutory or administrative changes the Ombudsman
recommends to improve the administration of the Homeowner Protection Program under
Part VII of this subtitle; and

(viii) any other relevant information.

(b) On or before November 15 each year, the Department shall:

(1) publish the report required under subsection (a) of this section on the
Department’s website; and

(2) submit the report required under subsection (a) of this section, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the Senate Budget and
Taxation Committee and the House Committee on Ways and Means.

14–886.

(a) A homeowner shall submit an application to the Department to be enrolled in
the Program.

(b) A homeowner may submit an application for the Program online or by mail.

(c) The Ombudsman shall:

(1) prominently advertise the Program and make applications available on
the Ombudsman’s website; and

(2) collaborate with local governments, community organizations, and
public and private providers of social services and benefits to raise awareness of the
Program and disseminate applications.

(D) (1) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT:

(I) AT LEAST 2% OF THE BALANCE IN THE HOMEOWNER
PROTECTION FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–891 OF THIS SUBTITLE BE SPENT
EACH YEAR TO CONDUCT OUTREACH TO HOMEOWNERS IN TAX SALE TO ENCOURAGE
THE HOMEOWNERS TO ENROLL IN THE PROGRAM;

(II) THE OUTREACH CONSIST OF:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 316

1. LIVE TELEPHONE CALLS TO HOMEOWNERS
WHENEVER PRACTICABLE; OR

2. IF LIVE TELEPHONE CALLS ARE NOT PRACTICABLE,
METHODS OF CONTACTING HOMEOWNERS OTHER THAN SENDING INFORMATION BY
MAIL; AND

(III) PRIORITY BE GIVEN TO CONTACTING HOMEOWNERS AS
SOON AS POSSIBLE AFTER THEIR DWELLINGS ARE SOLD AT TAX SALE.

(2) THE OMBUDSMAN MAY:

(I) CONDUCT OUTREACH TO HOMEOWNERS USING STATE
EMPLOYEES AND RESOURCES; OR

(II) CONTRACT WITH A PRIVATE VENDOR TO CONDUCT
OUTREACH TO HOMEOWNERS.

(3) AT THE REQUEST OF THE OMBUDSMAN:

(I) PROMPTLY AFTER EACH COUNTY TAX SALE, THE
COLLECTOR SHALL PROVIDE THE OMBUDSMAN WITH THE LIST OF HOMEOWNERS
WHOSE DWELLINGS WERE SOLD AT THE TAX SALE;

(II) NOTWITHSTANDING § 13–202 OF THE TAX – GENERAL
ARTICLE, THE COMPTROLLER SHALL PROVIDE THE TELEPHONE NUMBER OF A
HOMEOWNER IF THE HOMEOWNER INCLUDED THE HOMEOWNER’S TELEPHONE
NUMBER ON A TAX RETURN FILED WITH THE COMPTROLLER; AND

(III) ANY OTHER STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY SHALL
PROMPTLY PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION REQUIRED TO CONDUCT OUTREACH UNDER
THIS SUBSECTION.

(4) THE OMBUDSMAN MAY OBTAIN INFORMATION FROM ANY
RELIABLE PRIVATE SOURCE TO CONDUCT OUTREACH UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

[(d)] (E) The Ombudsman shall cancel the enrollment of a homeowner in the
Program if:

(1) the homeowner submits a request to the Ombudsman to withdraw from
the Program;

(2) the homeowner submitted false information in the homeowner’s
application for enrollment in the Program; or

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 316 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) the Ombudsman determines that the homeowner is not acting in good
faith to pay the taxes due.

[(e)] (F) If the Ombudsman cancels the enrollment of a homeowner in the
Program, the Ombudsman shall send a notice of the cancellation to the homeowner that
includes the reasons for cancellation.

[(f)] (G) A homeowner’s enrollment in the Program ends on the earliest of:

(1) the date the homeowner pays the full amount of the taxes owed to the
Department;

(2) the date that is 3 years after the date the homeowner first enrolled in
the Program; or

(3) the date the homeowner’s enrollment in the Program is canceled under
subsection [(d)] (E) of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8