START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 202 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 202 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Administration) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2023 
 
 
This Administration bill executes actions to provide mandate relief, contain costs, change 
the use of special funds, and swap funds in the fiscal 2024 operating budget. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures decrease by $0.2 million in FY 2023 and increase 
by $49.5 million in FY 2024. General fund revenues are not affected. Special fund 
expenditures decrease by $40.8 million in FY 2024; special fund revenues decrease by 
$50.0 million in FY 2024. Effects on general and special fund expenditures in FY 2027 are 
primarily due to a $500.0 million transfer of general funds to the Blueprint for Maryland’s 
Future Fund (BMFF) in FY 2024, contingent on a provision in this bill. Nonbudgeted 
revenues (not shown) are also affected. This bill affects existing mandated 
appropriations beginning in FY 2024. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
SF Revenue 
$0 
($50.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
($0.2) 
$49.5 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($500.5) 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
($40.8) 
$0 
$0 
$500.0 
Net Effect 
$0.2 
($58.7) 
$0.5 
$0.5 
$0.5  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or no 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 202/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  As described in more detail for each provision in Appendix A, the bill:  
 
 
provides flexibility with respect to the specializations for faculty that must be 
assigned to the University of Maryland Capital Region Medical Center by the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine;  
 
eliminates the requirement, for fiscal 2024 only, that the Governor provide specified 
monies to the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day Fund), resulting in 
$500.0 million being transferred to BMFF;  
 
reduces the required fiscal 2024 Medicaid Deficit Assessment in the Medicaid 
program by $50.0 million; 
 
repeals the requirement for repayment of the Local Reserve Account over a 15-year 
period for refunds of recalculated Homeowners’ Tax Credits paid out of the account;  
 
delays the date by which the Bainbridge Development Corporation must transfer a 
portion of the Bainbridge Naval Training Center site to the Department of Natural 
Resources by two years, to June 1, 2025; 
 
reduces the fiscal 2023 appropriation for the Assistance Payments Program within 
the Department of Human Services by $7.5 million; 
 
authorizes the Maryland Energy Administration to use $9.25 million of the money 
derived from the AltaGas Ltd. and WGL Holdings, Inc. merger to support the repair 
of existing natural gas infrastructure in the Washington Gas service territory; and 
 
authorizes the Governor to transfer by budget amendment $10.0 million in 
unexpended funds in the fiscal 2023 budget for Baltimore County to two libraries 
in the county. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Constitution requires the Governor to submit, and the 
General Assembly to pass, a balanced budget. Generally, the General Assembly cannot add 
more spending to the budget introduced by the Governor, nor can general funds be used to 
restore reductions made by the General Assembly after adoption of the budget, except 
through an approved deficiency appropriation in the following year’s budget.  
 
Beginning with the 2023 session (fiscal 2024 budget bill), the General Assembly may 
amend the budget to increase appropriations made by the Governor as well as add items to 
appropriations for Executive Branch agencies if the total appropriation for the 
Executive Branch does not exceed the total proposed appropriation submitted by the 
Governor. Prior to the 2023 session, the legislature could only add or increase funding for 
the General Assembly and the Judiciary. 
 
Background:  In December 2022, the Spending Affordability Committee recommended 
that the fiscal 2024 budget leave a closing general fund balance of at least $350.0 million. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 202/ Page 3 
The committee also recommended maintaining a Rainy Day Fund balance of 10.0% of 
estimated general fund revenues. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
leaves a $351 million balance in the general fund and maintains the Rainy Day Fund 
balance at 10.1% of general fund revenues ($2.5 billion). Combined cash balances at the 
end of fiscal 2024 of $2.85 billion represent approximately 11.5% of general fund 
revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Budget Reconciliation and Financing Acts have been introduced 
within the last three years. See SB 493 and HB 589 of 2021 and SB 192 and HB 152 of 
2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 183 (The President)(By Request - Administration) - Budget 
and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Treasurer’s Office; 
University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Enrolled - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - May 9, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 202/ Page 4 
Appendix A – Contents  
 
 
Provide Flexibility for Certain Faculty Assignments to the University of Maryland 
Capital Region Medical Center ...................................................................................... 5 
 
Reduce Appropriation to the Revenue Stabilization Account in Fiscal 2024 Only ....... 6 
 
Reduce Medicaid Deficit Assessment in Fiscal 2024 Only ........................................... 8 
 
Repeal Requirement to Repay Local Reserve Account for Recalculated Homeowners’ 
Tax Credits ..................................................................................................................... 9 
 
Delay Bainbridge Naval Training Center Site Transfer Deadline by Two Years ........ 11 
 
Withdraw Unspent Fiscal 2023 Funds for Assistance Payments Program .................. 12 
 
Authorize Use of Merger Funds for Natural Gas Infrastructure .................................. 13 
 
Authorize Transfer of Unexpended Funds for Baltimore County in Fiscal 2023 ........ 15 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 202/ Page 5 
Provide Flexibility for Certain Faculty Assignments to the University of Maryland 
Capital Region Medical Center 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Alters a requirement that the University of Maryland School of 
Medicine assign faculty to the University of Maryland Capital Region Medical Center 
specializing in four particular areas of medicine to instead require that the assigned faculty 
specialize in “identified essential areas.” 
 
Agency:  University System of Maryland  
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous  
  
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Chapters 44 and 418 of 2021 require the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine to provide clinical care at the University of 
Maryland Capital Region Medical Center by assigning faculty to the center who specialize 
in neuroscience, obstetrics and gynecology, oncology, and vascular neurology. For 
fiscal 2023 through 2025, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of at least $5.0 million to implement this requirement. The fiscal 2024 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million for this purpose.  
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 2-3) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 202/ Page 6 
Reduce Appropriation to the Revenue Stabilization Account in Fiscal 2024 Only 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Reduces the fiscal 2024 funding that the Governor must provide to 
the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day Fund) by $500.0 million. The fiscal 2024 
budget as passed by the General Assembly transfers $500.0 million to the Blueprint for 
Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF), contingent on the enactment of legislation eliminating 
the required Rainy Day Fund appropriation for fiscal 2024. 
 
Agency:  State Reserve Fund  
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief; fund swap  
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 
GF Exp 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
($500.0) 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$500.0 
$0 
 
 
State Effect:  The bill effectuates a contingent provision in the budget bill. Special fund 
revenues for the Rainy Day Fund decrease by $500.0 million in fiscal 2024 and special 
fund revenues for BMFF increase by $500.0 million in fiscal 2024 for no net effect on 
special fund revenues that year. BMFF special fund revenues are projected to be sufficient 
to cover mandated annual increases in expenditures for the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
through fiscal 2026. However, current projections indicate that, under current law, 
revenues in BMFF, including prior-year fund balances, will be less than the required 
increases to annual expenditures under the Blueprint beginning in fiscal 2027. Accordingly, 
general fund expenditures decrease by $500.0 million in fiscal 2027 and special fund 
expenditures for BMFF increase by $500.0 million in fiscal 2027 as the transferred funds 
are spent. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The Rainy Day Fund was established to retain State revenues to 
meet future short-term funding needs and to reduce the need for future tax increases by 
moderating revenue growth. Statute limits transfers from the fund and prohibits 
transferring funds by budget amendment. 
 
Chapter 557 of 2017 required that for fiscal 2021 and beyond, for surpluses above 
$10.0 million, the first $100.0 million be divided among the Rainy Day Fund, the State 
Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) accumulation funds (trust fund), and the 
Postretirement Health Benefits Trust Fund so that the Rainy Day Fund receives 50%, the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 202/ Page 7 
SRPS trust fund receives 25%, and the Postretirement Health Benefits Trust Fund receives 
25% on a dollar-for-dollar basis.  
 
Chapter 391 of 2022 amended this distribution for fiscal 2024 only, reducing the amount 
distributed to the SRPS trust fund to 15% and directing 10% to the Maryland Equity 
Investment Fund. Amounts above $110.0 million are credited to the Rainy Day Fund. 
Fiscal 2022 ended with an unappropriated general fund balance totaling nearly 
$1.12 billion. The general fund retains $10.0 million of this surplus. Per Chapter 391, the 
appropriation to the Dedicated Purpose Account includes a $15.0 million supplemental 
appropriation provided to the SRPS trust fund and a $25.0 million supplemental 
appropriation to the Postretirement Health Benefits Trust Fund. Another $10.0 million is 
provided for the Maryland Equity Investment Fund within the Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation. The remaining surplus, approximately $1.06 billion, was 
reflected in the fiscal 2024 budget, as introduced, for the Rainy Day Fund. That 
appropriation would have increased the Rainy Day Fund balance to nearly $4.1 billion, or 
16.1%, of general fund revenues. The budget as passed by the General Assembly directly 
cuts $561.4 million of the $1.06 billion, not contingent on this bill. The remaining 
$500.0 million is transferred to BMFF, contingent on this bill. 
 
Recent History:  The Spending Affordability Committee recommended the Rainy Day 
Fund end fiscal 2024 with an estimated balance equivalent to 10.0% of general fund 
revenues (approximately $2.5 billion). The fiscal 2023 budget included an appropriation 
of $2.3 billion to the fund. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 3) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 202/ Page 8 
Reduce Medicaid Deficit Assessment in Fiscal 2024 Only 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Reduces the required Medicaid Deficit Assessment in the Medicaid 
program from $294,825,000 to $244,825,000 in fiscal 2024 only. The fiscal 2024 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes a $50.0 million general fund expenditure 
increase and a $50.0 million special fund expenditure reduction, both contingent on the 
enactment of legislation decreasing the Medicaid Deficit Assessment for fiscal 2024. 
 
Agency:  Maryland Department of Health 
 
Type of Action:  Fund swap 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Rev 
$0 
($50.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Exp 
$0 
$50.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
($50.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
 
State Effect:  The bill effectuates contingent provisions in the budget bill. Accordingly, 
special fund revenues and expenditures for Medicaid decrease by $50.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 due to the reduction in the Medicaid Deficit Assessment. General fund 
expenditures increase by $50.0 million in fiscal 2024 to backfill the foregone special funds.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  Following the 2007-2009 recession, a Medicaid Deficit 
Assessment was imposed on Maryland hospitals to support the Medicaid program. The 
assessment consists of (1) an amount included in hospital rates (and paid by hospital users) 
and (2) a remittance from hospitals (currently $56.5 million). 
 
Recent History:  Since its imposition, budget reconciliation legislation in numerous years 
has altered the Medicaid Deficit Assessment. The Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act (BRFA) of 2017 (Chapter 23) specified the deficit assessment level and BRFAs in the 
three subsequent years amended the proposed assessment level. The BRFA of 2020 
(Chapter 528) established the assessment level at $294,825,000 for fiscal 2021 and each 
fiscal year thereafter. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 3-4) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 202/ Page 9 
Repeal Requirement to Repay Local Reserve Account for Recalculated Homeowners’ 
Tax Credits  
 
Provision in the Bill:  Repeals the requirement to repay the Local Reserve Account over 
a 15-year period for refunds of recalculated Homeowners’ Tax Credits paid out of the 
account under Chapters 717 and 718 of 2021. The fiscal 2024 budget includes a general 
fund deficiency appropriation of $7,287,531 for the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) to fund repayment to the Local Reserve Account, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation that allows full repayment to the account for refunds paid to 
homeowners in fiscal 2022 due to Chapter 717. The fiscal 2024 budget also includes a 
general fund expenditure decrease of $529,836 for SDAT, contingent on the enactment of 
legislation to modify the repayment schedule to the Local Reserve Account due to refunds 
paid to homeowners impacted by Chapter 717. 
 
Agency: State Department of Assessments and Taxation  
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief  
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Exp 
$7.3 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
 
State Effect:  The bill effectuates contingent provisions in the budget bill. Accordingly, 
general fund expenditures increase by $7,287,531 in fiscal 2023 and decrease by $529,836 
annually from fiscal 2024 through 2028 (and annually thereafter through fiscal 2037). 
Nonbudgeted revenues for the Local Income Tax Reserve Fund increase correspondingly 
in fiscal 2023 and decrease correspondingly thereafter. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  The State maintains a Local Reserve Account utilized for holding 
and disbursing income taxes collected by the State for local jurisdictions. According to 
generally accepted accounting principles, the State is supposed to maintain a sufficient 
fund balance to pay future refunds realized during the fiscal year in case the income tax is 
no longer collected. If the account is insufficiently capitalized at the end of a fiscal year, 
the State is required to report the underfunding as an unfunded liability in the 
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). If the State has a plan in place to 
reimburse the account, the State does not need to show an unfunded liability in CAFR. 
 
Recent History:  Chapters 717 and 718 of 2021 required SDAT to provide a one-time 
property tax refund to homeowners for property taxes paid by the homeowner as a result 
of certain changes made to the calculation of the homeowners’ property tax credit by the 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 202/ Page 10 
Acts. Refunds were required to be paid by the Comptroller’s Office from the Local Reserve 
Account. The Acts required that beginning in fiscal 2023 the Governor include an 
appropriation in the State budget to the Local Reserve Account in an amount equal to 
one-fifteenth of the total property tax refunds paid due to the legislation during fiscal 2022. 
 
The amount of refunds repaid in fiscal 2022 totaled $7.9 million. The fiscal 2023 budget 
prior to the deficiency appropriation included $0.6 million for the anticipated repayment in 
that year, which when combined with the fiscal 2023 deficiency appropriation fully repays 
the Local Reserve Account. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 4-6) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 202/ Page 11 
Delay Bainbridge Naval Training Center Site Transfer Deadline by Two Years 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Changes the date by which the Bainbridge Development 
Corporation (BDC) must transfer specified property to the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) for the Port Deposit State Historical Park – from June 1, 2023, to 
June 1, 2025. 
 
Agency:  Department of Natural Resources 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
  
State Effect:  None. The provision is not expected to affect the timing of any State 
expenditures to establish and maintain the Port of Deposit State Historical Park pursuant 
to Chapter 39 of 2022. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Chapter 39 of 2022 requires DNR to establish the 
Port of Deposit State Historical Park as a specified partnership park that seeks to educate 
the public about and preserve and interpret the lives and experiences of Black Americans 
both before and after the abolition of slavery. The park must be held by the State as a State 
park under the protection and administration of DNR. The park must consist of a portion 
of the Bainbridge Naval Training Center site – measuring not less than 120 acres and not 
more than 150 acres – that BDC transfers to DNR, including (1) the historic Tome School; 
(2) the Snow Hill archaeological site; and (3) the adjacent wooded conservation area. 
Chapter 39 requires BDC to transfer that specified portion of the site to DNR by 
June 1, 2023. The provision in this bill mirrors one of several provisions in Senate Bill 517 
of 2023, enacted as Chapter 602. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 6) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 202/ Page 12 
Withdraw Unspent Fiscal 2023 Funds for Assistance Payments Program 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Reduces the fiscal 2023 general fund appropriation for the 
Assistance Payments Program within the Department of Human Services (DHS) by 
$7.5 million. 
 
Agency:  Department of Human Services 
 
Type of Action:  Cost containment 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 
GF Exp 
($7.5) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DHS decrease by $7.5 million in fiscal 2023. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The DHS Family Investment Administration administers cash 
benefits and other grant programs that provide assistance to individuals and families in 
financial need as well as employment programs to promote self-sufficiency. The 
Assistance Payments Program is the program in which public benefits are budgeted. The 
three largest programs by spending are the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, 
the Temporary Cash Assistance Program, and the Temporary Disability Assistance 
Program (TDAP), which account for the vast majority of annual spending. 
 
The fiscal 2023 budget as enacted could support an average of 11,282 TDAP recipients per 
month, which was near the level of recipients in the beginning of fiscal 2022 leading up to 
the budget introduction. However, with the restart of recertifications for public benefits 
across DHS-administered programs, the number of recipients decreased substantially. 
Although the number of recipients rebounded from the initial decline, the number of 
recipients in the first half of fiscal 2023 was 8,025. Spending in certain other public benefit 
programs in fiscal 2023 has also been below budgeted levels due to the availability of 
federal pandemic-related assistance. 
 
Recent History: None. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 2 (p. 6) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 202/ Page 13 
Authorize Use of Merger Funds for Natural Gas Infrastructure 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) to use 
$9.25 million of the money derived from the AltaGas Ltd. and WGL Holdings, Inc. merger 
(and deposited as the Maryland Gas Expansion Fund into the Strategic Energy Investment 
Fund (SEIF)) to support the repair of existing natural gas infrastructure in the Washington 
Gas service territory. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
a $9.25 million special fund expenditure increase, contingent on the enactment of 
legislation that authorizes Maryland Gas Expansion Fund monies to be used for repair of 
existing natural gas infrastructure in the Washington Gas service territory. 
 
Agency:  Maryland Energy Administration 
 
Type of Action:  Change use of special funds 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 
SF Exp 
$0 
$9.3 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
 
State Effect:  The bill effectuates a contingent provision in the budget bill. Accordingly, 
special fund expenditures for SEIF increase by $9.25 million in fiscal 2024. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  In April 2018, the Public Service Commission approved the 
merger of AltaGas Ltd. and WGL Holdings, Inc. with a number of conditions, including 
the contribution of $30.3 million to create a Maryland Gas Expansion Fund to be 
administered by MEA. The fund must be used to promote the expansion of natural gas 
infrastructure, more than half of which must be spent in the Washington Gas service 
territory and at least $4.6 million of which must be used in the combination of Calvert, 
Charles, Frederick, and St. Mary’s counties. 
 
The funds were subsequently deposited into SEIF as the Maryland Gas Expansion Fund 
and have been used to support MEA’s Maryland Energy Infrastructure Program (MEIP), 
which promotes natural gas expansion by making it available to new customers, 
reconnecting previous natural gas customers, or expanding its usage by current customers. 
 
Recent History:  The fiscal 2023 appropriation for the Maryland Gas Expansion Fund 
totaled $18.5 million, which was originally intended to be used in full for MEIP. However, 
language in the fiscal 2023 budget restricted half of those funds to be used for bill payment 
assistance and arrearage retirement for certain residential electric and natural gas 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 202/ Page 14 
customers. The restricted funds were not transferred, and $9.3 million was instead included 
for MEIP in the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced. However, the fiscal 2024 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly deletes that funding; it also includes a $9.3 million 
expenditure increase, contingent on the enactment of legislation that authorizes Maryland 
Gas Expansion Fund monies to be used for repair of existing natural gas infrastructure in 
the Washington Gas service territory. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 3 (p. 6) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 202/ Page 15 
Authorize Transfer of Unexpended Funds for Baltimore County in Fiscal 2023 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer by budget amendment 
$10.0 million in unexpended pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general funds in the fiscal 2023 
budget to Woodlawn Library ($9.0 million) and Essex Library ($1.0 million). The 
unexpended funds were included in the fiscal 2023 operating budget to provide funding to 
Baltimore County to acquire Stevenson University’s Greenspring Campus. 
 
Agency:  Department of General Services 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
State Effect: None. Changing the potential purpose for the use of existing authorized 
PAYGO general funds does not affect State finances. In absence of the provision, the 
fiscal 2023 funding would remain available to Baltimore County for its original purpose 
through fiscal 2024, or longer if a portion of the funds were to be encumbered. 
 
Local Effect:  None. Funds available to Baltimore County are unchanged by the provision. 
Both libraries are located in Baltimore County. 
 
Program Description:  At the end of a fiscal year, the unspent part of an appropriation for 
a capital expenditure made through the State budget or a supplementary appropriation act 
other than an enabling act for a general obligation loan (1) does not revert to the general 
fund and (2) with the approval of the Board of Public Works (BPW), may be carried in a 
capital account until it is spent for a capital purpose or until the authority to spend the 
appropriation for a project terminates. 
 
Generally, the authority to spend the appropriation for a project terminates two years after 
the effective date of the appropriation act that authorizes the project if (1) evidence that a 
required matching fund will be provided has not been presented to BPW or (2) no part of 
the project is under contract and BPW has not encumbered money for any part of the 
project. Subject to limited exceptions, authorization terminates seven years after the 
effective date of the appropriation act that authorized the project. 
 
Recent History:  The fiscal 2023 budget included $10.0 million in PAYGO general funds 
to provide funding to Baltimore County to acquire Stevenson University’s Greenspring 
Campus to create a headquarters and training facilities for Baltimore County’s police and 
fire departments. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 4 (p. 6) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 202/ Page 16 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2023 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 202 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Department of Budget and Management 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 16