START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 288 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 288 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Grocery Stores and Restaurants - Automated External Defibrillator Program 
(Joe Sheya Act) 
 
 
 
This bill requires each owner and operator of a “grocery store” or a specified restaurant, 
beginning January 1, 2025, to place an automated external defibrillator (AED) in a 
prominent area (accessible to employees and customers) and maintain its functionality. A 
restaurant with an annual gross income of $1.0 million or less (exclusive of sales for 
off-premises consumption) or a seating capacity of less than 100 individuals is exempt; 
likewise, a grocery store with an annual gross income of $10.0 million or less is exempt. 
A grocery store or restaurant subject to the bill is excluded from the Maryland Public 
Access AED Program; however, the grocery store or restaurant must nonetheless register 
with the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS). 
MIEMSS must jointly adopt regulations with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), 
to implement the bill and, by December 1, 2024, MIEMSS must submit two reports to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. 
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF) 
expenditures increase by at least $41,400 in FY 2024, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
41,400 
46,000 
48,000 
50,300 
53,100 
Net Effect 
($41,400) 
($46,000) 
($48,000) 
($50,300) 
($53,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. To the extent that MDH requires local health departments (LHDs) to inspect 
and/or collect information on AEDs during inspections of grocery stores and restaurants, 
LHD expenditures may increase minimally. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 288/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Grocery store” means a store that has (1) all major food departments, 
including produce, meat, seafood, dairy, and canned and packaged goods or (2) at least one 
of the major food departments and a minimum of 12,000 square feet of floor space. 
 
A grocery store or restaurant subject to the bill’s requirements is exempt from the definition 
of “facility” under Title 13, Subtitle 5 of the Education Article. Accordingly, a grocery 
store or restaurant that is required to make an AED available under the bill is not required 
to participate in the Maryland Public Access AED Program. Even so, a grocery store or 
restaurant subject to the bill must register with MIEMSS in order to (1) make its location 
publicly available to emergency dispatchers and (2) receive maintenance and recall notices 
from MIEMSS. 
 
The bill provides the following liability protections to a grocery store, restaurant, and 
individual in addition to the existing immunities available under statutory or common law: 
 
 
a grocery store or restaurant is not civilly liable for any act or omission in the 
provision of automated external defibrillation if the grocery store or restaurant has 
placed an AED in a prominent area and maintained its functionality; 
 
an individual is not civilly liable for any act or omission if the individual is acting 
in good faith while rendering automated external defibrillation to another individual 
who is a victim or is reasonably believed to be a victim of a sudden cardiac arrest; 
the assistance or aid is provided in a reasonably prudent manner; and the automated 
external defibrillation is provided without fee or compensation; and 
 
a grocery store, restaurant, or individual is not civilly liable for failing to render 
automated external defibrillation to an individual who is a victim or is reasonably 
believed to be a victim of a sudden cardiac arrest. 
 
MDH and MIEMSS must jointly adopt regulations that establish guidelines for periodic 
inspections and annual maintenance of the AEDs and assist owners and operators of a 
grocery store or restaurant in carrying out the requirements of the bill. By 
December 1, 2024, MIEMSS must report to the Senate Finance Committee, the House 
Health and Government Operations Committee, and the House Economic Matters 
Committee on (1) the grocery stores and restaurants that registered AEDs in accordance 
with the bill and (2) the number of adverse cardiac events that required the use of an AED 
in those grocery stores and restaurants. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 288/ Page 3 
Additionally, MIEMSS must evaluate, in collaboration with the Maryland Restaurant 
Association and Maryland Retailers Association, the impact of mandating additional 
grocery stores and restaurants to place AEDs on-site and register with the agency. 
MIEMSS must report its findings and recommendations from that evaluation to the 
Senate Finance Committee, the House Health and Government Operations Committee, and 
the House Economic Matters Committee by December 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
“AED” means a medical heart monitor and defibrillator device that (1) is cleared for market 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration; (2) recognizes the presence or absence of 
ventricular fibrillation or rapid ventricular tachycardia; (3) determines, without 
intervention by an operator, whether defibrillation should be performed, and on 
determination that defibrillation should be performed, automatically charges; and 
(4) requires operator intervention to deliver an electrical impulse or automatically 
continues with delivery of electrical impulse. 
 
A “facility” is defined as an agency, association, corporation, firm, partnership, or other 
entity. 
 
Maryland Public Access AED Program 
 
The Maryland Public Access AED Program was first established by Chapter 167 of 1999. 
The program permits a facility that meets specified requirements to make AEDs available 
to victims of sudden cardiac arrest. MIEMSS is the State agency that oversees the program, 
including approving entities to participate and issuing registrations. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.06.02.01), to be eligible for registration or 
renewal of registration, each facility must designate an AED coordinator who must:  
 
 
complete cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and AED training and subsequent 
refresher training, in accordance with specified requirements; 
 
be responsible for implementing and administering the AED program at the facility; 
and  
 
ensure that monthly safety inspections of all supplemental and AED equipment are 
conducted. 
 
A facility must ensure that all expected AED operators have completed CPR and AED 
training and subsequent refresher training, as specified. AEDs must be placed in locations 
that are visible and readily accessible to any person willing to operate the AED in the event 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 288/ Page 4 
of a suspected cardiac arrest. A facility must have a telephone or communication service 
available at all times at which an AED is operated for the notification of a public safety 
answering point; it must also submit data or other information concerning the AED 
program as requested by MIEMSS. 
 
Exempt Entities 
 
The following entities are exempt from the State’s registration requirements for AEDs:  
(1) a jurisdictional emergency medical services operation program; (2) a licensed 
commercial ambulance service; (3) specified health care facilities; and (4) licensed dentist 
and physician offices. 
 
Immunity and Liability Protections 
 
In addition to other immunities available under statutory or common law, a registered 
facility is not civilly liable for any act or omission in the provision of automated external 
defibrillation if the facility (1) has made automated external defibrillation available, as 
specified, and (2) possesses a valid certificate. An individual is not civilly liable for any 
act or omission if the individual (1) acts in good faith while rendering automated external 
defibrillation to a person who is a victim of or is reasonably believed to be a victim of a 
sudden cardiac arrest; (2) provides aid or assistance in a reasonably prudent manner; and 
(3) renders aid or assistance without fee or other compensation. The foregoing immunities 
do not apply if the conduct of a registered facility or an individual amounts to gross 
negligence, willful or wanton misconduct, or intentionally tortious conduct. 
 
State Expenditures:  MIEMSS advises that one new full-time position is likely necessary 
to implement the bill and its reporting requirements. However, the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) advises that the duties under the bill can likely be fulfilled with 
one part-time (50%) administrator and, if necessary, the use of contractual services to 
complete the required studies. Thus, MEMSOF expenditures increase by at least $41,371 
in fiscal 2024, which reflects the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) administrator to establish and oversee a registration 
system for grocery stores and restaurants subject to the bill, adopt regulations in concert 
with MDH, and comply with the bill’s reporting requirements. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$34,359 
Operating Expenses 
7,012 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$41,371 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 288/ Page 5 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Expenditures for some small business grocery stores and 
restaurants increase as a result of the bill’s requirement to place an AED in a prominent 
area and maintain its functionality. The Maryland Restaurant Association advises that there 
are approximately 11,000 Maryland restaurants. Based on 2017 U.S. Economic Census 
data, the National Restaurant Association estimates that 39% of restaurants nationally have 
annual gross income greater than $1.0 million (which equates to approximately 
4,300 restaurants in Maryland). Since, however, the bill specifies that a restaurant’s 
gross income excludes sales for off-premises consumption and exempts restaurants with a 
seating capacity of less than 100, the number of restaurants affected by the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated. The number of grocery stores that may be subject to the bill is also 
unknown. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to MIEMSS, new AED units cost between $880 to 
$1,700 and certified pre-owned AEDs generally range from $500 to $880. The 
American Red Cross offers CPR and AED training courses that cost between $75 to $115 
per person. It holds on-site AED training at several locations in Maryland, including 
Annapolis, Baltimore, Salisbury, Silver Spring, and Walkersville. 
 
DLS advises that the report on the bill’s implementation is due one month before the 
requirement for registration; accordingly, the report is likely to contain only minimal data 
with respect to implementation or will be delayed, likely by one year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 299 (Senator Kramer, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 288/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6