START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 97

Chapter 97

(House Bill 230)

AN ACT concerning

Department of the Environment – Zero–Emission Medium– and Heavy–Duty
Vehicles – Regulations
(Clean Trucks Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of the Environment to adopt regulations on
or before a certain date establishing requirements for the sale of new zero–emission
medium– and heavy–duty vehicles in the State; requiring the Department, in
consultation with certain units of State government, to prepare and submit to the
General Assembly a certain needs assessment and deployment plan; authorizing the
Department to delay implementation of regulations adopted under this Act under
certain circumstances; altering the Medium–Duty and Heavy–Duty Zero–Emission
Vehicle Grant Program by altering the definition of “grant” and “qualified
medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle”, limiting the application of the
Program, and requiring the Maryland Energy Administration to give preference to
certain vehicles and equipment in issuing Program grants; altering and repealing
certain mandatory appropriations from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund for
certain fiscal years; and generally relating to the sale of zero–emission vehicles in
the State.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 2–1103.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–2011
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

2–1103.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 97 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “HEAVY–DUTY VEHICLE” MEANS A VEHICLE WITH A GROSS
VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN 14,001 POUNDS.

(3) “MEDIUM–DUTY VEHICLE” MEANS A VEHICLE WITH A GROSS
VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING OF NOT LESS THAN 8,501 POUNDS AND NOT MORE THAN
14,000 POUNDS.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2023, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SALE OF NEW
ZERO–EMISSION MEDIUM– AND HEAVY–DUTY VEHICLES IN THE STATE.

(2) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) UPDATE EXISTING REGULATIONS; AND

(II) INCORPORATE BY REFERENCE THE CALIFORNIA AIR
RESOURCES BOARD’S VEHICLE STANDARDS ADVANCED CLEAN TRUCKS
REGULATIONS, AS REVISED AND UPDATED; AND

(III) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, TAKE
EFFECT STARTING WITH MODEL YEAR 2027.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION, THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES, THE MARYLAND
ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION, SHALL
PREPARE A NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND DEPLOYMENT PLAN RELATING TO THE
SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION OF REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND DEPLOYMENT PLAN SHALL ASSESS
AND PLAN FOR:

(I) THE ADDITIONAL ELECTRICAL CAPACITY, TRANSMISSION,
DISTRIBUTION DEMANDS, AND HYDROGEN FUELING DEMANDS THAT WILL RESULT
FROM IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REGULATIONS, AND THE ABILITY OF THE STATE’S
ELECTRIC UTILITIES, GRID, AND HYDROGEN INFRASTRUCTURE TO MEET THOSE
DEMANDS, BASED ON PUBLICLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION AND EXISTING
ANALYSES;

(II) THE NUMBER OF ZERO–EMISSION MEDIUM– AND
HEAVY–DUTY VEHICLE RECHARGING AND REFUELING STATIONS RECOMMENDED

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 97

FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REGULATIONS, AND THE COSTS, PERMITTING
PROCESSES, AND TIMELINES FOR INSTALLING THOSE STATIONS;

(III) THE PURCHASE INCENTIVES AND OTHER MECHANISMS
RECOMMENDED FOR SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REGULATIONS,
INCLUDING INCENTIVES FOR RECHARGING AND REFUELING STATIONS AND
RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE, AND THE EXISTING AND POTENTIAL SOURCES OF
FUNDING FOR THOSE INCENTIVES AND MECHANISMS; AND

(IV) THE TIMELINE, ECONOMIC FEASIBILITY, AND MODELS
AVAILABLE FOR TRANSITIONING MEDIUM– AND HEAVY–DUTY VEHICLES IN THE
STATE VEHICLE FLEET, INCLUDING STATE–CONTRACTED MEDIUM– AND
HEAVY–DUTY VEHICLES, TO ZERO–EMISSION VEHICLES.

(3) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
SUBMIT THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND DEPLOYMENT PLAN TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT MAY DELAY IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION BY ONE OR MORE MODEL YEARS
IF, AFTER CONSULTING WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, THE
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES, THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION,
AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION, THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES, BASED
ON CRITERIA IDENTIFIED THROUGH THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND DEPLOYMENT
PLAN, THAT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REGULATIONS IS NOT YET FEASIBLE.

Article – State Government

9–2011.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Grant” means a medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle
grant issued by the Administration under this section for up to [20%] 75% of the
INCREMENTAL cost of a qualified medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle[,
qualified medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle supply equipment,] or
zero–emission heavy equipment property.

(3) “INCREMENTAL COST” MEANS THE DIFFERENCE IN PRICE OF:

(I) A CONVENTIONAL MODEL VEHICLE AND A ZERO–EMISSION
MODEL THAT IS ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE FUNCTIONAL FEATURES OF THE VEHICLE;
OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 97 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) CONVENTIONAL HEAVY EQUIPMENT PROPERTY AND
ZERO–EMISSION HEAVY EQUIPMENT PROPERTY THAT IS ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE
FUNCTIONAL FEATURES OF THE EQUIPMENT.

(4) “Program” means the Medium–Duty and Heavy–Duty Zero–Emission
Vehicle Grant Program.

[(4)] (5) “Qualified medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle”
means a motor vehicle that is:

(i) rated at more than [8,500 pounds unloaded gross weight] 10,000
POUNDS GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT; and

(ii) powered by electricity that is stored in a battery or produced by
a hydrogen fuel cell.

[(5)] (6) “Qualified medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle
supply equipment” means property in the State that is used for recharging or refueling
medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicles or zero–emission heavy equipment
property.

[(6)] (7) (i) “Zero–emission heavy equipment property” means
construction, earthmoving, or industrial heavy equipment, including any attachment for
the equipment, that:

1. is mobile; and

2. does not use an internal combustion engine.

(ii) “Zero–emission heavy equipment property” includes:

1. a self–propelled vehicle that is not designed to be driven
on a highway; and

2. industrial electrical generation equipment, industrial lift
equipment, industrial material handling equipment, or other similar industrial equipment.

(b) (1) There is a Medium–Duty and Heavy–Duty Zero–Emission Vehicle
Grant Program.

(2) THE PROGRAM APPLIES ONLY TO VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
INTENDED FOR COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USE.

(3) The Administration shall administer the Program.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 97

(c) (1) For each of fiscal years 2024 through 2027, a person or a unit of local
government may apply to the Administration for a grant under the Program.

(2) For the purpose of calculating the amount of a grant, the
Administration may allow an applicant to include reasonable installation costs in the cost
of qualified medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicle supply equipment.

(3) IN ISSUING PROGRAM GRANTS, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL
GIVE PREFERENCE TO:

(I) QUALIFIED MEDIUM–DUTY OR HEAVY–DUTY
ZERO–EMISSION VEHICLES THAT ARE:

1. EXPECTED TO BE PRIMARILY DOMICILED AND
OPERATED IN THE STATE; AND

2. TO BE OWNED OR OPERATED BY AN ENTITY ENGAGED
IN BUSINESS ACTIVITY THAT IMPACTS PUBLIC HEALTH, THE ENVIRONMENT, OR
INFRASTRUCTURE IN AN OVERBURDENED OR UNDERSERVED COMMUNITY, AS
DEFINED IN § 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE; AND

(II) ZERO–EMISSION HEAVY EQUIPMENT PROPERTY THAT IS
EXPECTED TO BE USED PRIMARILY AT LOCATIONS IN THE STATE.

(d) Program grants are subject to available funding and § 9–20B–05(j)(4) of this
title.

(e) [(1)] Notwithstanding § 9–20B–05(g) of this title, in each of fiscal years 2024
through 2027, the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of at
least [$1,000,000] $10,000,000 from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund for grants for
qualified NEWLY MANUFACTURED medium–duty or heavy–duty zero–emission vehicles
OR ZERO–EMISSION HEAVY EQUIPMENT PROPERTY under the Program.

[(2) Notwithstanding § 9–20B–05(g) of this title, in each of fiscal years 2024
through 2027, the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of at
least $750,000 from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund for grants for zero–emission
heavy equipment property under the Program.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 21, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5