START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 230 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 230 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of the Environment - Zero-Emission Medium- and Heavy-Duty 
Vehicles - Regulations (Clean Trucks Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), by 
December 1, 2023, to adopt regulations that, among other things, (1) establish 
requirements for the sale of new zero-emission medium- and heavy-duty vehicles in the 
State; (2) update existing regulations and incorporate by reference the California Air 
Resources Board’s (CARB) Advanced Clean Trucks (ACT) regulations, as revised and 
updated; and (3) take effect starting with model year 2027 (unless delayed by MDE, as 
authorized under specified conditions). MDE must also prepare a related needs assessment 
and deployment plan in consultation with specified State agencies and submit the plan to 
the General Assembly by December 1, 2024. Finally, the bill increases funding for the 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty (MHD) Zero-Emission Vehicle (ZEV) Grant Program and 
makes other changes to the program. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. General fund expenditures increase by $474,200 in 
FY 2024; out-years reflect ongoing costs and inflation. Special fund expenditures increase 
by $5.25 million in FY 2024, reflecting discretionary funding for the MHD ZEV Grant 
Program; out-years reflect increases in mandated funding through FY 2027. Other potential 
impacts on State expenditures related to the implementation of the regulations are not 
reflected in this analysis, as discussed below. State revenues are not directly affected. This 
bill increases an existing mandated appropriation from FY 2025 through 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
474,200 
157,600 
164,600 
172,000 
181,100 
SF Expenditure 
5,250,000 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
0 
Net Effect 
($5,724,200) 
($5,157,600) 
($5,164,600) 
($5,172,000) 
($181,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 230/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures are likely affected by the regulations 
adopted under the bill, as discussed below. Local grant revenues and expenditures may be 
affected by the changes to the MHD ZEV Grant Program, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Advanced Clean Truck Regulations and Needs Assessment and Deployment Plan  
 
“Heavy-duty vehicle” means a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) rating equal to 
or greater than 14,001 pounds (lbs). A “medium-duty vehicle” is a vehicle with a 
GVW rating of between 8,501 and 14,000 lbs. 
 
MDE, in consultation with the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), the 
Department of General Services (DGS), MEA, and the Public Service Commission (PSC), 
must prepare a needs assessment and deployment plan relating to the successful 
implementation of the regulations. The needs assessment and deployment plan must assess 
and plan for: 
 
 
the additional electrical capacity, transmission, distribution demands, and hydrogen 
fueling demands that will result from implementing the regulations, and the ability 
of the State’s electric utilities, grid, and hydrogen infrastructure to meet those 
demands, based on publicly available information and existing analyses; 
 
the number of zero-emission medium- and heavy-duty vehicle recharging and 
refueling stations recommended to implement the regulations, and the costs, 
permitting processes, and timelines for installing those stations; 
 
the purchase incentives and other mechanisms recommended to successfully 
implement the regulations, including incentives for recharging and refueling 
stations and related infrastructure, and the existing and potential sources of funding 
for those incentives and mechanisms; and  
 
the timeline, economic feasibility, and models available for transitioning 
medium- and heavy-duty vehicles in the State vehicle fleet, including 
State-contracted medium- and heavy-duty vehicles, to ZEVs.  
 
MDE must submit the needs assessment and deployment plan to the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024. MDE may delay implementation of the regulations by one or more 
model years if, after consulting with MDOT, DGS, MEA, and PSC, MDE determines, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 230/ Page 3 
based on criteria identified through the needs assessment and deployment plan, that 
implementation of the regulations is not yet feasible.  
 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program 
 
The bill replaces requirements that the Governor, in each of fiscal 2024 through 2027, 
include, in the annual budget bill, appropriations from the Strategic Energy Investment 
Fund (SEIF) of (1) at least $1.0 million for grants under the MHD ZEV Grant Program for 
qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEVs and (2) at least $750,000 for grants under the 
program for zero-emission heavy equipment property. The requirements are replaced with 
a single requirement that the Governor, in each of fiscal 2024 through 2027, include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation from SEIF of at least $10.0 million for grants under the 
program for qualified newly manufactured medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEVs or 
zero-emission heavy equipment property. Under existing law and under the bill, the 
appropriations must be made irrespective of existing provisions specifying the allocation 
of SEIF revenues from the sale of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) 
allowances among various uses. 
 
The bill modifies a limit on the amount of individual grants awarded under the program for 
qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEVs and zero-emission heavy equipment property 
and eliminates the availability of grants for qualified medium- or heavy-duty zero-emission 
vehicle supply equipment under the program. Under the bill, for each of fiscal 2024 through 
2027, a person or unit of local government may apply to MEA for a grant for up to 75% of 
the incremental cost (rather than the existing limit of 20% of the cost) of a qualified 
medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEV or zero-emission heavy equipment property. 
“Incremental cost” means the difference in price of (1) a conventional model vehicle and 
a zero-emission model that is attributable to the functional features of the vehicle or 
(2) conventional heavy equipment property and zero-emission heavy equipment property 
that is attributable to the functional features of the equipment. The bill also modifies the 
definition of a “qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle” so that it 
means a motor vehicle that is rated at more than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (rather 
than 8,500 pounds unloaded gross weight) and powered by electricity that is stored in a 
battery or produced by a hydrogen fuel cell. 
 
The bill also establishes that the MHD ZEV Grant Program applies only to vehicles and 
equipment intended for commercial or industrial use. In addition, in issuing program 
grants, MEA must give preference to: 
 
 
qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEVs that are (1) expected to be primarily 
domiciled and operated in the State and (2) to be owned or operated by an entity 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 230/ Page 4 
engaged in business activity that impacts public health, the environment, or 
infrastructure in an overburdened or underserved community; and 
 
zero-emission heavy equipment property that is expected to be used primarily at 
locations in the State.  
 
“Overburdened community” and “underserved community” have the meanings stated 
under existing provisions of the Environment Article of the Maryland Code that establish 
and govern the Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities. 
“Overburdened community” means any census tract for which three or more of specified 
environmental health indicators are above the seventy-fifth percentile statewide. 
“Underserved community” means any census tract in which, according to the most recent 
U.S. Census Bureau Survey (1) at least 25% of the residents qualify as low-income; (2) at 
least 50% of the residents identify as nonwhite; or (3) at least 15% of the residents have 
limited English proficiency. 
 
Current Law: 
 
The Federal Clean Air Act and California’s Clean Car Program 
 
Pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act (CAA), vehicles sold in the United States must be 
certified under one of two certification programs:  (1) the federal program (Tier 2); or 
(2) the California program (the Clean Car Program). Section 177 of the CAA Amendments 
of 1990 provides states the ability to adopt the California program in lieu of the federal 
program as long as the adopted state program is identical to the California program and the 
state allows two model years lead time from adoption to implementation. 
 
The Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007 (Chapters 111 and 112) requires MDE to adopt 
regulations implementing the California Clean Car Program (also referred to as the 
California Low Emissions Vehicle Program, or CAL LEV) in Maryland. Maryland’s 
implementing 
regulations 
adopted, 
through 
incorporation 
by 
reference 
in 
COMAR 26.11.34.02, the applicable California regulations. The CAL LEV program is a 
dynamic, changing program in which many of the relevant California regulations are 
continuously updated. To retain California’s standards, Maryland must remain consistent 
with its regulations, which means when California updates its regulations, Maryland must 
reflect those changes by amending State regulations. Of note, on August 25, 2022, CARB 
adopted the Advanced Clean Cars II regulation requiring that all new cars and light trucks 
sold in California be ZEVs, including a certain percentage of plug-in hybrid electric 
vehicles, by 2035. 
 
California’s Truck Emissions Programs 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 230/ Page 5 
CARB updated its ACT Rule in March 2021. Broadly, the rule requires manufacturers of 
medium- and heavy-duty trucks to sell an increasing number of ZEV trucks in California 
(as opposed to diesel or gasoline vehicles). The emissions reductions requirements begin 
in 2024 and increase through 2035. ACT includes ZEV sales requirements for any 
manufacturer that certifies on-road vehicles over 8,500 lbs for sale in California. 
 
CARB adopted the Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle Omnibus Regulation (Omnibus 
Regulation) on September 9, 2021; it is an emissions reduction regulation designed to cut 
smog-forming nitrogen oxides (NOx) from conventional heavy-duty engines. The 
regulation went into effect December 22, 2021. According to CARB, the 
Omnibus Regulation significantly increases the stringency of NOx emissions standards and 
will also lengthen the useful life and emissions warranty of heavy-duty diesel engines for 
use in vehicles with a GVW rating greater than 10,000 lbs. The new NOx emission 
standards begin with the 2024 model year engines and become more stringent with 2027 
and subsequent model year engines. 
 
Federal Clean Trucks Plan  
 
On August 5, 2021, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced plans to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and other harmful air pollutants, including ozone and 
particulate matter, from heavy-duty trucks through a series of rulemakings over the next 
three years. According to EPA, the Clean Trucks Plan would result in significant emissions 
reductions from new medium- and heavy-duty vehicles and represents a major step toward 
improving air quality and addressing the climate crisis. 
 
In January 2023, EPA published a final rule creating a new standard for NOx emissions for 
heavy-duty trucks starting with model year 2027. Of note, EPA is reviewing a CAA waiver 
request from the federal NOx emissions standards from California for CARB’s 
Omnibus Regulation. It is anticipated that, as part of the Clean Trucks Plan and to 
compliment the new emissions standards, EPA will also publish ZEV sales requirements 
in the next few years. However, the current NOx regulations do not include a ZEV sales 
standard. 
 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program 
 
Chapter 234 of 2022 established the MHD ZEV Grant Program. Chapter 234, for 
fiscal 2024 through 2027, and subject to available funding, authorizes a person or unit of 
local government to apply to MEA for a grant of up to 20% of the cost of a qualified 
medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEV, qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEV supply 
equipment, or zero-emission heavy equipment property. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 230/ Page 6 
A qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEV is a motor vehicle that is (1) rated at more 
than 8,500 pounds unloaded gross weight and (2) powered by electricity that is stored in a 
battery or produced by a hydrogen fuel cell. Qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEV 
supply equipment is property in the State that is used for recharging or refueling 
medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEVs or zero-emission heavy equipment property. 
Zero-emission heavy equipment property is construction, earthmoving, or industrial heavy 
equipment, including any attachment for the equipment, that is mobile and does not use an 
internal combustion engine. 
 
Chapter 234 specifies that – irrespective of existing provisions specifying the allocation of 
SEIF revenues from the sale of RGGI allowances among various uses – in fiscal 2024 
through 2027, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation from 
SEIF of at least $1.75 million for the program, including (1) at least $1.0 million for grants 
for qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty ZEVs and (2) at least $750,000 for grants for 
zero-emission heavy equipment property.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment Administrative Expenditures 
 
MDE advises that, even in the absence of the bill, it is considering promulgating CARB’s 
ACT regulations. However, a decision to do so has not yet been made, and MDE has not 
yet begun to implement any such action. MDE further advises that in order to promulgate 
CARB’s ACT regulations, MDE needs to hire two regulatory and compliance engineers 
(whether it promulgates the regulations pursuant to its existing authority or in response to 
the bill’s requirements). Additional MDE administrative and contractual costs, which are 
discussed below, arise from related actions MDE must take under the bill that go beyond 
the standard regulatory process. This analysis reflects the full cost for MDE to promulgate 
CARB’s ACT regulations as required by the bill. However, the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) notes that because MDE is considering promulgating the ACT regulations 
even in the absence of the bill, the staffing costs included in the estimate below may be 
incurred regardless of the bill.  
 
General fund expenditures increase by $474,167 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for a 
30-day start-up delay; there is no effect in fiscal 2023. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring two regulatory compliance engineers to (1) develop the regulations; (2) facilitate the 
hiring of a contractor to conduct outreach and get input from stakeholders; (3) establish a 
compliance program; (4) track new truck sales and credits; and (5) oversee the 
administration of the ZEV Truck Credit, Banking, and Trading Program, a component of 
ACT. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including contractual 
costs), and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below: 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 230/ Page 7 
 
 
MDE adopts portions of California’s ACT rule by regulation to satisfy the bill’s 
requirement; 
 
adopting the required regulations necessitates an extensive stakeholder outreach 
process prior to adoption to inform the regulated community of ACT requirements 
and to determine the baseline for the credit, banking, and trading program;  
 
MDE does not have sufficient staff to complete the stakeholder process or prepare 
the needs assessment and deployment plan, so it must hire a third-party contractors 
to conduct the work; and 
 
to implement ACT, MDE needs to establish and implement a compliance program 
for medium- and heavy-duty truck manufacturers to ensure ZEV truck credit 
requirements are met each vehicle model year. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$158,819 
Contractual Costs 
300,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
15,348 
Total FY 2024 MDE Admin. Costs 
$474,167 
 
Future year administrative expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program  
 
SEIF expenditures increase by $5.25 million in fiscal 2024 and $5.0 million annually from 
fiscal 2025 through 2027, reflecting the difference between (1) appropriations to the 
MHD ZEV Grant Program, under the bill, of at least $10.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2027 (with the fiscal 2024 appropriation being discretionary and the fiscal 2025 through 
2027 appropriations mandated) and (2) appropriations to the program, in the absence of the 
bill, of $4.75 million in fiscal 2024 (the amount included for the program in the fiscal 2024 
budget as passed by the General Assembly) and $5.0 million in fiscal 2025 through 2027 
(the amount MEA indicates is an approximate minimum amount of annual funding needed 
to sustain a viable program). While current law only mandates a minimum of $1.75 million 
for the program, this analysis assumes that, in the absence of the bill, the amount included 
in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly ($4.75 million) is appropriated 
in fiscal 2024 and the minimum amount needed for a viable program ($5.0 million) is 
appropriated in fiscal 2025 through 2027.  
 
Impact of Adopting California’s Advanced Clean Trucks Rule 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 230/ Page 8 
Adopting portions of California’s ACT rule likely has an impact on State expenditures 
(all/multiple fund types) for State agencies that purchase medium- and heavy-duty 
vehicles. According to MDE, pursuant to ACT, ZEV requirements are phased in (they 
increase from model year 2025 through 2035 and remain constant thereafter). There may 
also be the need to hire new (or train existing) technicians to maintain the ZEVs and to 
install charging equipment. MDE advises that, compared to conventional trucks, 
ZEV trucks are generally more expensive to purchase but have lower operating costs. The 
ACT standards only affect the purchase of new vehicles, so any impact occurs when 
existing vehicles are replaced or new vehicles are purchased. DLS does not have sufficient 
information to provide an estimate of the fiscal impacts associated with implementing 
ACT. DLS also notes that since MDE may promulgate the ACT regulations even in the 
absence of the bill, the potential impacts on State expenditures may be incurred anyway.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the potential impacts on State agencies from adopting 
California’s ACT rule, local government expenditures are likely affected by the adoption 
of portions of ACT. DLS notes that since MDE may promulgate the ACT regulations even 
in the absence of the bill, the potential impacts on local expenditures may be incurred 
anyway.  
 
As eligible applicants under the MHD ZEV Grant Program, local governments may benefit 
from the bill’s increase in funding for the program and increased individual grant amounts 
under the program. This analysis assumes that the bill’s provision establishing that the 
program applies only to vehicles and equipment intended for commercial or industrial use 
is not intended to eliminate the availability of the program to local governments, since local 
governments are still authorized to apply to MEA for a grant under the program.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Similar to the State and local impacts described above, small 
businesses that purchase medium- and heavy-duty vehicles are likely affected by the 
adoption of portions of ACT. Also, as eligible applicants under the MHD ZEV Grant 
Program, small businesses may benefit from the bill’s increase in funding for the program 
and increased individual grant amounts under the program. 
 
Additionally, small businesses that sell, service, or provide other services or parts 
(including charging equipment) for zero-emission medium- and heavy-duty vehicles may 
see an increase in the demand for their services and/or products. Conversely, small 
businesses that sell, service, or offer other services or parts, equipment, or fuels for 
conventional medium- and heavy-duty vehicles may see a decline in the demand for their 
services (although this likely does not occur until the out-years as the ZEV requirements 
are phased in).  
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 230/ Page 9 
As noted above, since MDE may promulgate the ACT regulations even in the absence of 
the bill, the potential impacts on small businesses related to the ACT regulations may be 
incurred anyway.  
 
Additional Comments:  MDE advises that the authorization to delay implementation of 
the ACT regulations injects a level of uncertainty into Maryland’s air quality program that 
the CAA does not allow. This uncertainty means that the State would not be able to 
incorporate the estimated reductions from the regulations into the State’s State 
Implementation Plan (SIP); instead, the State would need to incorporate required 
reductions from other air quality reduction actions. Other reductions are generally 
unavailable for on-road diesel sources, as the State’s authority to regulate on-road diesel 
sources under CAA is limited. SIPs are a required component under CAA and are the 
mechanism that states use to demonstrate that they are meeting CAA obligations. Any 
effects from any impacts to the State’s SIP resulting from the bill have not been addressed 
in this analysis.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 224 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Budget 
and Management; California Air Resources Board; U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - April 6, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 6, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 6, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 9, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 230/ Page 10 
 

END OF PAGE 10