START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 229 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 229 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Employment for Minors - Opportunities for Work 
 
 
This bill requires the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to release the name, 
home address, and telephone number of a minor who is at least 16 years old and has a 
work permit to the following organizations that request and have registered with the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) for the purpose of receiving the information:  
(1) employers and apprenticeship sponsors; (2) educational programs and institutions; and 
(3) local workforce development boards that meet specified requirements. The 
commissioner may release information relating to a minor only if the minor’s parent or 
guardian or the minor elects to allow the sharing of the information. MDL must adopt 
regulations to implement the bill, including allowing minors or their parents or guardians 
to opt in to sharing their information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MDL can release minors’ information to specified organizations with 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A minor’s parent or guardian may apply for a work permit for the minor 
by completing an online application that includes (1) verification of the minor’s age; 
(2) a description of the work to be performed by the minor; (3) approval by the parent or 
guardian of the minor’s employment; and (4) any other information the commissioner may 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 229/ Page 2 
require. After reviewing an online work permit application, the commissioner may issue 
the permit if the employment is allowed for the minor under State law. 
 
Children between the ages of 14 and 18 may not work without a permit unless the work is 
performed outside school hours, does not involve manufacturing or mining, is not 
hazardous, and is restricted to the following occupations:   
 
 
farming; 
 
domestic work; 
 
working in a business owned by a parent or guardian; 
 
caddying; 
 
sailing instruction; 
 
newspaper delivery; 
 
making an evergreen wreath; 
 
camp counselor or instructor; or 
 
volunteer work for a nonprofit or charitable organization. 
 
Except under conditions specified in statute, a minor between the age of 14 and 18 may not 
work in about a dozen hazardous professions delineated in statute; additional occupations 
are restricted for minors younger than age 16. Statute includes additional requirements 
related to the working hours of minor children that generally limit the number of hours and 
time of day during which a minor may be employed. 
 
For an overview of registered apprenticeship programs in the State, please see the 
Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the General Assembly passed similar legislation in the 
2022 session (Senate Bill 420), the Governor vetoed the bill. 
 
MDL advises that the bill does not prevent the groups authorized to receive a minor’s 
identifying information under the bill from resharing to other individuals or groups not 
intended to receive the information. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 420 and HB 719 of 2022. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 229/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 172 (Senator Rosapepe) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 229/ Page 4 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers and may be 
administered solely by the employer or jointly by management and labor groups. An 
apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job training under the direction of a 
skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in a specific occupation. 
Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the program sponsor. Many 
industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train employees in the knowledge 
necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the number of apprenticeships 
available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the industry and the capacity and 
willingness of employers to supervise them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations. Apprenticeships last from one to six years, although most are three to 
four years, and involve a minimum of 144 hours of classroom instruction per year and at 
least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job training. A national apprenticeship and training 
program was established in federal law in 1937 with the passage of the National 
Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The purpose of the Act was to promote 
national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with 26 other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has chosen to operate 
its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of Workforce 
Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department of Labor is 
responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. More specifically, 
DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as changes to current programs 
and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. The approval process 
involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program in a proposed 
industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current staffing level of 
the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate supervision can be 
provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations of the entity. The 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory role for legislation 
and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 
As of December 2021, there were 11,404 apprentices registered, and there were 
3,833 participating employers. During calendar 2021, the State added 23 new 
apprenticeship programs. 
 

END OF PAGE 4