START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 659

Chapter 659

(House Bill 292)

AN ACT concerning

Child Care Providers – Registration and Licensing – Exemptions

FOR the purpose of exempting certain family child care homes, large family child care
homes, and child care centers that serve only dependent children of military
personnel and are located on certain federal property or certified by a branch of the
U.S. Department of Defense or the U.S. Coast Guard from certain registration and
licensing requirements for child care providers in the State; authorizing certain
entities and agents to assume certain responsibilities regarding the children served
by child care providers that are exempted from certain requirements under this Act;
and generally relating to registration and licensing requirements for child care
providers.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 9.5–303.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.5–403
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

9.5–303.1.

(A) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME OR
LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME THAT IS:

(1) LOCATED SERVES ONLY DEPENDENT CHILDREN OF MILITARY
PERSONNEL; AND

(2) (I) IS LOCATED ON A MILITARY BASE OR FEDERAL PROPERTY;
OR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 659 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) (II) IS CERTIFIED CERTIFIED AS A FAMILY CHILD CARE
~~PROVIDER~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER BY A
BRANCH OF THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR THE U.S. COAST GUARD.

(B) THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR THE U.S. COAST GUARD, OR
THEIR AGENTS, INCLUDING AN INSTALLATION COMMANDER OF A MILITARY BASE ON
WHICH A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME OR LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME IS
LOCATED, MAY ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY FOR APPROVING OR DETERMINING WHICH
CHILDREN MAY BE SERVED BY THE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES AND LARGE FAMILY
CHILD CARE HOMES THAT ARE EXEMPT FROM THIS SUBTITLE.

9.5–403.

(a) This subtitle does not supersede:

(1) Any right or power of the Maryland Department of Health or any local
health officer;

(2) Any right or power of a county department of education;

(3) Any building code or zoning provision;

(4) Any right or power of the Administration within the Department of
Human Services or any local department; or

(5) Any right or power of the Department of Human Services to regulate
residential child care facilities.

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a child care center for school
age children is operated before and after school hours in a building which is in use as a
public or private school, the school age child care center:

(1) Shall meet local fire, health, and zoning codes required of school
buildings; and

(2) May not be required to meet any additional regulations relative to the
physical plant beyond those imposed by the county or the local board of education with
respect to that building.

(C) (1) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO A CHILD CARE CENTER THAT
~~IS:~~

(1) (I) LOCATED SERVES ONLY DEPENDENT CHILDREN OF
MILITARY PERSONNEL; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 659

(II) 1. IS LOCATED ON A MILITARY BASE OR FEDERAL
PROPERTY; OR

(2) 2. CERTIFIED IS CERTIFIED AS A FAMILY CHILD CARE
PROVIDER CHILD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM BY A BRANCH OF THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR THE U.S. COAST GUARD.

(2) THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR THE U.S. COAST GUARD,
OR THEIR AGENTS, INCLUDING AN INSTALLATION COMMANDER OF A MILITARY BASE
ON WHICH A CHILD CARE CENTER IS LOCATED, MAY ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY FOR
APPROVING OR DETERMINING WHICH CHILDREN MAY BE SERVED BY THE CHILD
CARE CENTERS THAT ARE EXEMPT FROM THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3