START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 226 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 226 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Person in a Position of Authority - Sexual Offenses With a Minor 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of a “person in a position of authority” under the 
fourth-degree sexual offense statute and makes related changes to prohibitions under that 
statute. The bill also establishes that (1) unless specifically charged by the State, a violation 
of the fourth-degree sexual offense statute may not be considered a lesser included crime 
of any other crime and (2) a sentence imposed for a violation of the fourth-degree sexual 
offense statute may be imposed separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a 
sentence for any crime based on the act establishing the violation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
expanded application of existing penalty provisions. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
expanded application of existing penalty provisions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Person in a Position of Authority 
 
Under current law, a “person in a position of authority” is a person who (1) is at least 
age 21; (2) is employed by or under contract with a public or private preschool, elementary 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 226/ Page 2 
school, or secondary school; and (3) because of the person’s position or occupation, 
exercises supervision over a minor who attends the school. 
 
The bill redefines a person in a position of authority to be a person who is:   
 
 
at least age 21 and works for remuneration or as a volunteer for a public or private 
preschool, elementary school, or secondary school; or 
 
at least age 22 and works for remuneration or as a volunteer for a “program” and 
exercises supervision over or works or interacts with one or more minors who attend 
the school or participate in the program. 
 
The bill defines “program” to mean an individual, a business, a religious or faith-based 
institution, or an organization that provides, on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, instructional, 
coaching, recreational, spiritual, character-building, or supervisory services or activities 
for minors, including:  (1) sports, music, dance, art, or martial arts coaching or instruction; 
(2) tutoring or academic enrichment; (3) day care or after school care; (4) scouting; or 
(5) day or overnight camping. “Program” also means any unit of local, State, or federal 
government. 
 
Under current law, a person in a position of authority includes a principal, vice principal, 
teacher, coach, or school counselor at a public or private preschool, elementary school, or 
secondary school. The bill retains these specific inclusions. 
 
Sexual Offense in the Fourth Degree 
 
Currently, the crime of fourth-degree sexual offense prohibits a person from (1) engaging 
in sexual contact with another without the consent of the other or (2) except as prohibited 
under the third-degree sexual offense statute, engaging in a sexual act or vaginal 
intercourse with a victim who is age 14 or 15 and the person performing the act is at least 
four years older than the victim. Additionally, with specified exceptions pertaining to other 
criminal provisions, it is a fourth-degree sexual offense for a person in a position of 
authority to engage in a sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal intercourse with a minor who, 
at the time of the act, contact, or intercourse, is a student enrolled at a school where the 
person is employed. 
 
Under the bill, with specified exceptions pertaining to other criminal provisions, a person 
in a position of authority is prohibited from engaging in a sexual act, sexual contact, or 
vaginal intercourse with a minor who, at the time of the sexual act, sexual contact, or 
vaginal intercourse (1) is a student enrolled at a school where the person in a position of 
authority works or (2) is participating in a program for which the person in a position of 
authority works and is at least six years younger than the person in a position of authority. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 226/ Page 3 
A fourth-degree sexual offense is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. A penalty of imprisonment for up to three years 
and/or a $1,000 maximum fine applies to specified subsequent offenders. Imposition of the 
subsequent offender penalty is subject to specified procedural requirements. There is a 
three-year statute of limitations for prosecution of a fourth-degree sexual offense involving 
a person in a position of authority or sexual contact with a minor without the consent of 
the minor. The bill does not alter the applicable penalties or statute of limitations. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
expanded application of existing monetary penalty provisions from cases heard in the 
District Court. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase minimally as a result of the 
bill’s expanded application of existing incarceration penalties due to more people being 
committed to State correctional facilities and increased payments to counties for 
reimbursement of inmate costs. The number of people convicted under the bill is expected 
to be minimal. The Judiciary can implement the bill’s provisions using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$4,970 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For persons sentenced to a term 
of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the discretion to order that the 
sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional facility. The State provides 
assistance to the counties for locally sentenced inmates and for (1) inmates who are 
sentenced to and awaiting transfer to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced inmates 
confined in a local detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) inmates who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
The Office of the Public Defender advises that the bill may lead to a minimal increase in 
the agency’s workload and caseload that can be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded 
application of existing monetary penalty provisions from cases heard in the circuit courts. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 226/ Page 4 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded 
application of existing incarceration penalties. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration 
for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs 
of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately $90 to $300 per inmate in 
recent years. 
 
The Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association advises that the bill has no fiscal or operational 
effect on prosecutors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 49 and HB 223 of 2022 and HB 223 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 21 (Senator Folden) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Maryland State Commission on Criminal 
Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public 
Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; University System of Maryland; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County 
Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4