START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 757

Chapter 757

(House Bill 251)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – Class A–7 Licenses

FOR the purpose of repealing certain geographic and temporal restrictions on the issuance
of Class A–7 beer, wine, and liquor licenses in Baltimore City; and generally relating
to alcoholic beverages licenses in Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–902.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–902.1.

(a) [This section does not apply in the 43rd legislative district.

(b)] There is a Class A–7 beer, wine, and liquor license.

[(c)] (B) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
at retail at the place described in the license, for off–premises consumption.

[(d)] (C) [(1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, a] A license holder
who holds a valid Class B–D–7 beer, wine, and liquor license issued on or before July 1,
2018, may apply to the Board to exchange the license for a Class A–7 license if the license
holder first obtains approval by resolution of the Baltimore City Council.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 757 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(2) The Board may not issue a Class A–7 license on or after July 1, 2022.]

[(e)] (D) A holder of a Class A–7 license may sell beer, wine, and liquor on
Monday through Sunday from 10 a.m. to midnight.

[(f)] (E) The annual license fee is $1,500.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2