START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 238 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 238 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Massage Therapy - Discipline 
 
 
This bill repeals a provision of law that prohibits an individual from performing or offering 
to perform a massage on another individual for compensation unless the individual who 
performs or offers to perform a massage is a licensed massage therapist or registered 
massage practitioner and instead provides a six-month grace period to practice after a 
license or registration has expired. The bill also makes alterations relating to grounds for 
discipline, notice of disciplinary actions, judicial review of State Board of Massage 
Therapy Examiners orders, reinstatement of a license or registration, and the applicability 
of penalties regarding practicing massage therapy without a license or registration or 
misrepresentation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners can implement the bill’s 
changes with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Discipline Procedures 
 
The bill adds failure to comply with a board order to the list of disciplinary grounds for 
which the board may deny a license or registration, reprimand a licensee or registration 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 238/ Page 2 
holder, place any licensee or registration holder on probation, or suspend or revoke a 
license or registration. The bill repeals the requirement that the board file notice of each 
revocation or suspension of a license or registration in the Maryland Register within 
24 hours of revocation or suspension. The board may reinstate a suspended or revoked 
license only in accordance with the terms and conditions of the order of suspension, 
revocation, or reinstatement issued by the board. The bill specifies that current penalties 
for individuals convicted of practicing or attempting to practice massage therapy without 
a license or registration or misrepresentation do not apply to a person whose license or 
registration expired fewer than six months before the violation occurred. The bill also 
specifies that an order by the board may not be stayed pending judicial review, and the 
board may appeal a decision that reverses or modifies its order. However, the board may 
grant a stay of enforcement for its own orders in accordance with the Administrative 
Procedure Act (APA). 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 705 and 706 of 2022 phased out the registered massage 
practitioner credential. Until October 31, 2026, an individual may practice massage therapy 
in the State if the individual is either (1) licensed by the board or (2) registered by the board 
to practice massage therapy in a non-health care setting. Beginning November 1, 2026, an 
individual must be licensed by the board to practice massage therapy in the State. 
 
“Practice massage therapy” means to engage professionally and for compensation in 
massage therapy. An individual is prohibited from performing a massage or offering to 
perform a massage on another individual for compensation unless the individual who 
performs or offers to perform the massage is a license massage therapist or registered 
massage practitioner. 
 
Subject to specified hearing procedures, the board may deny a license or registration or 
reprimand, place on probation, suspend or revoke a license or registration if an individual 
violates any 1 of 22 grounds for disciplinary action. The board must file a notice for 
publication in the earliest publication of the Maryland Register of each revocation or 
suspension of a license or registration within 24 hours after the revocation or suspension. 
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board in a contested case, as defined in the 
APA, may not appeal to the Secretary of Health but may petition for judicial review. A 
person who practices or attempts to practice massage therapy without a license or 
registration or represents to the public that the person is authorized to practice massage 
therapy is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to specified penalties:  for 
a first offense, a fine of up to $2,000 or imprisonment for up to six months; for a subsequent 
offense, a fine of up to $6,000 or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 238/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 215 (Senators Ellis and Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3