START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 244 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 244 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Estates and Trusts - Registers of Wills - Electronic Filing and Signatures 
 
 
This bill requires a register of wills to accept any document, except an original will, that is 
filed electronically through a system established by the register and in accordance with the 
Maryland Rules; however, the bill does not prohibit the filing of a document in paper form 
with a register. The bill also prohibits a register from refusing to accept any document 
based on the manner in which it was signed. For the purposes of the bill, “sign” means, 
with present intent to authenticate or adopt a record, to (1) execute or adopt a tangible 
symbol or (2) attach to or logically associate with the record an electronic symbol, sound, 
or process. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:   General fund revenues increase by a relatively minimal amount beginning 
in FY 2024. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current law:   
 
Registers of Wills 
 
In general, the registers of wills in each of the State’s 24 jurisdictions are responsible for 
the administration of estates by providing proper forms and direction, assisting, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 244/ Page 2 
advising any person who requests assistance in the preparation of any form for 
administrative probate, admitting wills to probate and issuing letters of administration, 
auditing accounts, and maintaining accurate records of all estate matters. The registers also 
serve as clerks of the orphans’ courts. 
 
Prohibition Against Electronic Transmission 
 
Maryland Rule 6-108(c) prohibits filing a paper with the register of wills by electronic 
transmission. 
 
Registers’ Custody of Wills and Other Papers 
 
Pursuant to provisions of the Estates and Trusts Article of the Maryland Code, any will, 
probate, or any paper filed in the office of the register may not be delivered out of the office 
to any person. A register may comply with that requirement by retaining a permanent paper 
file of a probated will and a copy of any other file associated with an estate in paper, 
photographic, microprocessed, magnetic, mechanical, electronic, digital, or any other 
medium if the copy is maintained in a specified manner. On or after 180 days following 
the closing of an estate, a register may dispose of any file associated with the estate, other 
than the will, if a copy of the file is retained. 
 
Electronic Signatures on Electronic or Remotely Witnessed Wills 
 
In general, every will must be (1) in writing; (2) signed by the testator (person making the 
will), or by another person on behalf of the testator, in the testator’s physical presence and 
by the testator’s express direction; and (3) attested and signed by two or more credible 
witnesses in the physical presence of the testator or, provided certain requirements are 
satisfied, the electronic presence of the testator. Electronic signatures of the testator and 
witnesses may be used for an electronic will or remotely witnessed will (executed in 
situations where the testator and witnesses are not all in the physical presence of 
one another); however, a certified will must be created that is a true, complete, and accurate 
paper version of the electronic will or remotely witnessed will, which is deemed to be the 
original will of the testator. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues increase by a relatively minimal amount 
beginning in fiscal 2024 due to reduction of registers’ administrative costs associated with 
paper filings. Registers of wills’ salaries and office expenses are paid from fees and 
inheritance tax revenues collected by the registers, with the remainder of the fees and 
inheritance tax revenues deposited into the general fund.  
 
For illustrative purposes, the Howard County register estimates that the amount of 
administrative costs associated with paper filings is at least $40,000 annually statewide. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 244/ Page 3 
The bill does not prohibit the filing of a document in paper form with a register, so the 
actual impact of electronic filing depends upon the number of current filers who switch 
from paper to electronic. 
 
The registers do not participate in the Maryland Electronic Courts system of electronic 
filing and case management. Consequently, the registers are in the process of establishing 
an independent web-based system of electronic filing so that customers may submit 
documents online rather than by paper through mail or in person. The registers’ electronic 
filing system is already budgeted. The bill allows for and facilitates the anticipated 
electronic filing of documents through the registers’ new filing system. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 253 (Senator Hester) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Register of 
Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - February 28, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3