START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 363

Chapter 363

(House Bill 234)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Chiropractic Examiners – Disciplinary Actions

FOR the purpose of authorizing the State Board of Chiropractic Examiners to take
disciplinary action against an applicant or a licensee for failing to comply with a
Board order; authorizing the Board to grant a stay of enforcement of a Board order
in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act; prohibiting an order of the
Board from being stayed pending judicial review; authorizing the Board to appeal a
decision that reverses or modifies its order; authorizing the Board to reinstate a
suspended or revoked license only in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
order of suspension or revocation or an order of reinstatement issued by the Board;
and generally relating to disciplinary actions by the State Board of Chiropractic
Examiners.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 3–313(28) and (29) and 3–316
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 3–313(30) and 3–317
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

3–313.

Subject to the hearing provisions of § 3–315 of this subtitle, the Board may deny a
license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, with or
without conditions, or suspend or revoke a license, or any combination thereof, if the
applicant or licensee:

(28) Violates any provision of this title; [or]

(29) Fails to submit to a criminal history records check in accordance with §

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 363 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3–302.1 of this subtitle; OR

(30) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH ANY BOARD ORDER.

3–316.

(a) Except as provided in this section for an action under § 3–313 of this subtitle,
any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Board in a contested case, as defined in the
Administrative Procedure Act, may petition for judicial review as allowed by the
Administrative Procedure Act.

(b) Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Board under § 3–313 of this
subtitle may not appeal to the Secretary but may take a direct judicial appeal as provided
in the Administrative Procedure Act.

(C) (1) THE BOARD MAY GRANT A STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF A BOARD
ORDER IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT.

(2) AN ORDER OF THE BOARD MAY NOT BE STAYED PENDING
JUDICIAL REVIEW.

(D) THE BOARD MAY APPEAL A DECISION THAT REVERSES OR MODIFIES ITS
ORDER.

3–317.

IF A LICENSE HAS BEEN SUSPENDED OR REVOKED UNDER § 3–313 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, THE BOARD MAY REINSTATE THE LICENSE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH:

(1) THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE ORDER OF SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION; OR

(2) AN ORDER OF REINSTATEMENT ISSUED BY THE BOARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2