START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 158

Chapter 158

(House Bill 276)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Libraries – Funding

FOR the purpose of providing certain funding for each county public library system for
certain fiscal years; and generally relating to the public libraries in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–503
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

23–503.

(a) (1) The entire capital and operating cost of the minimum library program
for this State as a whole shall be shared as provided in this subsection.

(2) The State shall provide:

(i) Approximately 40 percent of the total cost of the minimum
program; and

(ii) Not less than 20 percent of the cost of the minimum program in
any county.

(3) The counties participating in the program together shall provide
through local taxes approximately 60 percent of the total statewide cost of the minimum
program.

(b) (1) Each county public library system that participates in the minimum
library program shall be provided for each resident of the county, to be used for operating
and capital expenses:

(i) For each of fiscal years 2011 through 2015 – $14.00;

(ii) For fiscal year 2016 – $14.27;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 158 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) For fiscal year 2017 – $14.54;

(iv) For fiscal year 2018 – $15.00;

(v) For fiscal year 2019 – $15.50;

(vi) For fiscal year 2020 – $16.00;

(vii) For fiscal year 2021 – $16.43;

(viii) For fiscal year 2022 – $17.10;

(ix) For fiscal year 2023 – $17.50;

(x) For fiscal year 2024 – $17.90;

(xi) For fiscal year 2025 – $18.30;

(xii) For fiscal year 2026 – $18.70; and

(xiii) For fiscal year 2027 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER
– $19.10.

(2) (i) The State shall share in this amount.

(ii) Any county may provide an amount greater than its share under
the cooperative program, but the State may not share in the excess.

(c) Any employer Social Security contributions required by federal law for any
employee in a county public library system shall remain the obligation of the employer.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2