START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 276 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 276 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Education - Libraries - Funding 
 
 
This bill codifies the intent of the General Assembly to provide enhanced funding to local 
library systems at levels established by Chapters 496 and 497 of 2022. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No impact. The bill codifies existing funding levels for local library systems. 
  
Local Effect:  No impact. The bill codifies existing funding levels for local library systems. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State and local governments share in the cost of funding local public 
library systems through the library aid formula, which establishes minimum State and local 
contributions. The formula distributes funds on the basis of county population and wealth. 
Less wealthy counties, as measured by net taxable income and assessable property tax base, 
receive relatively more aid than wealthier counties. A total program cost for each county 
and Baltimore City, which is shared by the State and local governments, equals a specified 
dollar amount per county or city resident ($17.10 in fiscal 2022). Generally, the State pays 
approximately 40% of the total statewide formula cost, with the per county amount 
determined on a wealth-equalized basis; however, no library board receives less than 20% 
of the program cost from the State. State aid for local libraries totaled $44.7 million in 
fiscal 2022, excluding retirement-related expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 276/ Page 2 
Under Chapters 496 and 497, the library aid program per resident amount is scheduled to 
increase annually through fiscal 2027, when per capita funding is set at $19.10. The bill 
codifies the intent of the General Assembly to maintain this level of funding. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 205 (Senator King, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2