START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 292 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Child Care Providers - Registration and Licensing - Exemptions 
 
 
This bill exempts a family child care home, large family child care home, and a child care 
center from State registration and licensing requirements if the entity (1) serves only 
dependent children of military personnel and (2) is located on a military base or federal 
property or is certified as a family child care provider or child development program by a 
branch of the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) or the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG). DOD 
or USCG or their agents, including an installation commander of a military base on which 
a family child care home, large family child care home, or a child care center is located, 
may assume responsibility for approving or determining which children may be served by 
the relevant child care providers. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Subject to limited exception, family child care homes, large family child 
care homes, and child care centers may not operate in the State unless they are 
registered/licensed. The State Board of Education is required to adopt regulations that 
relate to the registration of family child care homes and large family child care homes and 
the licensing and operation of child care centers. A family child care home is a residence 
in which family child care is provided for up to 8 children. A large family child care home 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 292/ Page 2 
is a residence in which family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more 
than 12 children. A child care center is an agency, institution, or establishment that, for part 
or all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, and at least twice a week, offers 
or provides child care to children who do not have the same parentage except as otherwise 
provided for in law or regulation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any family child care home, large family child care home, or 
child care center in the State that qualifies as a small business and meets the bill’s 
exemption criteria may benefit from the bill’s changes. Under the bill, such entities are no 
longer subject to licensing and registration by the Maryland State Department of Education. 
Assuming these small businesses are already subject to federal requirements, the bill may, 
in certain circumstances, reduce the need to meet duplicative State and federal registration 
and licensing requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 280 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Military Department; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
Enrolled - May 1, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2