START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 291 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 291 
(Delegates Guzzone and Cullison) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Clinical and Graduate Alcohol and Drug Counselors - 
Licensure 
 
 
This bill alters the qualifications to become licensed to practice as a clinical alcohol and 
drug counselor (LCADC) and to qualify to practice as a licensed graduate alcohol and drug 
counselor (LGADC) under supervision by specifying that the required master’s or doctoral 
degree must be in professional (rather than health and human services) counseling field 
from an accredited (rather than a regionally accredited) educational institution as approved 
by the State Board of Professional Counselors. The bill also repeals a second educational 
pathway for licensure as an LCADC and removes from statute specific coursework 
requirements to qualify for licensure as an LGADC. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Licensed Clinical Alcohol and Drug Counselors 
 
Under current law, an applicant for licensure as an LCADC must be at least age 18, of good 
moral character, and either (1) hold a master’s or doctoral degree in a health and human 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 291/ Page 2 
services counseling field from a regionally accredited education institution that is approved 
by the board or (2) hold a master’s degree from a regionally accredited educational 
institution and have completed a program of studies judged by the board to be substantially 
equivalent in subject matter as may be required by the board in regulation. 
 
The bill (1) alters the first educational pathway to specify that an applicant may hold a 
master’s or doctoral degree in a professional counseling field from an accredited 
educational institution (as opposed to a regionally accredited institution) that is approved 
by the board and (2) repeals the second educational pathway of a regionally accredited 
program approved by the board as substantially equivalent in subject matter. 
 
Under current law, an applicant must also (1) complete any additional educational 
requirements established by the board in regulation; (2) complete and provide 
documentation of completing at least two years and 2,000 hours of supervised experience 
in alcohol and drug counseling following the award of the master’s or doctoral degree; and 
(3) pass a board-approved examination and the law examination administered by the board. 
The bill does not alter these licensure requirements.  
 
Licensed Graduate Alcohol and Drug Counselors 
 
Under current law, to qualify to practice as an LGADC an individual must be at least 
age 18, of good moral character, and have a master’s or doctoral degree in a health and 
human services counseling field from a regionally accredited educational institution.  
 
The bill alters the above educational requirement to specify that an individual may hold a 
master’s or doctoral degree in a professional counseling field from an accredited 
educational institution (as opposed to a regionally accredited institution) and further 
specifies that the educational institution meet the same educational requirements as those 
for an LCADC. 
 
Under current law, an individual must also meet specific coursework requirements to 
practice as an LGADC:  a minimum of 27 semester credit hours or 41 quarter credit hours 
in alcohol and drug counselor training including (1) 3 semester credit hours or 5 quarter 
credit hours in each of 6 specified courses and (2) 3 semester credit hours or 5 quarter credit 
hours in any 3 of 5 specified courses. The bill removes these specific educational 
requirements from statute. 
 
However, Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 10.58.07.04 establishes coursework 
requirements to qualify for licensure as an LGADC that align with what is being removed 
from statute, specifically, a requirement for a minimum of 39 semester credit hours or 
56 quarter credit hours in alcohol and drug counselor training including (1) 3 semester 
credit hours or 5 quarter credit hours in each of 6 specified courses and (2) 3 semester credit 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 291/ Page 3 
hours or 5 quarter credit hours in any 3 of 5 specified courses. Furthermore, the coursework 
requirements under COMAR for an LGADC are identical to those established under 
COMAR 10.58.07.05 for an LCADC.  
 
Under current law, an individual may not practice as an LGADC without board approval 
and before practicing as an LGADC must pass both (1) a board-approved examination and 
(2) the law examination administered by the board. The bill does not alter these 
requirements. 
 
Additional Comments:  The board advises that the revisions in the bill make the 
credentialing process for LCADC’s and LGADC’s more consistent with the requirements 
for similar professions that the board regulates.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 14 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3