START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 219 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 219 
(St. Mary's County Delegation*) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
St. Mary's County - Golf Carts on Public Highways - Report 
 
 
This bill requires the St. Mary’s County Board of County Commissioners to produce a 
report recommending and describing the areas of St. Mary’s County that the board 
considers appropriate for the operation of unregistered golf carts on public highways, 
subject to specified standards. The report must include a detailed map of any areas the 
board considers appropriate for the operation of unregistered golf carts on public highways, 
including a delineation of all public highways contained within the area. By 
December 1, 2023, the board must submit the report to the House Environment and 
Transportation Committee, the Senate Judicial Proceedings Committee, and the 
St. Mary’s County Delegation to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The St. Mary’s County Board of County Commissioners can produce and 
submit the required report with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An area appropriate for the operation of golf carts on public highways 
must:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 219/ Page 2 
 
be an isolated area on an island or a peninsula bordering the Chesapeake Bay or its 
tidal tributaries; 
 
have available significant public or private docking facilities available to the public 
that would facilitate visitors to the area arriving by boat; 
 
be viable as a destination for the boating public as part of a network of tourist 
attractions throughout the Maryland portion of the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal 
tributaries; 
 
have available for visitors shopping, sightseeing, dining, charter fishing, beaches, 
pools, or water parks, or other attractions; and 
 
preferably contain no State highways or highways with a speed limit that exceeds 
30 miles per hour. 
 
Current Law:  Each motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer driven on a 
highway must be registered. Certain motor vehicles are exempt from this requirement, 
including:   
 
 
certain snowmobiles in Allegany and Garrett counties; and 
 
certain golf carts in Allegany County, on Smith Island, in the City of Crisfield in 
Somerset County, in the community of Golden Beach Patuxent Knolls in 
St. Mary’s County, in the Town of Vienna in Dorchester County, and on 
Hoopers Island and Taylors Island. 
 
A “motor vehicle” is defined as a vehicle that, unless otherwise specifically exempted, is 
self-propelled or propelled by electric power obtained from overhead electrical wires and 
not operated on rails. Certain vehicles, such as low-speed vehicles, bicycles, and motor 
scooters, are restricted to certain highways based on the maximum posted speed limit; they 
may be subject to different rules of the road than passenger cars and trucks. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 219/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3