START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 243 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 243 
(Delegates Korman and Solomon) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Baltimore City Young Readers Program and Young Readers Matching Grant 
Program - Alterations (Young Readers Program Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill transfers the Baltimore City Young Readers Program and the Young Readers 
Matching Grant Program from the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and 
Victim Services (GOCPYVS) to the Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) and requires 
the State Librarian to administer both programs. The bill requires the Governor to include 
$350,000 (rather than $250,000) in the annual budget bill for the Young Readers Matching 
Grant Program. Additionally, the bill authorizes public libraries to apply for program grants 
under the Young Readers Matching Grant Program. By December 1, 2024, and every other 
year thereafter, the Maryland State Library Board must report to the General Assembly on 
the effectiveness of the Young Readers Matching Grant Program and collect statistics and 
other information necessary for this purpose. 
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2025 for additional 
grant funding and staff; future years reflect ongoing administrative costs and the bill’s 
mandated appropriation to the grant program. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
increases a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  For a county or local library that is an affiliated service and applies for and 
receives a matching grant, county revenues and expenditures increase, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 243/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In fiscal 2016, the Governor’s Office for Children implemented the 
Governor’s Young Readers Program in Baltimore City with funds from the Children’s 
Cabinet Interagency Fund. The program is a partnership between GOCPYVS, the 
Banneker-Douglass Museum Foundation, and Dolly Parton’s Imagination Library to mail 
a free book each month to all children up to the age of five in Baltimore City, regardless of 
family income. 
 
Chapters 446 and 447 of 2022 codified the Baltimore City Young Readers Program in 
GOCPYVS and mandated annual funding of $200,000 for the program beginning in 
fiscal 2024. The purpose of the program is to work with an “early reader organization” to 
mail free, high-quality books to children in Baltimore City. 
 
The Acts also established the Young Readers Matching Grant Program to provide matching 
grants to an “affiliated service” to support the establishment and operation of the affiliated 
service; the Governor must include $250,000 in the annual budget bill for the matching 
grant program beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2024 State budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $246,193 in funds for the Baltimore City Young Readers Program and 
$500,000 for the Young Readers Matching Grant Program ($746,193 in total for both 
programs). These funds are assumed to be transferred from GOCPYVS to MSLA in 
fiscal 2024. Beginning in fiscal 2025, general fund expenditures increase by an additional 
$100,000 for the Young Readers Matching Grant Program, reflecting the increased 
mandated appropriation established by the bill. 
 
MSLA advises that additional staff is required to operate the expanded grant program when 
it is transferred to MSLA on October 1, 2023. Thus, MSLA administrative expenditures 
increase by $42,300 in fiscal 2024, which reflects the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one half-time administrative officer to receive and 
approve grant applications and distribute grant awards and associated operating expenses. 
The estimate assumes these administrative costs are part of the annual mandated 
appropriation and remaining funds are used for grants. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, a county that is an affiliated service may apply for 
additional matching grants to establish and operate an affiliate service to gift books to 
eligible children. For a county that applies for and receives a matching grant, revenues and 
expenditures increase accordingly. 
 
The bill also authorizes public libraries (in addition to an affiliated service) to apply for 
grant funds under the Young Readers Matching Grant Program. Thus, once the bill takes 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 243/ Page 3 
effect, local public library systems may also be eligible to receive additional funds, to the 
extent they meet program requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 300 (Senator McCray) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services; Maryland State Library Agency; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - May 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2023 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3