START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 328

Chapter 328

(House Bill 278)

AN ACT concerning

Health Occupations – Clinical Nurse Specialists – Prescribing

FOR the purpose of defining “clinical nurse specialist” and “practice as a clinical nurse
specialist” for the purpose of authorizing clinical nurse specialists to prescribe drugs
and durable medical equipment under regulations adopted by the State Board of
Nursing; altering the definition of “authorized prescriber” for purposes of the
Maryland Pharmacy Act to include clinical nurse specialists; authorizing a licensed
physician to personally prepare and dispense a prescription written by a clinical
nurse specialist; and generally relating to the prescription authority of clinical nurse
specialists.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 8–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 8–514
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–101(b) and 12–102(c)(2)(iv)2.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

8–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Advanced practice registered nurse” means an individual who:

(1) (i) Is licensed by the Board to practice registered nursing; or
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 328 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Has a multistate licensure privilege to practice registered
nursing under the Nurse Licensure Compact; and

(2) Is certified by the Board to practice as:

(i) A nurse practitioner;

(ii) A nurse anesthetist;

(iii) A nurse midwife; or

(iv) A clinical nurse specialist.

8–514.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS:

(I) 1. LICENSED IS LICENSED BY THE BOARD TO PRACTICE
REGISTERED NURSING; OR

2. HAS A MULTISTATE LICENSURE PRIVILEGE TO
PRACTICE REGISTERED NURSING UNDER THE NURSE LICENSURE COMPACT; AND

(II) CERTIFIED IS CERTIFIED BY THE BOARD TO PRACTICE AS A
CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST; AND

(III) AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS AND DURABLE
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT UNDER REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE BOARD.

(3) (I) “PRACTICE AS A CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST” MEANS TO:

1. PROVIDE DIRECT CARE TO PATIENTS WITH COMPLEX
NEEDS;

2. ACT AS A CONSULTANT TO ANOTHER HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER AS NEEDED;

3. CONDUCT HEALTH–RELATED RESEARCH; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 328

4. PROVIDE EDUCATION AND GUIDANCE FOR STAFF
NURSES.

(II) “PRACTICE AS A CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST” INCLUDES:

1. ORDERING, PERFORMING, AND INTERPRETING
LABORATORY TESTS;

2. ORDERING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS AND USING THE
FINDINGS OR RESULTS IN THE CARE OF PATIENTS;

3. PRESCRIBING DRUGS AND DURABLE MEDICAL
EQUIPMENT AS PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION UNDER
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE BOARD;

4. ORDERING HOME HEALTH AND HOSPICE CARE; AND

5. INITIATING, MONITORING, AND ALTERING
APPROPRIATE THERAPIES OR TREATMENTS.

(B) PRACTICE AS A CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST IS GOVERNED BY RULES
AND REGULATIONS THAT ARE ADOPTED UNDER § 8–205 OF THIS TITLE AND THAT
CONCERN ADDITIONAL ACTS IN THE PRACTICE OF REGISTERED NURSING.

12–101.

(b) “Authorized prescriber” means any licensed dentist, licensed dental hygienist
with prescriptive authority under § 4–206.4 of this article, licensed physician, licensed
podiatrist, licensed veterinarian, advanced practice REGISTERED nurse with prescriptive
authority under § 8–508 OR § 8–514 TITLE 8 of this article, licensed nurse anesthetist, or
other individual authorized by law to prescribe prescription or nonprescription drugs or
devices.

12–102.

(c) (2) This title does not prohibit:

(iv) A licensed physician who complies with the requirements of item
(ii) of this paragraph from personally preparing and dispensing a prescription written by:

2. [A nurse practitioner who is authorized to practice under
Title 8, Subtitle 3] AN ADVANCED PRACTICE REGISTERED NURSE WITH
PRESCRIPTIVE AUTHORITY UNDER § 8–508 OR § 8–514 TITLE 8 of this article and is
working with the physician in the same office setting; or

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 328 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4