START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 273 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 273 
(Delegate Alston, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Environmental Health Specialists - Revisions 
 
 
This bill (1) alters the educational and experience requirements for applicants seeking 
licensure as an environmental health specialist (EHS); (2) alters the grounds for which the 
State Board of Environmental Health Specialists (BEHS) may take disciplinary action 
against an applicant or licensee; and (3) repeals certain requirements for an applicant who 
is retaking the licensing examination to become an EHS. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes are largely technical in nature and do not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local governmental operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by BEHS before 
the individual may practice as an EHS in the State. 
 
Educational and Experience Requirements 
 
Under current law, three possible combinations of education and training can lead to 
licensure as an EHS. Under specified circumstances, BEHS is authorized to waive certain 
educational or training requirements for an applicant to qualify for examination. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 273/ Page 2 
Option 1:  
Training:  12 months in an environmental health specialist-in-training (EHSIT) program; 
and  
Education:  a bachelor’s degree in the chemical, physical, biological, or environmental 
sciences that includes (1) 60 semester credit hours or equivalent quarter credit hours of 
chemical, physical, biological, or environmental sciences, including one laboratory course 
in two of the following fields:  chemistry, physics, biology, geographic information 
systems, or soil science and (2) a course in mathematics. 
 
Option 2:  
Training:  24 months in an EHSIT program; and 
Education:  a bachelor’s degree that includes (1) 30 semester credit hours or equivalent 
quarter credit hours of chemical, physical, biological, or environmental sciences, including 
one laboratory course in two of the following fields:  chemistry, physics, biology, 
geographic information systems, or soil science and (2) a course in mathematics. 
 
Option 3:  
Training:  a 3-month internship; and 
Education:  a master’s degree in public or environmental health science that includes 
(1) 30 semester credit hours or 45 quarter credit hours of chemical, physical, biological, or 
environmental sciences – obtained at the baccalaureate or master’s level – including 
one laboratory course in two of the following fields:  chemistry, physics, biology, 
geographic information systems, or soil science and (2) a course in mathematics. 
 
For Option 1, the bill repeals the requirement that an applicant’s baccalaureate degree be 
in the chemical, physical, biological, or environmental sciences and reduces the number of 
semester credit hours or equivalent quarter credit hours of chemical, physical, biological, 
or environmental sciences that the degree must include from 60 to 30. 
 
For Options 1 and 3, the bill eliminates specific laboratory course requirements for both 
baccalaureate and master’s degrees and instead specifies that the degrees must include 
laboratory coursework as required in regulations adopted by BEHS. 
 
The bill repeals Option 2 as a pathway to licensure, including BEHS’ authorization to 
waive the requirement that an applicant have 24 months of experience in an EHSIT 
program if the applicant has at least 12 months of such experience and the written support 
of the applicant’s employer. 
 
Administration of Licensing Examination 
 
Under current law, BEHS must give an examination to applicants at least once a year and 
notify all qualified applicants of the time and place an examination is to be held. An 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 273/ Page 3 
applicant who fails an examination may retake the examination as provided in the rules 
and regulations adopted by BEHS. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that an applicant for reexamination must submit an 
application to BEHS and pay a specified reexamination fee. 
 
Disciplinary Grounds 
 
Under current law, BEHS, on the affirmative vote of a majority of its members, may deny 
any applicant licensure, reprimand any licensee, place a licensee on probation, or suspend 
or revoke a license, if an applicant or licensee violates any one of 16 disciplinary grounds, 
including fraudulently or deceptively obtaining or attempting to obtain a license; 
committing an act of gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct while performing the 
duties of an EHS; or violating any rule or regulation adopted by BEHS. 
 
The bill broadens one of the grounds under which BEHS may take disciplinary action to 
include committing any act of misfeasance or malfeasance while performing the duties of 
an EHS. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 399 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 31, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3