START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 339 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 339 
(Delegate White, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission - Reporting and 
Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends, from June 30, 2024, to June 30, 2026, the termination date for the 
Maryland Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The bill also extends until  
December 1, 2025, the deadline by which the commission must submit a final report of its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The commission can continue its operations with existing resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The commission, as established by Chapter 41 of 2019, must:   
 
 
hold public regional hearings in areas where a lynching of an African American by 
a White mob has been documented;  
 
receive recommendations from the public, including from families and communities 
affected by racially motivated lynchings, for addressing, engaging, and reconciling 
affected communities, including the erection of memorial plaques or signage at or 
near sites of racially motivated lynchings; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 339/ Page 2 
 
make recommendations for addressing the legacy of lynching that are rooted in the 
spirit of restorative justice. 
 
In conducting the required hearings, the commission may research (1) cases of racially 
motivated lynchings that are not documented but which are brought to the commission’s 
attention and (2) the involvement of government entities and news media in cases of 
racially motivated lynching. 
 
Bowie State University, in consultation with the Maryland Lynching Memorial Project, 
provides staff for the commission, and the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) provides 
a staff member to assist the commission. The OAG staff member is authorized to issue 
subpoenas for a witness to testify or for the production of documents in connection with 
any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission. 
 
A commission member may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for 
travel expenses. 
 
As originally enacted, the commission was to terminate June 30, 2022, and submit a final 
report by December 1, 2021. Chapter 92 of 2021 extended, until June 30, 2024, the 
termination date of the commission and required a final report to be submitted by 
December 1, 2023. 
 
Additional Comments:  A required interim report of the commission’s findings and 
recommendations was submitted to the Governor and the General Assembly in 
September 2020. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 297 of 2021 (which was enacted as Chapter 92) and HB 1637 of 2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 478 (Senator Sydnor, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Office of the Attorney 
General; University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 339/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3