START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 319 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 319 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Pesticides - PFAS Testing - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) – in consultation with 
the Maryland Department of the Environment, the Maryland Department of Health, and 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency – to study the use of perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in pesticides in the State. By November 1, 2023, MDA 
must report its findings and recommendations to (1) the Governor; (2) the Senate 
Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment; and (3) the House Health and 
Government Operations Committee. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements are anticipated to be handled with existing 
budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must include: 
 
 
an analysis of the health and environmental impacts of PFAS in pesticides in the 
State; 
 
the identification of testing methods capable of testing for PFAS in pesticides;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 319/ Page 2 
 
an examination of characteristics that distinguish testing methods for PFAS that are 
validated for drinking water from testing methods that are validated for pesticides;  
 
a status update on federal efforts to certify a method for testing for PFAS in 
pesticides; and  
 
a status update on state and federal efforts to regulate or ban the use of pesticides 
containing PFAS.  
 
Current Law:  The State Chemist, within MDA, is responsible for administering the 
Maryland Pesticide Registration and Labeling Law subject to the supervision of the 
Secretary of Agriculture. The law requires pesticides to be registered before being 
distributed in the State and establishes requirements for the packaging and labeling of 
pesticides. A pesticide must comply with federal pesticide laws and regulations before it 
can be registered by the Secretary. MDA regulations establish that a person may only use 
or recommend pesticides that are registered with the department.  
 
The Maryland Pesticide Registration and Labeling Law prohibits the distribution, sale, or 
transportation in the State of unregistered, adulterated, or misbranded pesticides and 
authorizes the Secretary to adopt rules and regulations providing for the collection and 
examination of samples of pesticides. The Secretary has the authority to require the 
submission of toxicological, environmental, or health effects data, or the complete 
formulation of any pesticide, when necessary to carry out the purposes of the registration 
and labeling law. The Secretary may issue and enforce a written stop-sale order to the 
registrant, owner, custodian, or distributor of any pesticide that (1) the Secretary finds is in 
violation of the Maryland Pesticide Registration and Labeling Law or an implementing 
regulation; (2) has been found by federal or State authorities to cause unreasonable adverse 
effects to humans, animals, or the environment; or (3) is in violation of any provision of 
federal pesticide laws or regulations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 158 (Senator Hettleman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 319/ Page 3 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2023 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3