START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 333 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 333 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals - Financial Assistance - Medical Bill Reimbursement Process 
 
   
This bill modifies requirements relating to a specified refund process for patients who paid 
for hospital services in calendar 2017 through 2021 and were eligible for free care. The bill 
(1) alters the agencies with which the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) 
must coordinate in the development of the refund process and the responsibilities of those 
agencies; (2) alters the refund process; (3) requires the Health Education and Advocacy 
Unit (HEAU) to assist patients in obtaining reimbursement; (4) requires hospitals to 
reimburse State agencies for costs incurred to implement the refund process; (5) authorizes 
tax information to be disclosed to a hospital, HSCRC, and other State agencies involved 
with implementation of the refund process, as specified; (6) delays the due date for the 
2024 HSCRC reporting requirement; (7) requires implementation of Option 3 from 
HSCRC’s December 2022 Free Hospital Care Refund Process report; and (8) makes 
failure to comply by a hospital an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and 
terminates on termination of Chapter 683 of 2022 (June 30, 2025). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase in FY 2024 and 2025 for affected State 
agencies to implement the refund process, as discussed below. As hospitals must reimburse 
State entities for costs incurred, State revenues increase correspondingly, as discussed 
below. The bill’s new penalty provisions and imposition of existing penalty provisions are 
not anticipated to have a material impact on State finances or operations. Generally, there 
is no net effect on State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential operational and/or fiscal impact on local education agencies 
(LEAs), as discussed below. The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not 
have a material impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 333/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Current Requirements under Chapter 683 of 2022 
 
Chapter 683 of 2022 requires HSCRC, in coordination with the Department of Human 
Services (DHS), the State-designated health information exchange (HIE), the 
Comptroller’s Office, and the Maryland Hospital Association, to develop a process (known 
as the refund process) that:  
 
 
identifies patients who paid for hospital services who may have qualified for free 
care at the time that care was given during calendar 2017 through 2021;  
 
provides reimbursement to the identified patients, which may be applied 
incrementally;  
 
ensures that a patient’s alternate address is used if the patient required an alternate 
address for safety reasons; and  
 
determines how HSCRC, DHS, and the Comptroller’s Office should share with or 
disclose relevant information, including tax information, to the minimum extent 
necessary, to the hospital and in accordance with federal and State confidentiality 
laws for the purpose of carrying out the required process.  
 
HSCRC must report twice (by January 1, 2023, and January 1, 2024) to specified 
committees of the General Assembly on the development and implementation by hospitals 
of the refund process. If the refund process requires legislation for implementation, 
HSCRC must include legislative recommendations in the 2023 report; if not, hospitals must 
implement the refund process by January 1, 2023. Chapter 683 terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
Initial Report on the Refund Process Informs the Requirements of the Bill 
 
Per HSCRC’s December 2022 Free Hospital Care Refund Process report, stakeholders 
discussed the potential refund process during the 2022 interim but were unable to reach 
consensus on a process. The report noted that statutory changes are required to ensure that 
all entities involved in the final process are compliant with federal and State data security 
laws and to clarify roles and responsibilities for hospitals, the HIE, and State agencies in 
order to remove barriers that currently prevent implementation.  
 
Stakeholders considered four refund process options. Under Option 3, hospitals must 
identify all patients who paid out-of-pocket expenses in calendar 2017 through 2021. The 
Comptroller’s Office must take the hospital data and match it with tax data to determine 
which patients had incomes at or below 200% of the federal poverty level (FPL) during the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 333/ Page 3 
year of the service date(s). Data for patients identified to have incomes at or below 200% 
FPL must be returned to hospitals. Data unable to be matched with tax data must be shared 
with DHS (and the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE), if applicable) to match with enrollment data for certain 
public assistance programs. Data on patients identified as being enrolled in such programs 
must be returned to hospitals. Hospitals would then contact patients to inform them that 
they may be due a refund. At the patient’s request, the hospital would determine if the 
patient was eligible for free care and, if so, provide a refund.  
 
Provisions in the Bill 
 
Responsibilities for State Agencies:  The bill alters the agencies with which HSCRC is 
required to coordinate on the development of the refund process by removing the HIE and 
adding MDH, MSDE, and HEAU.  
 
The bill also requires HEAU in the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to assist patients 
identified as being eligible to obtain reimbursement under the refund process. MDH, DHS, 
the Comptroller’s Office, MSDE, and each hospital must report to HSCRC information on 
the refund process developed, in the time and manner determined by HSCRC.  
 
HSCRC, MDH, DHS, the Comptroller’s Office, MSDE, and each hospital must disclose 
(1) to each other, to the minimum extent necessary, relevant information, including tax 
information, necessary for implementation of the refund process and (2) to HEAU, relevant 
information necessary for HEAU to assist patients in obtaining reimbursement, as 
specified. If HEAU requests information from HSCRC, MDH, DHS, the Comptroller’s 
Office, MSDE, or a hospital, the information must be provided within 10 business days 
after the date of the receipt of the request. 
 
The bill may not be construed to make a hospital responsible for the confidentiality of the 
information in possession of each of these State entities. 
 
Alterations Related to the Refund Process:  In identifying patients who may be eligible for 
reimbursement, the refund process must, under the bill, only identify patients who paid 
more than $25 for hospital services who may have qualified for free care on the date the 
hospital service was provided during calendar years 2017 through 2021.  
 
The refund process must require each hospital to consider (1) tax data from the 
Comptroller’s Office as de facto evidence of a patient’s income and (2) data from MDH, 
DHS, and MSDE as de facto evidence of a patient’s presumptive eligibility for free care. 
The refund process must (1) require each hospital to provide refunds to qualifying patients 
and (2) may not require a hospital to provide a patient with a refund if the patient previously 
was denied free care because of a failed asset test for the identified date of service. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 333/ Page 4 
Additionally, under the bill, if reimbursements are provided incrementally and less than 
5% of the estimated reimbursements are made each year during the first increment, HSCRC 
is not required to implement additional increments of the process.  
 
The bill delays the due date of HSCRC’s second report on the development and 
implementation by hospitals of the refund process from January 1, 2024, to 
October 1, 2024. 
 
The bill requires that each hospital, HSCRC, the Comptroller’s Office, MDH, DHS, and 
MSDE implement Option 3 from the Free Hospital Care Refund Process report submitted 
by HSCRC in December 2022. Accordingly, a patient who paid out-of-pocket expenses for 
services must qualify for refunds if, based on the following:  (1) the Comptroller’s Office 
determines that the patient’s family income was at or below 200% FPL during the year of 
service date(s); or (2) DHS, MDH, or MSDE determines that, during the year of service 
date(s), the patient lived in a household with children enrolled in the free and reduced-cost 
meal program or received benefits through the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program (SNAP), the State’s energy assistance program, or the federal Special 
Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). However, the bill 
specifies that the Comptroller’s Office, DHS, MDH, MSDE, HSCRC, and each hospital 
may not implement the alternative approach included with Option 3 in the HSCRC report. 
 
Hospital Responsibilities and Penalties:  Each hospital must reimburse HSCRC, the 
Comptroller’s Office, MDH, DHS, MSDE, and HEAU for the costs incurred by each State 
entity to implement the refund process. Calculations for each hospital’s share must be 
based on the hospital’s proportion of the total number of patients who were identified by 
the State entity as potentially eligible for reimbursement in a designated year, as 
determined by HSCRC. HSCRC must provide each hospital with the reimbursement 
amount due to the appropriate State entity, as specified.  
 
Each hospital must also create a webpage that includes specified information about the 
refund process. If a patient is entitled to a single refund per year in an amount of $25 or 
less, the hospital may, but is not required to, provide the reimbursement.  
 
If a hospital fails to provide refunds to patients who qualify as required under the bill, 
HSCRC may impose a fine of up to $50,000 per violation. In determining the amount of 
the fine to be imposed, HSCRC must consider the appropriateness of the fine in relation to 
the severity of the violation. A violation of the refund process by a hospital is an unfair, 
abusive, or deceptive trade under and subject to enforcement and penalty provisions of 
MCPA.   
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 333/ Page 5 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer.  
  
The Consumer Protection Division in OAG is responsible for enforcing MCPA and 
investigating the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to 
conciliate the matter, issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A 
merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and 
up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties 
that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on 
conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.   
 
State Fiscal Effect:  HSCRC advises it can implement any changes to the refund process 
using existing personnel.  
 
Under the bill, the Comptroller’s Office must match hospital data with tax data. General 
fund expenditures for the Comptroller increase by approximately $28,000 in fiscal 2024 
and 2025 only for contractual staffing costs to match data sets.  
 
MDH, DHS, and MSDE must take patient data unable to be matched with tax data and 
match it with other public benefits program enrollment data. MDH advises that it can match 
data with WIC enrollment using existing budgeted resources. This analysis assumes that 
DHS incurs additional general fund expenditures for data matching with SNAP and State 
energy assistance program data; however, the department did not provide a specific 
estimate of these costs. MSDE also likely incurs additional general fund expenditures to 
determine if any patients lived in households with children in the free and reduced-cost 
meal program. MSDE advises that it must obtain this data from LEAs.   
 
OAG’s HEAU must assist patients identified as eligible in obtaining reimbursement under 
the refund process. OAG may require additional staff to provide assistance to patients; 
however, OAG did not respond to a request for information for this fiscal and policy note. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 333/ Page 6 
Each State entity that incurs costs under the bill is eligible for reimbursement from 
hospitals; presumably the reimbursement requirement applies to costs absorbed within 
existing budgets. Accordingly, revenues increase for the Comptroller’s Office, DHS, and 
potentially MSDE, OAG, and HSCRC in fiscal 2024 and/or 2025 to reflect reimbursement 
from hospitals for costs incurred to comply with the bill and implement the refund process. 
It is unclear whether these monies would be treated as reimbursable revenues or special 
fund revenues (even though there may not be a dedicated special fund to receive them); 
reimbursable or special fund expenditures increase subsequently, presumably replacing 
other (in many cases, general fund) appropriations.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  MSDE advises that it does not determine eligibility for the free and 
reduced-cost meal program; instead, LEAs identify eligible students using data from DHS 
or by using the Household Application for Free and Reduced-Price Meals. Thus, LEAs 
must provide MSDE with data on households with children in the free and reduced-cost 
meal program so that MSDE may match the data with patient data provided by hospitals. 
This may have an operational and/or fiscal impact on LEAs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 404 (Senators Hershey and Hayes) – Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Energy Administration; Comptroller’s 
Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6