START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 379 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 379 
(Delegate Jackson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation - Name and Organization of Office 
 
 
This bill expressly establishes the Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) under the 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). 
As a result, the Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) is renamed to 
OFR. Additionally, the bill splits the position of Deputy Commissioner into (1) Deputy 
Commissioner for Depository Activities (who must have at least five years of experience 
in the regulation or management of financial institutions) and (2) Deputy Commissioner 
for Non-Depository Activities (who must have at least five years of experience in the 
regulation or management of persons required to be licensed or registered under the 
Financial Institutions Article or the Commercial Law Article). The bill also makes several 
conforming changes. Finally, the bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly that 
these changes are a nonsubstantive revision (and do not affect the powers and duties of the 
commissioner or the office). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  One-time costs to revise signage and other related items associated with the 
bill’s changes can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. The salary and benefits 
associated with the new position can also be absorbed with existing funds. No effect on 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 379/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  OCFR regulates State-chartered and State-licensed financial institutions 
operating in Maryland. These include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered 
banks, trust companies, bank holding companies, and credit unions, as well as 
non-depository entities such as money transmitters, check cashers, consumer lenders, sales 
finance companies, installment lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan originators, 
credit services businesses, debt management services providers, debt settlement services 
providers, consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies. The activities of the office 
are set out in Titles 1 through 7, 11, and 12 of the Financial Institutions Article. In addition, 
the office supervises certain activities found in Title 12 and Title 14 of the Commercial 
Law Article and Title 7 of the Business Regulation Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 929 (Senator Griffith) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2