START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 302 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 302 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Rare Disease Advisory Council 
 
 
This bill establishes a Rare Disease Advisory Council to enhance research and provide 
policy recommendations on matters related to individuals living with rare diseases in the 
State. The council’s general duties include (1) performing a survey to establish the needs 
of rare disease patients, caregivers, and health care providers in the State; (2) developing 
policy recommendations; (3) creating a publicly accessible webpage; (4) providing an 
annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly; and (5) providing 
recommendations to address the needs of individuals living with rare diseases in the State. 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must staff the council. Members may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses under the 
standard State travel regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can staff and additional State agencies can participate in the council 
using existing budgeted resources. To the extent the council receives federal grant funding, 
federal fund revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 302/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Council Membership 
 
The council comprises (1) one member of the Senate, appointed by the President of the 
Senate; (2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the House; 
(3) the Secretary of Health (or designee); (4) the chair of the State Advisory Council on 
Hereditary and Congenital Disorders (or designee); (5) one representative of the Office of 
Minority Health and Health Disparities (or designee), designated by the director of the 
office; (6) one representative of Maryland Medicaid, designated by the Secretary; 
(7) one representative of the Maryland Insurance Administration, designated by the 
Maryland Insurance Commissioner; and (8) 14 members appointed by the Governor. 
 
Gubernatorial appointees include:  (1) one representative of an academic research 
institution that receives rare disease grant funding; (2) one geneticist licensed and 
practicing in the State; (3) one registered nurse or advanced practice nurse licensed and 
practicing in the State with experience treating rare diseases; (4) one physician licensed in 
the State with experience treating rare diseases; (5) one hospital administrator (or designee) 
from a Maryland hospital that provides care to individuals with rare diseases; 
(6) one pharmacist licensed in the State with experience dispensing drugs used to treat rare 
diseases; (7) two individuals diagnosed with a rare disease; (8) one caregiver of an 
individual with a rare disease; (9) one representative of a rare disease patient organization 
in 
the 
State; 
(10) 
one 
representative 
of 
the 
biopharmaceutical 
industry; 
(11) one representative of a health insurance carrier providing coverage in the State; 
(12) one member of the scientific community who is engaged in rare disease research, and 
(13) one representative of an organization that provides care management for individuals 
enrolled in the Medicaid Rare and Expensive Case Management Program. 
 
Members of the council must be full-time residents of the State. 
 
Council Duties 
 
The initial meeting of the council must occur by December 30, 2024. Until 
October 1, 2025, the council must meet at least once per month in person or through an 
online meeting platform. After October 1, 2025, the council must meet at least 
once per quarter in person or through an online meeting platform. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 302/ Page 3 
Policy Assessment and Development 
 
In the first year, the council must convene public hearings, make inquiries, and solicit 
comments from the public to develop a survey assessing the needs of individuals living 
with rare diseases, their caregivers, and health care providers in the State. 
 
The council must also (1) consult with experts on rare diseases to develop policy 
recommendations, as specified; (2) research and make recommendations to State agencies 
and insurers on the impact of specified utilization management procedures on the provision 
of treatment and care for patients; (3) establish best practices and protocols to include in 
State planning related to natural disasters and public health emergencies or other 
emergency declarations, as specified; (4) evaluate and make recommendations regarding 
coverage or prescription drugs for rare disease patients, as specified; (5) publish a list of 
existing and publicly accessible resources, as specified; (6) identify areas of unmet needs 
for research that can inform future studies and reports by the council; (7) identify and 
distribute educational resources for health care providers to foster recognition and optimize 
treatment of rare diseases in the State; and (8) research and identify best practices to ensure 
continuity of care for individuals living with rare diseases transitioning from pediatric to 
adult care. 
 
The council must provide opportunities for the public to hear updates and provide input on 
council activities. The council must maintain a webpage to provide a list of resources and 
facilitate public communication regarding the council’s activities, including meeting 
minutes and notices of upcoming meetings, and the ability to submit public comments. 
 
Reporting 
 
By December 1, 2024, and annually thereafter, the council must submit a report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly. The report must describe the council’s activities and 
funding sources (including grants that were applied for and accepted and the remaining 
balances of any current grants), as well as provide recommendations on ways to address 
the needs of individuals living with rare diseases in the State. 
 
Council Funding 
 
The council may solicit funds by applying for federal or State grants. The council must 
establish a method to securely hold and distribute funds to support its duties. 
 
Current Law:  COMAR 10.10.01.03, which governs medical laboratory testing, defines 
“rare disease” as (1) a disabling, chronically debilitating, or life-threatening disease or 
condition that has fewer than 200,000 affected individuals in the United States, which is 
equivalent to a prevalence of fewer than 1 individual per 2,000 individuals in the population 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 302/ Page 4 
or an incidence of fewer than 1 in 10,000; (2) a disabling or life-threatening disease or 
condition that is listed as a rare disease by the National Institutes of Health Office of Rare 
Diseases; or (3) a disabling or life-threatening disease or condition in which more than 
200,000 individuals are affected if a subpopulation of the disease or condition is equal to a 
prevalence of fewer than 1 individual per 2,000 or the incidence of the disease or condition 
is fewer than 5 in 10,000 in a defined community. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center estimates that 
more than 7,000 rare diseases affect 25 million to 30 million Americans. Risk factors are 
often genetic. Rare diseases include conditions impairing a person’s physical or mental 
ability and many are life-threatening. According to the National Organization for Rare 
Disorders, 20 states have a rare disease advisory council. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 188 (Senator Lam, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Health; 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4