START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 397 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 397 
(Delegate Watson) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Investment Portfolio - Investment Thresholds - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires the State Treasurer to adopt regulations establishing a State investment 
policy that specifies thresholds for maximum investment in each asset class in which the 
State Treasurer is authorized to invest or reinvest unexpended or surplus money. The bill 
also repeals the maximum threshold of 10% of total investments for investments the 
State Treasurer makes in the commercial paper asset class. Prior to the effective date of the 
bill, the State Treasurer must notify in writing the chief executive and governing body of 
each local governmental unit required to have a local investment policy under § 17-205 of 
the Local Government Article. The State Treasurer must also provide the local government 
with an opportunity to review, revise, and report any changes in the local investment 
policies, as appropriate. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and the State Treasurer must 
adopt regulations under the bill by December 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase by an indeterminant amount beginning 
in FY 2024 to the extent higher investment returns are realized through increased 
investment in commercial paper under the bill, as discussed below. State expenditures are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Revenues for certain local government entities may be minimally affected, 
as discussed below. Local expenditures are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 397/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Treasurer may invest or reinvest unexpended or surplus money 
in:  
 
 
an obligation for which the United States has pledged its faith and credit for the 
payment of the principal and interest; 
 
an obligation that a federal agency or a federal instrumentality has issued in 
accordance with an act of Congress; 
 
an obligation issued and unconditionally guaranteed by a supranational issuer; 
 
a repurchase agreement collateralized in an amount not less than 102% of the 
principal amount by an obligation of the United States, its agencies, or 
instrumentalities; 
 
bankers’ acceptances guaranteed by a financial institution with a short-term debt 
rating in the highest letter and numerical rating by at least one nationally recognized 
statistical rating organization as designated by either the United States Securities 
and Exchange Commission or the State Treasurer; 
 
with respect to amounts treated by the Internal Revenue Service as bond sale 
proceeds only, bonds, notes, or other obligations of investment grade in the highest 
quality letter and numerical rating by at least one nationally recognized statistical 
rating organization as designated by the United States Securities and Exchange 
Commission issued by or on behalf of this or any other state or any agency, 
department, county, municipal or public corporation, special district, authority, or 
political subdivision thereof, or in any fund or trust that invests only in securities of 
the type described in this item; 
 
commercial paper that has received the highest letter and numerical rating by at least 
two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations as designated by the 
United States Securities and Exchange Commission provided that such commercial 
paper does not exceed 10% of the total investments made by the State Treasurer; 
 
money market mutual funds with certain restrictions; and 
 
any investment portfolio created under the Maryland Local Government Investment 
Pool. 
 
The State Treasurer is required to report to the General Assembly annually by January 3 
on investment activities. At a minimum, the report must contain the following information 
for general fund investments and all other investments: 
 
 
the inventory of investments with maturity dates and the book and market value as 
of June 30; 
 
the earned net income; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 397/ Page 3 
 
the percentage share of each category of investment in the portfolio; and 
 
sales of investments prior to the maturity date. 
 
The State Treasurer is required to make investments with care, skill, prudence, and 
diligence with due regard for minimizing risk while maximizing return. The State Treasurer 
must use competitive purchasing practices except when impractical. Investments must 
reasonably match the State’s cash flow so that sufficient funds are available to pay 
obligations as they become due. The State Treasurer must also maintain a reasonable 
amount of cash on hand for unanticipated needs. Investments must be made accordance 
with a written investment policy, and they must be made so that securities and collateral 
may be priced on a market-to-market basis. The State Treasurer must also avoid the 
enhancement of his/her personal financial position and avoid enhancing the personal 
financial positions of employees who are responsible for managing investments with State 
funds. 
 
The State Treasurer must attempt to use minority business enterprises for brokerage and 
investment management services for its investments to the greatest extent feasible. 
 
Local Investment Policy 
 
Local governments are required to establish and follow an investment policy for specified 
public funds that is consistent with guidelines established by the State Treasurer. For this 
requirement, local government includes Baltimore City, counties, municipalities, 
community colleges, the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission, public corporations, 
and authorities of the State that issue debt. Investments by a board of education and a 
library board must comply with the respective county local investment policy. The public 
funds subject to the required policy do not include revenues held as part of a pension fund, 
other postemployment fund, or trust fund account. Borrowing of funds for the express 
purpose of investing those funds is prohibited. 
 
The Maryland Code of Regulations (COMAR 25.03.03.03) requires that a local 
government investment policy meets or exceeds standards published by two nationally 
recognized financial organizations that are recognized by the State Treasurer:  the 
Municipal Treasurer’s Association; and the Government Finance Officers Association. 
COMAR 25.03.03.04 requires that local government units invest in only those types of 
securities authorized by the State Finance and Procurement Article § 6-222(a), thus 
aligning permissible investments of local governments with limits that must be followed 
by the State Treasurer. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill provides the State Treasurer with more flexibility to manage its 
investment portfolio and repeals the maximum threshold of 10% of total investments for 
investments the State Treasurer makes in the commercial paper asset class. The 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 397/ Page 4 
State Treasurer notes that a recent survey of AAA-rated states found that many of these 
states do not limit the maximum investment in commercial paper. For states that do 
establish a threshold on investment in commercial paper, these thresholds can be as high 
as 50% of total investments. 
 
The State Treasurer advises that approximately $2 billion (9.3%) of its estimated current 
$21.8 billion total investment portfolio is in the commercial paper asset class, and the 
percentage invested in commercial paper would likely increase under the bill. The bill 
would bring the State more in line with other top-rated states, which could potentially yield 
a higher rate of return for the State’s investments. However, the amount of additional 
revenue cannot be reliably estimated as it would depend on how each investment performs 
relative to other investment classes. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local governments are required to establish and follow an investment 
policy for specified public funds that is consistent with guidelines established by the 
State Treasurer. For those local governments that invest in commercial paper, the 
elimination of the maximum threshold in allowable commercial paper investment will 
provide greater flexibility in investing in those types of assets and could potentially yield 
a higher rate of return for local investments; however, the amount of additional revenue 
cannot be reliably estimated, as discussed above. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 153 (Senator Augustine)(Chair, Joint Committee on the 
Management of Public Funds) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4