START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 374 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 374 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance – Pharmacy Benefits Managers – Audits of Pharmacies and 
Pharmacists 
 
   
This bill establishes additional requirements and restrictions regarding the pharmacy audit 
process on pharmacy benefits managers (PBMs) that provide pharmacy benefits 
management services on behalf of carriers and authorizes those PBMs to conduct an audit 
through an auditing entity. The Secretary of Health must adopt regulations for PBMs that 
contract with Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) for conducting audits of 
pharmacies or pharmacists, as specified. The bill takes effect January 1, 2024, and, 
except as specified, applies to an audit of a pharmacy or pharmacist under contract 
with a PBM performed on or after that date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent that the regulations adopted by the Secretary increase the cost 
of PBM contracts for MCOs, Medicaid expenditures (and federal matching fund revenues) 
increase by an indeterminate amount, as discussed below. Expenditures (general, federal, 
and special funds) for the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program (State Plan) also increase if PBMs incur costs that are passed on to purchasers, as 
discussed below. Any additional workload on the Maryland Insurance Administration 
(MIA) can be handled with existing budgeted resources. MIA revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent health insurance costs increase as a result of the bill, health 
care expenditures for local governments that purchase fully insured health benefit plans 
may increase. Revenues are not affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 374/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  A PBM is a business that administers and manages 
prescription drug benefit plans for purchasers. A PBM must register with MIA prior to 
providing pharmacy benefits management services. The Insurance Commissioner is 
authorized to examine the affairs, transactions, accounts, and records of a registered PBM 
at the PBM’s expense. 
 
Pharmacy Audits 
 
When conducting an audit of a pharmacy or pharmacist under contract with the PBM, the 
PBM must follow specified procedures and requirements. These procedures and 
requirements apply only to a PBM that provides pharmacy benefits management services 
on behalf of a carrier. These provisions do not apply to PBMs providing services on behalf 
of plans subject to the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) 
or PBMs that contract with MCOs. 
 
Under the bill, the Secretary must adopt regulations for PBMs that contract with MCOs 
that establish requirements for conducting audits of pharmacies or pharmacists that are 
(1) to the extent practicable, substantively similar to the audit provisions applicable to 
PBMs that provide pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a carrier and 
(2) consistent with federal law.  
 
While under current law an audit must be conducted by a PBM itself, the bill authorizes a 
PBM to conduct an audit through an auditing entity.  
 
Audit Procedures 
 
Under current law, when conducting an audit of a pharmacy or pharmacist, a PBM may 
only audit claims submitted or adjudicated within the two-year period immediately 
preceding the audit, unless a longer period is permitted under federal or State law. For an 
on-site audit, the PBM must provide written notice to a pharmacy or pharmacist at least 
two weeks before initiating the audit and may not schedule an audit to begin during the 
first five calendar days of a month, unless requested by the pharmacy. Under current law, 
a PBM must also: 
 
 
employ the services of a pharmacist if an audit requires the clinical or professional 
judgment of a pharmacist;  
 
permit its auditors to enter the prescription area of a pharmacy only when 
accompanied by or authorized by a pharmacy staff member;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 374/ Page 3 
 
allow a pharmacist or pharmacy to use any prescription (or authorized change to a 
prescription) that meets specified requirements to validate claims submitted for 
reimbursement for dispensing of original and refill prescriptions;  
 
allow a pharmacy or pharmacist to use the written or electronically transmitted 
records of a hospital, physician, or authorized prescriber to validate the pharmacy 
record with respect to orders or refills of a drug;  
 
audit each pharmacy and pharmacist using the same standards and parameters as 
used for others similarly situated; and  
 
avoid disrupting a pharmacy’s provision of services to customers.  
 
In addition to meeting the audit procedures and requirements specified above, the bill 
requires a PBM to accept a completed cash register transaction as proof of delivery or 
pickup for a pharmacy customer, unless there is contradictory information. A PBM is 
prohibited from doing the following: 
 
 
auditing more than 125 prescriptions during a desk or site audit; or 
 
auditing claims that were reversed or for which there was no remuneration by the 
purchaser or cost to the pharmacy customer, except if necessary to evaluate 
compliance to a contract. 
 
Telephone Hotline:  The bill requires a PBM to provide a pharmacy or pharmacist being 
audited with a phone number and, if available, access to a secure portal that can be used to 
ask questions regarding the audit. An individual who is familiar with the audit must respond 
to any inquiry made by the pharmacy or pharmacist via telephone or the secure portal 
within three business days after the inquiry was made.  
 
Email and Fax Communications:  The bill requires a PBM to give a pharmacy or 
pharmacist the option to provide requested audit documentation by mail, email, or 
facsimile. If a PBM or auditing entity requests a document during an audit, the PBM must 
provide a secure facsimile number and a mechanism for receiving secure emails. 
 
Secure Electronic Communications:  The bill requires, by October 1, 2025, that a PBM 
provide a mechanism for secure electronic communication for pharmacies and pharmacists 
to communicate with and submit documents to the auditing entity. 
 
Financial-related Restrictions on Pharmacy Benefits Managers:  The bill prohibits a PBM 
from recouping any funds from or charging any fees to a pharmacy or pharmacist for a 
prescription with regard to an incorrect days of supply calculation if (1) the package size 
of the medication is unbreakable and (2) the PBM is unable to accept the correct 
mathematically calculable days’ supply during prescription adjudication. Additionally, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 374/ Page 4 
bill prohibits a PBM from having or requesting access to a pharmacy’s or pharmacist’s 
bank, credit card, or depository statements or data as it relates to cost-sharing. 
 
Applicability of New Audit Procedures 
 
The bill takes effect January 1, 2024, and generally applies to any audit of a pharmacy or 
pharmacist that is under contract with a PBM performed on or after that date. However, for 
a PBM that contracts with the State, the bill applies only to audits that occur (1) on the first 
day of the first plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2024, or (2) the first time a 
contract between a PBM and the State is amended or renewed on or after January 1, 2024. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the 
Maryland Department of Health both advise that the bill’s changes likely result in an 
indeterminate increase in expenditures for the State Plan and Medicaid MCOs, 
respectively.  
 
According to DBM, the bill’s audit provisions are generally less favorable to PBMs and 
any additional net costs are likely to be passed on to purchasers. However, DBM advises 
that it is not privy to all the audit procedures contained in existing agreements and, thus, 
cannot determine the magnitude of any cost difference between current audit procedures 
and those required under the bill as they apply to the State Plan. To the extent that PBMs 
pass along increased administrative expenses to purchasers, expenditures for the State Plan 
(general, federal, and special funds) increase under the bill. 
 
The Secretary must adopt regulations for PBMs that contract with MCOs that establish 
requirements for conducting audits of pharmacies or pharmacists that are, to the extent 
practicable, substantively similar to the audit provisions applicable to carriers and 
consistent with federal law. The precise scope of these regulations is not known; however, 
to the extent the regulations increase administrative expenses for PBMs contracting with 
MCOs and PBMs pass along those costs to MCOs, Medicaid general and federal fund 
expenditures (and federal matching fund revenues) also increase. Expenditures are eligible 
for a 51% federal matching rate in fiscal 2024, decreasing to 50% in fiscal 2025 and 
beyond.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Independent and community pharmacies benefit from more 
accommodating audit procedures. Conversely, the additional requirements and restrictions 
placed on PBMs when conducting pharmacy audits may lead to a slight increase in 
premiums for small businesses that purchase fully insured health benefit plans.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 374/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 565 (Senators Ready and Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5