START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 299

Chapter 299

(House Bill 376)

AN ACT concerning

Health Insurance – Diagnostic and Supplemental Examinations and Biopsies for
Breast Cancer – Cost–Sharing

FOR the purpose of prohibiting, except under certain circumstances, insurers, nonprofit
health service plans, and health maintenance organizations that provide coverage
for diagnostic and supplemental breast examinations from imposing a copayment,
coinsurance, or deductible requirement for the examination; requiring the Maryland
Health Care Commission to study and report on the financial impact of eliminating
cost–sharing for diagnostic image–guided biopsies for breast cancer; and generally
relating to health insurance and diagnostic and supplemental examinations and
biopsies for breast cancer.

BY adding to
Article – Insurance
Section 15–814.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

15–814.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “DIAGNOSTIC BREAST EXAMINATION” MEANS A MEDICALLY
NECESSARY AND APPROPRIATE EXAMINATION OF THE BREAST THAT IS USED TO
EVALUATE AN ABNORMALITY THAT IS:

1. SEEN OR SUSPECTED FROM A PRIOR SCREENING
EXAMINATION FOR BREAST CANCER; OR

2. DETECTED BY ANOTHER MEANS OF PRIOR
EXAMINATION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 299 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) “DIAGNOSTIC BREAST EXAMINATION” INCLUDES AN
EXAMINATION USING DIAGNOSTIC MAMMOGRAPHY, BREAST MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING, OR BREAST ULTRASOUND.

(3) (I) “SUPPLEMENTAL BREAST EXAMINATION” MEANS A
MEDICALLY NECESSARY EXAMINATION OF THE BREAST THAT IS USED TO SCREEN
FOR BREAST CANCER WHEN:

1. THERE IS NO ABNORMALITY SEEN OR SUSPECTED
FROM A PRIOR EXAMINATION; AND

2. THERE IS A PERSONAL OR FAMILY MEDICAL HISTORY
OR ADDITIONAL FACTORS THAT MAY INCREASE AN INDIVIDUAL’S RISK OF BREAST
CANCER.

(II) “SUPPLEMENTAL BREAST EXAMINATION” INCLUDES AN
EXAMINATION USING BREAST MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OR BREAST
ULTRASOUND.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

(1) INSURERS AND NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLANS THAT
PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR DIAGNOSTIC BREAST EXAMINATIONS OR SUPPLEMENTAL
BREAST EXAMINATIONS UNDER INDIVIDUAL, GROUP, OR BLANKET HEALTH
INSURANCE POLICIES OR CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE
STATE; AND

(2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
COVERAGE FOR DIAGNOSTIC BREAST EXAMINATIONS OR SUPPLEMENTAL BREAST
EXAMINATIONS UNDER INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR
DELIVERED IN THE STATE.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY NOT IMPOSE A
COPAYMENT, COINSURANCE, OR DEDUCTIBLE REQUIREMENT ON COVERAGE FOR
DIAGNOSTIC BREAST EXAMINATIONS OR SUPPLEMENTAL BREAST EXAMINATIONS.

(2) IF THE APPLICATION OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO
A HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNT–QUALIFIED HIGH DEDUCTIBLE HEALTH PLAN WOULD
RESULT IN HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNT INELIGIBILITY UNDER § 223 OF THE
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL APPLY
~~ONLY~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~RESPECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEDUCTIBLE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PLAN~~ ~~AFTER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ENROLLEE~~ ~~HAS~~
SATISFIED THE MINIMUM DEDUCTIBLE UNDER § 223 OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 299

CODE IF AN INSURED OR ENROLLEE IS COVERED UNDER A HIGH–DEDUCTIBLE
HEALTH PLAN, AS DEFINED IN 26 U.S.C. § 223, AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION
MAY SUBJECT DIAGNOSTIC BREAST EXAMINATIONS OR SUPPLEMENTAL BREAST
EXAMINATIONS TO THE DEDUCTIBLE REQUIREMENT OF THE HIGH–DEDUCTIBLE
HEALTH PLAN.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before October 1, 2023,
the Maryland Health Care Commission shall study and report to the Governor and, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the Senate Finance Committee
and the House Health and Government Operations Committee, on the financial impact of
eliminating health insurance cost–sharing for diagnostic image–guided biopsies for breast
cancer.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
apply to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the
State on or after January 1, 2024.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
take effect January 1, 2024.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
4 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3