START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 325 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 325 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Provision of Veterinary Services - Practice of Veterinary Medicine and Rabies 
Vaccines 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners (SBVME) to establish 
an expedited process to authorize out-of-state veterinary practitioners to become licensed 
to practice veterinary medicine in the State. The bill also (1) requires the Secretary of 
Health to allow registered veterinary technicians or other clinical staff who work in or for 
an animal shelter or animal control facility to administer rabies vaccines subject to 
specified conditions and (2) correspondingly expands the scope of a specified animal 
control facility license. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues may increase by an indeterminate amount, beginning 
in FY 2024. General/special fund expenditures increase by $25,000 in FY 2024 only. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF/SF Exp. 
$25,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
-/(-) 
- 
- 
- 
-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 325/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Out-of-state Veterinary Practitioners – Expedited Licensing 
 
SBVME must establish an expedited process to authorize a veterinary practitioner who 
holds a current, valid license to practice veterinary medicine in another state or jurisdiction 
to become licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State.  
 
By December 1, 2023, SBVME must report to the General Assembly on (1) the status of 
establishing an expedited process for out-of-state veterinary practitioners to become 
licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State and (2) any financial support needed 
to implement the expedited process. 
 
Administration of Rabies Vaccines  
 
The Secretary of Health must, as part of an existing requirement to provide a specified 
statewide system to control rabies, allow a registered veterinary technician or other clinical 
staff who work in or for an animal shelter or an animal control facility to administer rabies 
vaccines if: 
 
 
the animal shelter or animal control facility is licensed to administer drugs under 
§ 2-305 of the Agriculture Article of the Maryland Code; 
 
the animal being vaccinated is under the custody or control of an animal shelter or 
animal control facility;  
 
the veterinary practitioner who signs the rabies vaccination certificate has ensured 
that the individual administering the rabies vaccine was appropriately trained on 
administering rabies vaccines, including proper storage, handling, administration, 
and management of adverse reactions; and 
 
the individual administering the vaccine is identified on the rabies vaccination 
certificate.  
 
“Animal shelter” means (1) a county or municipal animal control facility; (2) an 
organization that contracts with a county or municipality for animal control; or (3) an 
organization that shelters animals and has received a grant from the Spay/Neuter Fund 
during the previous year. 
 
“Animal control facility” means a humane society or a county or municipal designated 
animal shelter. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 325/ Page 3 
Expanded Animal Control Facility License – Rabies Vaccines 
 
The bill expands the scope of an existing license SBVME is authorized to issue to an animal 
control facility, under § 2-305 of the Agriculture Article, to administer drugs needed to 
sedate, euthanize, or sedate and euthanize animals. Under the expanded scope of the 
license, an animal control facility may administer (1) drugs needed to sedate, euthanize, or 
sedate and euthanize animals and (2) rabies vaccines in accordance with the provisions of 
the bill discussed above (requiring the Secretary of Health to allow specified administration 
of rabies vaccines). The bill correspondingly expands a requirement that an application for 
a license designate one individual at the facility responsible for the drugs so that it instead 
requires that an individual be designated who is responsible for both the drugs and rabies 
vaccines. Other existing provisions apply to the expanded license, including (1) a 
requirement that an animal control facility that is issued a license comply with SBVME’s 
requirements relating to employee training and (2) a requirement that SBVME, in 
consultation with Maryland Department of Health (MDH), adopt regulations necessary to 
carry out the provisions authorizing the issuance of the license. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Regulation of the Practice of Veterinary Medicine 
 
State law prohibits a person from practicing veterinary medicine unless the person is 
licensed, registered, and authorized to engage in the practice under provisions of State law 
that regulate the practice of veterinary medicine. “Veterinary practitioner” means a 
licensed and registered veterinarian engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine. 
 
The “practice of veterinary medicine” is defined in detail in State law, and there are certain 
circumstances that are excluded from the definition of “practice of veterinary medicine,” 
in which a person is not required to be licensed and registered to practice veterinary 
medicine in the State in order to perform certain functions, including (1) any nurse, 
attendant, technician, intern, or other employee of a licensed and registered veterinarian 
when administering medication or rendering auxiliary or supporting assistance under the 
responsible direct supervision of a licensed and registered veterinarian; (2) a registered 
veterinary technician when performing a procedure under the responsible direct 
supervision of a veterinary practitioner; (3) a veterinarian licensed in another jurisdiction 
while consulting with a veterinary practitioner in this State; and (4) a student of veterinary 
medicine practicing veterinary medicine who has successfully completed three years of 
veterinary education at an institution approved by SBVME and who works under the 
responsible direct supervision of a veterinary practitioner. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 325/ Page 4 
Licensing and Certification of Out-of-state Veterinarians 
 
SBVME regulations establish that the board may license and certify an applying 
veterinarian who: 
 
 
is licensed (1) in another state or (2) a foreign jurisdiction and is a graduate of an 
American Veterinary Medical Association (AMVA) accredited school; 
 
has been engaged in or taught (at an AMVA accredited school) clinical veterinary 
medicine for the preceding five years, or meets specified alternative requirements; 
 
has paid all appropriate fees; 
 
has passed the board examination, consisting of a notarized statement submitted to 
the board, attesting to the fact that the applicant has read and comprehends the laws 
and regulations governing the practice of veterinary medicine in this State; and 
 
submits proof of good moral character. 
 
Rabies Control 
 
The Secretary of Health is required to provide a statewide system to (1) control rabies; 
(2) grant authority to the public health veterinarian and the local health officer in matters 
pertaining to the disposition of animals that bite or otherwise expose rabies to an individual; 
(3) assist local political subdivisions regarding the laboratory testing of rabid animals; 
(4) treat each individual who is exposed or suspected of having been exposed to rabies; and 
(5) distribute, in accordance with the conditions set by the Secretary of Agriculture, the 
biological products that are needed to prevent and treat rabies. 
 
Animal Control Facility License 
 
Under § 2-305 of the Agriculture Article, SBVME may issue a license to an animal control 
facility to allow the animal control facility to administer drugs needed to sedate, euthanize, 
or sedate and euthanize animals. The owner of an animal control facility must apply for a 
license and the application must designate one individual at the facility responsible for the 
drugs. An animal control facility that is licensed under § 2-305 must comply with 
SBVME’s requirements related to employee training. In consultation with MDH, SBVME 
must adopt regulations necessary to carry out the provisions authorizing the issuance of the 
license. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues may increase, beginning in fiscal 2024, to the 
extent that the expedited licensing process established by SBVME increases the number of 
out-of-state veterinary practitioners who seek to become licensed and registered in the 
State. The extent of any increase in revenues cannot be reliably estimated. Veterinarians 
licensed and registered in Maryland pay an annual fee of $150, and new applicants also 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 325/ Page 5 
pay a $225 application/examination fee. Fees collected by SBVME are deposited in the 
SBVME Fund and used to cover the board’s costs. 
 
State Expenditures:  General/special fund expenditures increase by $25,000 in fiscal 2024 
only, for one-time programming to update the SBVME licensing portal to reflect changes 
necessary to establish the expedited licensing process. To the extent sufficient special funds 
are not available in the SBVME Fund to cover this cost, general funds are assumed to be 
needed. Processing of any additional license applications and registrations in fiscal 2024 
and/or future years resulting from the expedited licensing process is assumed to be handled 
with existing resources. 
 
Efforts by the Secretary of Health to allow registered veterinary technicians or other 
clinical staff who work in or for an animal shelter or animal control facility to administer 
rabies vaccines are assumed to be handled with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 390 (Senator Lewis Young, et al.) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Charles, Garrett, and Howard counties; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5