START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 320 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 320 
(Delegates Guyton and Kaiser) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Longitudinal Data System - Definition of Student Data - Alteration 
 
 
This bill adds student disability data by specific disability category to the data collected, 
analyzed, and reported on by the Maryland Longitudinal Data System (MLDS) Center. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The MLDS Center can incorporate existing student disability data into 
MLDS using existing resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 190 of 2010 established MLDS to contain individual-level student 
data and workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce. The purpose 
of the data system is to facilitate and enable the exchange of student data among agencies 
and institutions within the State as well as generate timely and accurate information about 
student achievement that can be used to improve the State’s education system and guide 
decision makers at all levels. The MLDS Center may only use de-identified data in the 
analysis, research, and reporting conducted by the center. The center may only use 
aggregate data in the release of data in reports and in response to data requests.  
 
Student data collected by MLDS includes State and national assessments; course taking 
and completion; grade point average; remediation; retention; degree, diploma, or credential 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 320/ Page 2 
attainment; enrollment; demographic data; juvenile delinquency records; elementary and 
secondary school disciplinary records; child welfare data; license, industry certificate, or 
vocational certificate; and personally identifiable information. Medical and health records 
are specifically excluded from the types of data that MLDS may collect. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) collects 
student disability data by disability category. Thus, the MLDS Center can work with 
MSDE to understand the available data elements, data limitations, and arrange for the data 
to be added to the MLDS data inventory using existing resources. It is assumed that MSDE 
can provide the data using existing resources. The MLDS Center notes that the bill 
expresses the intent of the General Assembly that student disability data by specific 
disability category is not a medical or health record and, thus, can be incorporated into 
MLDS. Specific disability categories collected by MSDE include autism, deafness, hearing 
impairment, and intellectual disability. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2