START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 328 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 328 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Finance and Procurement - Grants - Prompt Payment Requirement 
 
 
This bill establishes that it is the policy of the State to make payment under specified grant 
agreements with nonprofit organizations within 37 days of (1) the payment becoming due 
under the grant agreement or (2) if later, receiving a proper invoice. Interest accrues at the 
rate of 9% per year on any amount for which a grant-making entity has received and failed 
to submit a proper invoice to the Comptroller within 30 days of its receipt. However, 
interest does not begin accruing until the thirty-eighth day after the grantor receives a 
proper invoice. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and special fund expenditures may increase by up to $8,100 in 
FY 2023 and up to $97,100 each year thereafter to pay interest on late payments to grantees. 
Additional expenditures for staff at grant-making agencies (to ensure on-time payments) 
are not anticipated unless interest payments exceed the cost of adding additional staff in 
agencies that award high volumes of grants, as discussed below. No effect on revenues.     
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill applies only to State grant payments to nonprofit 
organizations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. Nonprofit organizations are not considered small 
businesses.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “grant” means a legal instrument of financial assistance between a State 
grant-making entity and a nonprofit organization that meets specified criteria. “Grant” does 
not include: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 328/ Page 2 
 
grants executed, renewed, or extended before June 1, 2023; 
 
direct government cash assistance to an individual; 
 
a subsidy; 
 
a loan guarantee; 
 
insurance; or 
 
State funding that is required annually and is calculated through a formula set in 
statute. 
 
Also, the bill does not apply to a unit in the Judicial Branch of State government or to 
grants funded from general obligation bond proceeds or from a general fund capital 
appropriation to the Board of Public Works. 
 
A proper invoice must include without error (1) the grant recipient’s federal employer 
identification number or Social Security number; (2) the grant agreement’s identification 
number or other adequate description; and (3) any documentation required by regulation 
or the grant agreement. 
 
The bill includes specified procedures for receiving and processing invoices from grant 
recipients to determine whether they are proper invoices. If an invoice is determined to be 
proper, the grant-making entity must submit the invoice to the Comptroller, who must pay 
the invoice within five business days. If the grant-making entity determines that an invoice 
is not a proper invoice, it must notify the grant recipient, within two business days of the 
determination, of all the reasons that the invoice is improper. Failure by the State 
grant-making entity to comply with these procedural requirements does not constitute a 
late payment. 
 
Payment of interest is required only if a grant recipient submits an invoice for the interest 
within 30 days of the date on the State’s check for the amount on which the interest accrued. 
Further, the State is not liable for interest (1) if the State has initiated legal proceedings to 
dispute the amount owed; (2) that accrues more than one year after the thirty-first day that 
the State receives an invoice; or (3) on unpaid interest. Interest for which a State 
grant-making entity is liable must be paid from the entity’s operating budget and not from 
funds appropriated to fund a grant.  
 
State grant-making entities may use media that produce tangible recordings of information 
to expedite the payment process rather than requiring paper documents. They must also 
provide adequate safeguards and controls to ensure the integrity of the data and to prevent 
duplicate processing. 
 
The bill does not create liability on the Comptroller for interest accrued on a late payment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 328/ Page 3 
Current Law:  There are no requirements in statute related to the timing of grant payments. 
The bill’s requirements related to the timing of grant payments and the accrual and payment 
of interest on late payments are modeled somewhat on requirements for payment under 
State contracts. It is the policy of the State to make payments under a procurement contract 
within 30 days of (1) the payment being due under the contract or (2) if later, receiving an 
invoice. In general, interest accrues at the rate of 9% per year on any amount that is due 
and remains unpaid 45 days after receiving an invoice; effective June 1, 2023, interest 
becomes payable after 37 days. Interest begins accruing on the thirty-first day after 
payment is due. Contractors must submit invoices for interest due, and interest is not 
payable (1) if a contract claim has been filed; (2) on interest that accrues for more than 
one year; and (3) on unpaid interest.   
 
State Expenditures:  In general, grantees submit invoices for payment to grant-making 
agencies, which review the invoices to ensure they are proper. Once grant-making agencies 
determine an invoice is proper, they forward it to the Comptroller’s Office for payment. 
The Comptroller’s Office asks agencies to allow 5 days for payment (giving agencies 
25 days to review and approve a payment) but generally tries to process payments in 1 to 
3 days. Thus, the bill affects both grant-making agencies with high volumes of grant awards 
and the Comptroller’s Office. 
 
The bill has two potential effects on State agency expenditures: 
 
 
State grant-making entities may need to hire additional staff to process grant 
payments to ensure that they are paid within 37 days; or 
 
State grant-making entities may become liable for interest on late payments. 
 
As discussed below, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) believes that State 
agencies likely opt to risk paying interest on late payments rather than increase staff to 
improve on-time payment performance.  
 
Volume and Timing of Grant Payments 
 
A November 2021 audit of grant awards by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) 
identified $5.0 billion in grant awards made by State agencies over a six-year period 
(July 1, 2014, through June 30, 2020). Of those, $3.7 billion were operating grants and 
$1.2 billion were capital grants. The bill excludes capital grants from the payment 
requirements, so this analysis is based on $3.7 billion in operating grant awards, or an 
average of $617 million per fiscal year (grants by the units of the Judicial Branch, which 
are also excluded from the bill, do not represent a meaningful portion of total grant awards). 
 
A December 2022 study by DLS found that, from fiscal 2019 through 2022, between 97.6% 
and 96.1% of the dollar value of payments owed by State agencies were paid within 30 days 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 328/ Page 4 
(the data used for the study did not allow for a determination of the percentage of payments 
made within 37 days). The study does not distinguish between grant and contract payments, 
but there is no reason to believe that agency performance is substantially different for each 
type of payment. 
 
Interest Accrual on Late Payments 
 
For this analysis, DLS calculated the State’s projected annual penalty interest liability 
based on the following assumptions: 
 
 
State agencies pay an average of $617 million in operating grants each year (based 
on OLA’s 2021 audit); 
 
3.0% of the value of grant payments by State agencies is paid late (adjusted from 
the findings of the DLS study to account for payments made after 37 days instead 
of 30 days); 
 
the value of late payments to grantees averages $18.5 million each year (3.0% of 
$617 million); 
 
20.9% of late payments are made between 38 and 45 days, 13.3% are made between 
46 and 60 days, and 29.2% are made after 60 days (based on fiscal 2022 results in 
the DLS study); the remaining 36.6% are delivered by agencies to the Comptroller’s 
Office after the required 30 days (and, thus, are deemed late) but are paid before 
38 days (so that no interest actually accrues); and 
 
payments made in the 38-to-45-day timeframe are paid on day 41; payments made 
in the 46-to-60-day timeframe are made on day 52; and payments made after 
60 days are paid on day 90.  
 
The bill requires that interest on late payments be charged at the annual rate of 9%, which 
translates to 0.025% per day. Based on this daily interest rate and the assumptions listed 
above, DLS projects that the State could be liable for $97,129 in annual penalty interest 
payments each year; this estimate may encompass grant payments made to entities other 
than nonprofit organizations. Accordingly, given the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date, the 
State’s liability is up to $8,094 in fiscal 2023 (and then up to $97,129 each year thereafter). 
However, the State does not have to actually pay penalty interest unless a grantee submits 
an invoice for the amount of the penalty. The Comptroller’s Office advises that State 
contractors virtually never submit such invoices; to the extent that grantees are similarly 
unlikely to submit invoices for penalty interest, State agency payments may be minimal. 
Any penalty payments may not be made from money reserved for grants, so any general or 
special fund expenditures used to pay interest must come from other budgeted sources.  
 
Alternatively, agencies that award a high volume of grants may consider adding additional 
staff to ensure all payments are made on time. For instance, the Department of Natural 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 328/ Page 5 
Resources advises as many as nine additional full-time staff at an annualized cost of more 
than $700,000 could be needed; the Maryland Department of Health advises as many as 
six additional full-time staff at an annualized cost of more than $650,000 could be needed. 
These projected costs far exceed the estimated annual costs of paying interest on late 
payments. 
 
Thus, it appears to be more cost-effective for agencies to risk having to pay minimal interest 
penalties than to invest in increased staffing to improve on-time payment performance. To 
the extent that grant funding levels and/or on-time payment performance by agencies 
fluctuate, actual State liabilities for interest payments may be more or less. If actual interest 
payments ultimately exceed the cost of adding staff to process payments more efficiently, 
State expenditures (general and special funds) may increase accordingly to hire more staff. 
However, DLS does not anticipate this occurring. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Department of Transportation advises that some 
grants require submission of an annual report before payment is made, but the bill does not 
allow for any such conditions as long as grantees submit timely invoices. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 542 and HB 451 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 112 (Senator Kagan) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State 
Library Agency; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Baltimore City 
Community College; Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Board of Public Works; 
Department of State Police; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Military Department; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans 
Affairs; Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 328/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6