START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 323 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 323 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Social Services Programs - Eligibility and Enrollment 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) to enroll in any fuel and 
utility assistance program any household with an individual who meets the financial 
eligibility requirements established by the Department of Human Services (DHS) for the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families (TANF), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), or means-tested Veterans Affairs 
benefits. The bill also increases the annual income eligibility level for the Electric 
Universal Service Program (EUSP) to 200% of federal poverty guidelines (FPG). The bill 
takes effect January 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHS special fund expenditures increase by at least $15.0 million in FY 2024 
for costs associated with increased eligibility for and the auto-enrollment of SNAP 
recipients in EUSP; out-years reflect annualization. Special fund revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
15.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
Net Effect 
($15.0) 
($30.0) 
($30.0) 
($30.0) 
($30.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 323/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Electric Universal Service Program 
 
EUSP, administered by OHEP, helps the State’s vulnerable populations and other 
traditionally underserved populations pay their electric bills, minimize crises, and reduce 
their electric costs. Benefits include bill payment assistance and arrearage retirement 
assistance. Funding for the program is provided through fees collected by electric 
companies (at least $37.0 million annually) and through an allocation of the revenue 
generated by the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative carbon dioxide emission allowances. 
When available and if needed, federal Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program 
funds may also be used to support benefits. 
 
Eligibility for EUSP extends to families with (1) incomes at or below 175% FPG; (2) an 
electric bill responsibility; and (3) a household member that is a citizen, legal immigrant, 
or qualified alien. Households must also agree to a budget billing or monthly crediting plan. 
Chapters 638 and 639 of 2021 expanded income eligibility for a customer age 67 or older 
to up to 200% FPG. 
 
Households are only eligible for arrearage assistance once every five years except in 
limited circumstances. Households must also have a past due balance of at least $300 to 
receive arrearage assistance. 
 
Other Fuel and Utility Assistance Programs 
 
The Maryland Energy Assistance Program, administered by OHEP, helps the State’s 
vulnerable populations pay their heating bills, minimize crises, and make heating costs 
more affordable. Benefits include utility and fossil fuel payments, the Utility Service 
Protection Program, referrals to weatherization services, emergency heating system 
repairs/replacement, waivers on utility fees, and discounts on fuel purchases. As of 
fiscal 2019, there is also a gas arrearage component to the program. Eligibility for the 
program extends to families with incomes at or below 175% FPG with a heating bill 
responsibility and who are U.S. citizens. Roomers and boarders may receive a benefit 
separate from the household from whom they are renting. 
 
The Low Income Household Water Assistance Program (LIHWAP), administered by 
OHEP, is a temporary emergency program to assist low-income households with bill 
payment and arrearage assistance for household water and wastewater costs. The 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced the release of emergency 
funding in June 2021 to establish the program. DHS began accepting applications and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 323/ Page 3 
providing benefits in fiscal 2022. Eligibility for the program extends to homeowners, 
renters, and residents of public housing with a total gross household income of less than 
60% of the State median income and who are U.S. citizens. Applicants must provide a 
water or wastewater bill showing outstanding arrearages of at least $100 that are 30 days 
or more past due. Additionally, applicants may be categorically eligible for the program if 
receiving other energy assistance or cash assistance benefits through DHS. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DHS special fund expenditures increase by at least $15,024,000 in 
fiscal 2024, which accounts for the bill’s January 1, 2024 effective date, and by 
$30,048,000 annually thereafter. 
 
Categorical Eligibility:  Current recipients of SNAP, TANF, SSI, and means-tested 
veterans programs are generally eligible for all fuel and utility assistance programs 
(enrollees in these programs are already categorically eligible for LIHWAP). Categorical 
eligibility is not currently implemented for other OHEP programs. OHEP has begun to take 
steps necessary to implement categorical eligibility for energy assistance programs in order 
to reduce administrative costs, simplify the application process, and reduce denial rates. 
 
The OHEP Data Management System is not connected with the systems used to administer 
other DHS benefits. DHS advises that this system will be integrated with DHS’ new 
Eligibility and Enrollment System to enable categorical eligibility determinations by the 
next OHEP program year. Furthermore, DHS plans to centralize eligibility determination 
through local departments of social services and streamline eligibility through alignment 
with other benefit programs. DHS did not provide a specific estimate of the cost to 
auto-enroll all current recipients of SNAP, TANF, SSI, and means-tested veterans 
programs into all OHEP fuel and utility assistance programs. However, the impact on 
enrolling current recipients of SNAP in EUSP is included in the estimate below. 
 
Auto-enrollment of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Beneficiaries into and 
Expansion of Eligibility for Electric Universal Service Program:  The bill increases the 
annual income eligibility level for EUSP from 175% FPG to 200% FPG. Under current 
law, only customers age 67 or older qualify for EUSP at this income level. The bill also 
requires auto-enrollment of current SNAP recipients into fuel and energy assistance 
programs. 
 
DHS advises that approximately 32,000 additional households will qualify for EUSP under 
the bill. This figure represents the number of SNAP households that claim a utility expense 
but do not currently receive energy assistance. Based on an average annual EUSP bill 
payment assistance benefit of $939, DHS special fund expenditures increase by 
$15.0 million in fiscal 2024 to reflect the bill’s January 1, 2024 effective date. Expenditures 
increase by $30.0 million in fiscal 2025 and annually thereafter. These expenditures are 
likely offset somewhat by administrative savings due to the implementation of categorical 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 323/ Page 4 
eligibility and auto-enrollment. However, this estimate does not reflect any additional 
expenditures for EUSP arrearage assistance as this benefit may generally only be received 
once every five years. The estimate also does not reflect the cost of auto-enrolling current 
benefit recipients of TANF, SSI, and means-tested veterans programs into EUSP, or auto-
enrolling SNAP recipients into other OHEP fuel and utility assistance programs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4