START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 322 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 322 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Home- and Community-Based Services for Children and Youth 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to expand access to and 
provide reimbursement for specified wraparound, intensive in-home, and case 
management services relating to the 1915(i) Intensive Behavioral Health Services for 
Children, Youth, and Families Program. Beginning in fiscal 2024, the Behavioral Health 
Administration must fund 100 slots in the “mental health case management program” for 
children or youth who are not eligible for Medicaid services and are at risk of out-of-home 
placement. The Governor must include in the annual operating budget bill the following 
amounts to fund customized goods and services for youth receiving services under the 
1915(i) model or mental health case management program:  $150,000 in fiscal 2025; 
$250,000 in fiscal 2026; and $350,000 in fiscal 2027 and each fiscal year thereafter. The 
bill also establishes specified consultation and reporting requirements for MDH. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $3.5 million in FY 2024. 
General and federal fund expenditures increase by an additional indeterminate amount to 
reimburse for additional services; federal fund revenues increase accordingly (not shown). 
Future years reflect annualization, elimination of one-time costs, and the mandated 
appropriation. This bill increases the cost of an entitlement program beginning in 
FY 2024. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
3,496,500 
779,700 
891,200 
1,003,200 
1,018,200 
Net Effect 
($3,496,500) 
($779,700) 
($891,200) 
($1,003,200) 
($1,018,200) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 322/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Expanded Access and Reimbursement 
 
MDH must provide reimbursement for (1) wraparound services delivered by care 
coordinators under a “high-fidelity wraparound model” under the 1915(i) model or a 
“mental health case management program” commensurate with industry standards for the 
reimbursement of such services; (2) intensive in-home services delivered by providers 
using “family-centered treatment,” “functional family therapy,” and other evidence-based 
practices under the 1915(i) model, as specified; and (3) at least one pilot program utilizing 
value-based purchasing (VBP) for case management services. 
 
MDH must ensure that care coordinators delivering services under the 1915(i) model or a 
mental health case management program receive training in the delivery of “wraparound 
services.” 
 
Consultation and Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 1, 2023, MDH must consult early childhood community-based services 
stakeholders to ensure that services comparable to those available under the 1915(i) model 
are available for young children with acute or high-intensity behavioral health needs. 
 
By December 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, MDH must report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee on enrollment 
in the 1915(i) model and child and adolescent case management services, as specified. 
 
By December 1, 2024, MDH, in consultation with stakeholders, must review for the 
1915 (i) model (1) current eligibility requirements and provider reimbursement rates 
generally, including VBP and (2) current eligibility requirements and provider 
reimbursement rates for child and adolescent mental health case management services, 
including for youth with primary substance use disorders. MDH must submit 
recommendations for expanding eligibility and enrollment in these programs to the 
General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:  The 1915(i) Intensive Behavioral Health Services for Children, Youth, and 
Families Program (1915(i)) is a home- and community-based services benefit for children 
and youth with serious emotional disturbance and their families, as authorized by Maryland 
Medicaid’s 1915(i) State Plan Amendment. Participants are served by care coordination 
organizations through a care coordination service delivery model. The program covers 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 322/ Page 3 
family peer support services, respite services, expressive and experiential behavioral 
services, and intensive in-home services. 
 
To qualify for 1915(i) services, participants must be receiving targeted case management 
Level III services and meet certain medical necessity criteria. A comprehensive 
psychosocial assessment must be completed or updated within 30 days of the application 
submission by a licensed mental health professional. The assessment must outline how, 
due to behavioral health disorder(s), the participant exhibits significant impairment in 
functioning, representing potential serious harm to self or others across settings, including 
the home, school, and/or community. Other community services must be inadequate to 
meet the participant’s needs due to the severity of the impairment without the provision of 
one or more of 1915(i) services. 
 
Participants age 5 and younger must have a score of between 3 and 5 on the Early 
Childhood Service Intensity Instrument and either (1) be referred by a hospital, primary 
care provider, outpatient psychiatric facility, Early Childhood Mental Health Consultation 
Program in child care, Head Start, Early Head Start, Judy Hoyer Centers, or home visiting 
programs unit or (2) within the past 12 months, have had one or more psychiatric or day 
hospitalizations or emergency room visits, exhibited severe aggression, displayed 
dangerous behavior, have been suspended or expelled or at risk of expulsion from school 
or child care, displayed emotional and/or behavioral disturbances prohibiting their care by 
anyone other than their primary caregiver, have been at risk of out-of-home placement or 
placement disruption, have had severe temper tantrums that place the child or family 
members at risk of harm, have had trauma exposures and other adverse life events, or have 
been at risk of family-related risk factors, including safety, parent-child relational conflict, 
and poor health and developmental outcomes. 
 
Participants ages 6 to 21 must have a score of between 3 and 6 on the Child and Adolescent 
Service Intensity Instrument and either have two or more inpatient psychiatric 
hospitalizations or emergency room visits in the past 12 months or been in a residential 
treatment center within the past 90 days. 
 
In addition to meeting certain medical necessity criteria, participants must meet financial 
eligibility requirements. Participants are eligible with incomes up to 300% of the federal 
poverty level. This includes all children enrolled in Medicaid, the Maryland Children’s 
Health Program (MCHP), and MCHP Premium. The 1915(i) program currently has 
200 slots for children who meet the eligibility described above. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 322/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Expansion of Services and Reimbursement Requirements 
 
Under the bill, MDH must expand access to and provide reimbursement for specified 
wraparound, intensive in-home, and case management services relating to the 
1915(i) program. This includes funding 100 additional slots in the mental health case 
management program for children or youth who are not eligible for Medicaid services and 
who are at risk of out-of-home placement. The Behavioral Health Administration advises 
that there are 75 slots currently funded in the mental health case management program. 
Thus, to provide an additional 25 slots for individuals ineligible for Medicaid at an annual 
average cost per client of $14,820, MDH general fund expenditures increase by at least 
$370,500 annually (or $277,875 in fiscal 2024 to account for the bill’s October 1, 2023 
effective date). This does not account for the additional services that must be reimbursed 
under the bill. 
 
The bill also requires MDH to reimburse at least one pilot program utilizing VBP for case 
management. As VBP can take various approaches, at this time, MDH does not have a 
model designed for VBP for case management. As such, MDH would need to develop a 
program by assessing various models. This would have an indeterminate fiscal impact on 
MDH that is not reflected in this analysis. 
 
Mandated Funding for Customized Goods and Services for Youth 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $150,000 in fiscal 2025, $250,000 in fiscal 2026, 
and $350,000 in fiscal 2027 and each fiscal year thereafter to reflect the bill’s mandated 
appropriation to fund customized goods and services for youth served under the 
1915(i) model or mental health case management program. 
 
Personnel, Consultation, and Reporting 
 
In addition to other requirements regarding the expansion of 1915(i) services, the bill 
requires MDH to (1) consult with early childhood community-based services stakeholders 
by December 1, 2023; (2) submit annual reports on 1915(i) enrollment to specified 
committees of the General Assembly beginning December 1, 2023; and (3) conduct a major 
review of the 1915(i) model, including eligibility criteria and reimbursement rates, by 
December 1, 2024. MDH advises that additional personnel and contractual services are 
needed to fulfill these requirements. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures increase by as much as $3,218,649 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one program manager, one health policy analyst, and one coordinator of special 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 322/ Page 5 
programs to oversee and coordinate training for care coordinators, update regulations, 
submit annual reports on enrollment, and work with a consultant to review the 
1915(i) model and ensure that comparable services are available. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, contractual expenses to hire a consultant, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. MDH advises that it must contract with a consultant with expertise in 
1915(c) and 1915(i) waivers as well as the utilization of higher-intensity services under a 
wraparound model. This contract is estimated to cost $3.0 million. This analysis assumes 
these costs are incurred in fiscal 2024; however, a portion of the costs may be incurred in 
fiscal 2025, as the report on MDH’s review of the model is due by December 1, 2024. To 
the extent a consultant is less costly, general fund expenditures are reduced. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$196,422 
Contract with Consultant 
3,000,000 
Operating Expenses 
       22,227 
Total FY 2024 Personnel/Consultant Expenditures 
$3,218,649 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business behavioral health care providers that provide 
services for which reimbursement is mandated under the bill or for which additional 
funding is required serve additional clients and receive additional reimbursement. 
 
Additional Comments:  To the extent that expenditures on additional services under the 
bill improve individuals’ behavioral health and reduce the need for other behavioral health 
services, overall expenditures are likely offset over the long term. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 637 and HB 935 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 255 (Senator Hester) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 322/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6