START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 207

Chapter 207

(House Bill 323)

AN ACT concerning

Social Services Programs – Eligibility and Enrollment

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~ ~~to~~ ~~enroll~~ ~~individuals,~~
~~based~~ ~~on~~ ~~certain~~ ~~eligibility,~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Supplemental~~ ~~Nutrition~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program;~~
requiring the Office of Home Energy Programs to enroll ~~individuals~~ households,
based on certain eligibility, in certain Office of Home Energy Programs assistance
programs; altering the eligibility requirements for the electric universal service
program; and generally relating to eligibility for and enrollment in social services
programs.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~
~~Section~~ ~~5–501~~ ~~and~~ ~~5–5A–07~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 5–5A–01(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 5–5A–07
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–512.1(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

~~5–501.~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 207 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Department~~ ~~may~~ ~~implement~~ ~~a~~ ~~Supplemental~~ ~~Nutrition~~ ~~Assistance~~
~~Program~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~federal~~ ~~Supplemental~~ ~~Nutrition~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Supplemental~~ ~~Nutrition~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program~~ ~~shall~~ ~~include:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~a~~ ~~Restaurant~~ ~~Meals~~ ~~Program~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~5–505~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~subtitle;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~a~~ ~~Heat~~ ~~and~~ ~~Eat~~ ~~Program~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~5–506~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~subtitle.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~The~~ ~~State~~ ~~shall~~ ~~bear~~ ~~the~~ ~~nonfederal~~ ~~portion~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~administrative~~ ~~costs~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Supplemental~~ ~~Nutrition~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program~~ ~~for~~ ~~each~~ ~~county.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~local~~ ~~department~~ ~~shall~~ ~~administer~~ ~~the~~ ~~Supplemental~~ ~~Nutrition~~
~~Assistance~~ ~~Program:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~supervision~~ ~~and~~ ~~control~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~and~~ ~~federal~~ ~~law.~~

~~(d)~~ ~~If~~ ~~a~~ ~~household~~ ~~includes~~ ~~an~~ ~~individual~~ ~~who~~ ~~is~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~62~~ ~~years~~ ~~old~~ ~~and~~ ~~receives~~
~~a~~ ~~federally~~ ~~funded~~ ~~benefit~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~amount~~ ~~less~~ ~~than~~ ~~$40~~ ~~per~~ ~~month~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~Supplemental~~
~~Nutrition~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program,~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~shall~~ ~~provide~~ ~~a~~ ~~supplement~~ ~~to~~ ~~increase~~ ~~the~~ ~~total~~
~~benefit~~ ~~to~~ ~~$40~~ ~~per~~ ~~month.~~

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ENROLL IN THE SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO MEETS THE FINANCIAL ELIGIBILITY
REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR A RECIPIENT OF
~~SUPPLEMENTAL~~ ~~SECURITY~~ ~~INCOME.~~

5–5A–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) “Office” means the Office of Home Energy Programs.

5–5A–07.

(a) (1) The Office shall:

(i) carry out an energy emergency crisis intervention program to
prevent low–income households, including the near poor, the elderly, households with
children, and those on fixed incomes from experiencing danger to health or survival as a
result of an energy emergency;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 207

(ii) establish intake procedures for those experiencing an energy
emergency;

(iii) establish guidelines for the income and program eligibility of
applicants; and

(iv) identify local public or private agencies to administer the crisis
intervention program.

(2) (i) The Office shall make payments to fuel vendors and utility
vendors that have provided service to persons qualifying for the crisis intervention
program.

(ii) The amount of assistance shall be based on need.

(b) (1) The Office shall carry out one or more fuel and utility assistance
programs to make payments on behalf of qualified households to defray fuel and utility
costs.

(2) (I) The Office shall determine program and income eligibility
guidelines.

(II) THE OFFICE SHALL ENROLL IN ANY FUEL AND UTILITY
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ANY HOUSEHOLD WITH AN INDIVIDUAL WHO MEETS THE
FINANCIAL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR A
RECIPIENT OF:

1. THE SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM;

2. TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES;

3. SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME; OR

4. MEANS–TESTED VETERANS AFFAIRS BENEFITS.

(3) The amount of assistance shall be based on need.

(c) For fiscal year 2023 only, the Governor shall appropriate to the Office an
amount equal to the unexpended appropriation to the Office for fiscal year 2021 funding
that was included in Supplemental Budget No. 5.

Article – Public Utilities

7–512.1.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 207 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) The Commission shall establish an electric universal service program
to assist electric customers with annual incomes[:

(i) at or below 175% of the federal poverty level; or

(ii) for a customer at least 67 years of age,] at or below 200% of the
federal poverty level.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2023~~ January 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4