START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 316 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 316 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax Checkoff - Maryland Veterans Trust Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund (MVTF) checkoff on the individual 
income tax return form. After the Comptroller deducts administrative expenses, the 
contributions are credited to MVTF. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to 
tax year 2025 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024 or 2025. General fund expenditures for the 
Comptroller’s Office increase by $79,000 in FY 2026 only. General fund expenditures for 
the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) increase by $71,600 in FY 2026; 
future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Nonbudgeted revenues to MVTF 
increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2026. Special fund revenues to other 
funds receiving contributions through income tax checkoffs may decrease beginning in 
FY 2026 (not shown below). 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
NonBud Rev. 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$150,600 
$90,500 
$95,300 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 316/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Comptroller must include a checkoff designated as the Maryland 
Veterans Trust Fund Contribution on the individual income tax return form. The checkoff 
must state that the individual, or each spouse in the case of a joint return, may contribute 
to the fund an amount designated by the individual. The individual deducts the amount of 
the contribution from any refund to which the individual is entitled or, if the individual is 
not entitled to a refund, the individual adds the amount of the contribution to the income tax 
paid with the return. The Comptroller must include, with the individual income tax return 
package, a description of the purposes of MVTF. From the contributions collected, the 
Comptroller distributes an amount necessary to administer the checkoff system to an 
administrative cost account and distributes the remainder to MVTF. 
 
Current Law:  The Chesapeake Bay and Endangered Species Fund, Maryland Cancer 
Fund, Developmental Disabilities Services and Support Fund, and Fair Campaign 
Financing Fund are the four current checkoffs on the personal income tax form. 
 
Maryland Veterans Trust Fund 
 
MVTF, established under § 9-913 of the State Government Article, is maintained by the 
Maryland Veterans Trust and consists of gifts and grants received by the trust, specified 
proceeds from the sale of tickets from instant ticket lottery machines by specified 
veterans’ organizations, specified donations from video lottery facility players, designated 
fees from certain special registration license plates, and specified civil penalty revenues. 
 
Money in the fund may be used to provide grants or loans to veterans and their families, 
public and private programs that serve veterans and their families, or any other programs 
that the trust considers to be within the purposes for which the trust is established. Money 
in the fund may also be invested in accordance with specified provisions and pay the costs 
of administering the fund through distribution to an administrative cost account in MDVA. 
 
Money expended from the fund is supplemental to and not intended to take the place of 
funding otherwise appropriated to MDVA. 
 
State Revenues:  Nonbudgeted revenues to MVTF increase beginning in fiscal 2026 to 
the extent the bill generates additional donations to the fund. In addition, revenues to other 
special funds that benefit from income tax checkoffs may decrease to the extent donations 
are shifted to MVTF. However, any such effect cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 316/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs 
 
As discussed above, MVTF is maintained by the Maryland Veterans Trust, which is staffed 
by MDVA. MDVA advises that, under the bill, an additional grants specialist is needed in 
order to handle increased grant activity resulting from increased MVTF revenues generated 
by the checkoff. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures for MDVA increase by $71,598 in fiscal 2026. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time grants specialist to assist with 
administering additional MVTF funds generated as a result of the bill. In addition, this 
estimate assumes that the position begins October 1, 2025, in advance of the filing period 
for tax year 2025 individual income tax returns. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$64,173 
Other Operating Expenses 
    7,425 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$71,598 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Comptroller’s Office 
 
General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by an estimated $79,000 
in fiscal 2026 only for one-time changes to the Comptroller’s tax systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 241 and HB 358 of 2021 and SB 203 and HB 389 of 2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 354 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Veterans Affairs; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 316/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 
2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4