START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 379

Chapter 379

(House Bill 322)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Home– and Community–Based Services for Children and Youth

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to expand access to and
provide reimbursement for certain wraparound, intensive in–home, and case
management services; requiring the Governor to include in the annual budget bill
certain appropriations to fund certain behavioral health services and supports; and
generally relating to home– and community–based services for children and youth.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–1101 ~~and~~ ~~15–1102~~ through 15–1103 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 11. Home– and Community–Based Services for Children and Youth”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 11. HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND
YOUTH.

15–1101.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “FAMILY–CENTERED TREATMENT” MEANS AN EVIDENCE–BASED
PRACTICE USED TO STABILIZE YOUTH IN THE HOME BY ADDRESSING UNDERLYING
FUNCTIONS OF BEHAVIOR IN ORDER TO REDUCE DISRUPTIONS IN THE HOME,
SCHOOL, AND COMMUNITY.

(C) “FUNCTIONAL FAMILY THERAPY” MEANS A FAMILY–BASED
PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION PROGRAM FOR HIGH–RISK YOUTH THAT
ADDRESSES COMPLEX AND MULTIDIMENSIONAL PROBLEMS THROUGH CLINICAL
PRACTICE THAT IS FLEXIBLY STRUCTURED AND CULTURALLY SENSITIVE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 379 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) “HIGH–FIDELITY WRAPAROUND MODEL” MEANS A RESEARCH–BASED
MODEL OF CARE COORDINATION THAT USES A HIGHLY STRUCTURED, TEAM–BASED,
FAMILY–CENTERED MANAGEMENT PROCESS TO MEET THE NEEDS OF CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS WHO EXPERIENCE COMPLEX EMOTIONAL, BEHAVIORAL, OR
MENTAL HEALTH NEEDS.

(E) “MENTAL HEALTH CASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM
THAT PROVIDES AN IDENTIFIED SUBSET OF WRAPAROUND SERVICES.

(F) “1915(I) MODEL” MEANS THE 1915(I) INTENSIVE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
SERVICES FOR CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIES PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER
TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 9, CHAPTER 89 OF THE CODE OF MARYLAND REGULATIONS.

(G) “VALUE–BASED PURCHASING” MEANS FINANCIALLY INCENTIVIZING
PROVIDERS TO MEET SELECTED OUTCOME MEASURES.

(H) “WRAPAROUND SERVICES” MEANS SERVICES PROVIDED TO CHILDREN
AND YOUTH WITH INTENSIVE MENTAL HEALTH NEEDS AND THEIR FAMILIES IN
THEIR COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING:

(1) INTENSIVE CARE COORDINATION;

(2) CHILD AND FAMILY TEAM MEETINGS; AND

(3) PLANS OF CARE THAT ARE INDIVIDUALIZED TO EACH FAMILY AND
INCLUDE:

(I) FORMAL SUPPORTS, INCLUDING INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY
THERAPY; AND

(II) INFORMAL SUPPORTS, INCLUDING INTENSIVE IN–HOME
SERVICES, RESPITE CARE, MOBILE CRISIS RESPONSE AND STABILIZATION, FAMILY
PEER SUPPORT, EXPERIENTIAL THERAPIES, AND FLEXIBLE FUNDS FOR GOODS AND
SERVICES THAT ARE IDENTIFIED IN THE PLAN OF CARE.

15–1102.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ENSURE THAT CARE COORDINATORS
DELIVERING SERVICES UNDER THE 1915(I) MODEL OR A MENTAL HEALTH CASE
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM RECEIVE TRAINING IN THE DELIVERY OF SERVICES UNDER
A HIGH–FIDELITY WRAPAROUND MODEL.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE REIMBURSEMENT FOR:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 379

(1) WRAPAROUND SERVICES DELIVERED BY CARE COORDINATORS
UNDER A HIGH–FIDELITY WRAPAROUND MODEL UNDER THE 1915(I) MODEL OR A
MENTAL HEALTH CASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM THAT IS COMMENSURATE WITH
INDUSTRY STANDARDS FOR THE REIMBURSEMENT OF THE DELIVERY OF
WRAPAROUND SERVICES;

(2) INTENSIVE IN–HOME SERVICES DELIVERED BY PROVIDERS USING
FAMILY–CENTERED TREATMENT, FUNCTIONAL FAMILY THERAPY, AND OTHER
EVIDENCE–BASED PRACTICES UNDER THE 1915(I) MODEL THAT IS COMMENSURATE
WITH INDUSTRY STANDARDS FOR THE REIMBURSEMENT OF THE DELIVERY OF
FAMILY–CENTERED TREATMENT, FUNCTIONAL FAMILY THERAPY, AND OTHER
EVIDENCE–BASED PRACTICES; AND

(3) AT LEAST ONE PILOT PROGRAM UTILIZING VALUE–BASED
PURCHASING FOR CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES.

(C) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2024, THE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION SHALL FUND 100 SLOTS IN THE MENTAL HEALTH CASE
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM FOR CHILDREN OR YOUTH WHO ARE NOT ELIGIBLE FOR
PROGRAM SERVICES AND WHO ARE AT RISK OF OUT–OF–HOME PLACEMENT.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL EXPAND ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA TO ENSURE
THAT ALL CHILDREN WHO ARE MEDICAID–ELIGIBLE WILL BE ABLE TO UTILIZE THE
~~1915(I)~~ ~~MODEL.~~

(E) (D) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL OPERATING
BUDGET BILL THE FOLLOWING AMOUNTS TO FUND CUSTOMIZED GOODS AND
SERVICES FOR YOUTH RECEIVING SERVICES UNDER THE 1915(I) MODEL OR MENTAL
HEALTH CASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM:

(1) $150,000 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025;

(2) $250,000 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026; AND

(3) $350,000 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2027 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER.

15–1103.

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2023, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE AND THE
HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON ENROLLMENT IN:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 379 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE 1915(I) MODEL; AND

(2) CHILD AND ADOLESCENT CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES.

(B) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS SERVED
BY EACH PROGRAM;

(2) WHETHER THE NUMBER REPRESENTS AN INCREASE OR A
DECREASE IN THE NUMBER SERVED; AND

(3) ANY STEP STEPS THE DEPARTMENT HAS TAKEN TO INCREASE
ENROLLMENT IN THE PROGRAMS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Department of Health, in
consultation with stakeholders, shall:

(1) review for the model established under § 1915(i) of the Social Security
Act:

(i) current eligibility requirements and provider reimbursement
rates generally, including value–based purchasing options; and

(ii) current eligibility requirements and provider reimbursement
rates for child and adolescent mental health case management services, including for youth
with primary substance use disorders; and

(2) submit recommendations for expanding eligibility and enrollment in
these programs to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article.

(b) On or before December 1, 2023, the Department shall consult early childhood
community–based services stakeholders to ensure that services comparable to those
available under the 1915(i) model are available for young children with acute or high
intensity behavioral health needs.

~~(c)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~December~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~and~~ ~~quarterly~~ ~~thereafter,~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~shall~~ ~~report~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Senate~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~House~~ ~~Health~~ ~~and~~
~~Government~~ ~~Operations~~ ~~Committee,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~
~~Article,~~ ~~on~~ ~~enrollment~~ ~~in:~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 379

~~(i)~~ ~~the~~ ~~1915(i)~~ ~~model;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~child~~ ~~and~~ ~~adolescent~~ ~~case~~ ~~management~~ ~~services.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~report~~ ~~shall~~ ~~include:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~the~~ ~~total~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~children~~ ~~and~~ ~~adolescents~~ ~~served~~ ~~by~~ ~~each~~
~~program;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~whether~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~represents~~ ~~an~~ ~~increase~~ ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~decrease~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~
~~number~~ ~~served;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~any~~ ~~steps~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~has~~ ~~taken~~ ~~to~~ ~~increase~~ ~~enrollment~~ ~~in~~
~~the~~ ~~programs.~~

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5