START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 360

Chapter 360

(House Bill 302)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Rare Disease Advisory Council

FOR the purpose of establishing the Rare Disease Advisory Council to study and make
recommendations on matters relating to individuals with rare diseases in the State;
and generally relating to the Rare Disease Advisory Council.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 13–4801 through 13–4804 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 48. Rare
Disease Advisory Council”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 48. RARE DISEASE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

13–4801.

THERE IS A RARE DISEASE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

13–4802.

(A) THE COUNCIL CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(3) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE; AND

(4) THE CHAIR OF THE STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HEREDITARY
AND CONGENITAL DISORDERS, OR THE CHAIR’S DESIGNEE;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 360 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF MINORITY HEALTH
AND HEALTH DISPARITIES, DESIGNATED BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE;

(6) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND MEDICAL
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM, DESIGNATED BY THE SECRETARY;

(7) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND INSURANCE
ADMINISTRATION, DESIGNATED BY THE MARYLAND INSURANCE COMMISSIONER;
AND

(8) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH
INSTITUTION THAT RECEIVES GRANT FUNDING FOR RARE DISEASE RESEARCH;

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF MINORITY
HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITIES;

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND MEDICAL
~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~PROGRAM;~~

(IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND INSURANCE
~~ADMINISTRATION;~~

(V) (II) ONE GENETICIST LICENSED AND PRACTICING IN THE
STATE;

(VI) (III) ONE REGISTERED NURSE OR ADVANCED PRACTICE
REGISTERED NURSE LICENSED AND PRACTICING IN THE STATE WITH EXPERIENCE
TREATING RARE DISEASES;

(VII) (IV) ONE PHYSICIAN LICENSED IN THE STATE WITH
EXPERIENCE TREATING RARE DISEASES;

(VIII) (V) ONE HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR, OR THE DESIGNEE
OF A HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR, FROM A HOSPITAL IN THE STATE THAT PROVIDES
CARE TO INDIVIDUALS DIAGNOSED WITH A RARE DISEASE;

(IX) (VI) ONE PHARMACIST LICENSED IN THE STATE WITH
EXPERIENCE DISPENSING DRUGS USED TO TREAT RARE DISEASES;

(X) (VII) TWO INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH
A RARE DISEASE;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 360

(XI) (VIII) ONE CAREGIVER OF AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A RARE
DISEASE;

(XII) (IX) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A RARE DISEASE PATIENT
ORGANIZATION THAT OPERATES IN THE STATE;

(XIII) (X) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BIOPHARMACEUTICAL
INDUSTRY;

(XIV) (XI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A HEALTH INSURANCE
CARRIER PROVIDING HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE IN THE STATE; AND

(XV) (XII) ONE MEMBER OF THE SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY WHO
IS ENGAGED IN RARE DISEASE RESEARCH; AND

(XIII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION THAT
PROVIDES CARE MANAGEMENT FOR INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED IN THE STATE’S RARE
AND EXPENSIVE CASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.

(B) FOR THE APPOINTED MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL, THE APPOINTMENT
PROCESS SHALL BE CONDUCTED IN A TRANSPARENT MANNER TO PROVIDE
INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AN OPPORTUNITY TO APPLY.

(C) ALL MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL MUST BE FULL–TIME RESIDENTS OF
THE STATE.

(D) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 3 YEARS.

(2) IF A VACANCY OCCURS ON THE COUNCIL, THE MEMBERS OF THE
COUNCIL SHALL APPOINT AN INDIVIDUAL TO FILL THE VACANCY BY MAJORITY
VOTE.

(E) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL DESIGNATE THE INITIAL CHAIR OF THE
COUNCIL TO SERVE A TERM OF 3 YEARS.

(2) THE INITIAL CHAIR DESIGNATED BY THE GOVERNOR MAY NOT
HOLD A POSITION WITHIN STATE GOVERNMENT.

(3) AT THE END OF THE TERM OF THE INITIAL CHAIR, THE MEMBERS
OF THE COUNCIL SHALL DESIGNATE A NEW CHAIR BY MAJORITY VOTE.

(4) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE TERM OF A CHAIR OF THE COUNCIL IS 2 YEARS.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 360 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COUNCIL.

(G) A MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COUNCIL; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(H) (1) THE INITIAL MEETING OF THE COUNCIL SHALL OCCUR ON OR
BEFORE DECEMBER 30, 2024.

(2) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, THE COUNCIL SHALL MEET AT
LEAST ONCE PER MONTH IN PERSON OR THROUGH AN ONLINE MEETING PLATFORM
AT A TIME DESIGNATED BY THE CHAIR.

(3) AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2025, THE COUNCIL SHALL MEET AT LEAST
ONCE PER QUARTER IN PERSON OR THROUGH AN ONLINE MEETING PLATFORM AT A
TIME DESIGNATED BY THE CHAIR.

13–4803.

(A) THE COUNCIL SHALL:

(1) CONVENE PUBLIC HEARINGS, MAKE INQUIRIES, AND SOLICIT
COMMENTS FROM THE PUBLIC TO ASSIST THE COUNCIL WITH A FIRST–YEAR SURVEY
OF THE NEEDS OF RARE DISEASE PATIENTS, CAREGIVERS, AND HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS IN THE STATE;

(2) CONSULT WITH EXPERTS ON RARE DISEASES TO DEVELOP POLICY
RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE PATIENT ACCESS TO AND THE QUALITY OF RARE
DISEASE SPECIALISTS, AFFORDABLE AND COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE
COVERAGE, RELEVANT DIAGNOSTICS, TIMELY TREATMENT, AND OTHER NEEDED
SERVICES;

(3) RESEARCH AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO STATE AGENCIES
AND INSURERS THAT PROVIDE SERVICES TO INDIVIDUALS WITH A RARE DISEASE ON
THE IMPACT OF PRIOR AUTHORIZATION, COST–SHARING, TIERING, OR OTHER
UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES ON THE PROVISION OF TREATMENT AND
CARE FOR PATIENTS;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 360

(4) ESTABLISH BEST PRACTICES AND PROTOCOLS TO INCLUDE IN
STATE PLANNING RELATED TO NATURAL DISASTERS AND PUBLIC HEALTH
EMERGENCIES OR OTHER EMERGENCY DECLARATIONS TO ENABLE CONTINUITY OF
CARE FOR RARE DISEASE PATIENTS AND ENSURE THAT SAFEGUARDS AGAINST
DISCRIMINATION FOR RARE DISEASE PATIENTS ARE IN PLACE;

(5) EVALUATE AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPLEMENT
NECESSARY IMPROVEMENTS TO STATE NEWBORN SCREENING PROGRAMS;

(6) (5) EVALUATE AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING
COVERAGE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASE PATIENTS, INCLUDING
PATIENTS WITH PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE AND PATIENTS ENROLLED
IN THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM, TO IMPROVE COVERAGE OF
DIAGNOSTICS, AND TO FACILITATE ACCESS TO NECESSARY HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS WITH EXPERTISE IN THE TREATMENT OF RARE DISEASES;

(7) (6) PUBLISH A LIST OF EXISTING AND PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE
RESOURCES ON RESEARCH, DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT, AND EDUCATION RELATING TO
RARE DISEASES ON THE COUNCIL’S WEBSITE WEBPAGE;

(8) (7) IDENTIFY AREAS OF UNMET NEEDS FOR RESEARCH THAT
CAN INFORM FUTURE STUDIES AND REPORTS BY THE COUNCIL;

(9) (8) IDENTIFY AND DISTRIBUTE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES FOR
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO FOSTER RECOGNITION AND OPTIMIZE TREATMENT OF
RARE DISEASES IN THE STATE; AND

(10) (9) RESEARCH AND IDENTIFY BEST PRACTICES TO ENSURE
CONTINUITY OF CARE FOR RARE DISEASE PATIENTS TRANSITIONING FROM
PEDIATRIC TO ADULT CARE.

(B) THE COUNCIL SHALL PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE PUBLIC TO
HEAR UPDATES AND PROVIDE INPUT ON THE COUNCIL’S ACTIVITIES.

(C) THE COUNCIL SHALL MAINTAIN A WEBSITE WEBPAGE FOR THE
PURPOSES OF:

(1) POSTING MEETING MINUTES AND NOTICES OF UPCOMING
MEETINGS;

(2) ALLOWING THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS TO THE COUNCIL;
AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 360 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) POSTING A LIST OF RESOURCES AS REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(7) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) (1) THE COUNCIL MAY SOLICIT FUNDS ON ITS BEHALF, INCLUDING BY
APPLYING FOR AVAILABLE FEDERAL OR STATE GRANTS.

(2) THE COUNCIL SHALL SET UP A METHOD TO SECURELY HOLD AND
DISTRIBUTE FUNDS TO SUPPORT THE DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.

13–4804.

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
COUNCIL SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
§ 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(B) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL:

(1) DESCRIBE THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL UNDER § 13–4803(A)
OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) DESCRIBE THE FUNDING SOURCES OF THE COUNCIL, INCLUDING
GRANTS THAT WERE APPLIED FOR AND ACCEPTED AND THE REMAINING BALANCES
OF ANY CURRENT GRANTS; AND

(3) PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE WAYS TO ADDRESS THE
NEEDS OF INDIVIDUALS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES IN THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the members of
the Rare Disease Advisory Council appointed by the Governor under § 13–4802 of the
Health – General Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall expire as follows:

(1) ~~four~~ seven members, including one member appointed under §
13–4802(a)(8)(vii) of the Health – General Article, in ~~2025;~~ 2028; and

(2) ~~six~~ seven members, including one member appointed under §
13–4802(a)(8)(vii) of the Health – General Article, in ~~2026;~~ ~~and~~ 2030.

~~(3)~~ ~~six~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2027.~~

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6