START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 366 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 366 
(Delegate Smith) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland School for the Blind - Public School Construction Program - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill maintains the Maryland School for the Blind’s (MSB) eligibility for funding under 
the Public School Construction Program (PSCP) beyond fiscal 2028 by repealing the 
termination date for MSB’s eligibility for those funds. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect on total funding for PSCP beginning in FY 2029, as that amount 
is determined annually by the Governor and General Assembly through the capital budget 
process. No effect on revenues.     
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that PSCP funds are awarded to MSB beginning in FY 2029, 
fewer funds are available for public school construction projects in local school systems. 
To the extent local school systems receive fewer State matching funds for school 
construction, any local funds otherwise reserved for school construction can be redirected 
to other local capital construction projects.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Public School Construction Program 
 
The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) manages State review and 
approval of local school construction projects. Each year, local systems develop and submit 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 366/ Page 2 
to IAC a facilities master plan that includes an analysis of future school facility needs based 
on the current condition of school buildings and projected enrollment. The master plan 
must be approved by the local school board. Subsequently, each local school system 
submits a capital improvement plan to IAC that includes projects for which it seeks 
planning and/or funding approval for the upcoming fiscal year, which may include projects 
that the local system has forward funded. In addition to approval from the local school 
board, the request for the upcoming fiscal year must be approved by the county’s governing 
body. Typically, the submission letter to IAC contains signatures of both the school board 
president and either the county executive and county council president or chair of the board 
of county commissioners. 
 
Based on its assessment of the relative merit of all the project proposals it receives, and 
subject to the projected level of school construction funds available, IAC determines which 
projects to fund through PSCP. By December 31 of each year, IAC must approve projects 
comprising 75% of the preliminary school construction allocation projected to be available 
by the Governor for the upcoming fiscal year. Local school systems may appeal these 
preliminary decisions by IAC. By March 1 of each year, IAC must recommend to the 
General Assembly projects comprising 90% of the allocation for school construction 
submitted in the Governor’s capital budget. Following the legislative session, IAC 
approves projects comprising the remaining school construction funds included in the 
enacted capital budget, no earlier than May 1. The final allocations are not subject to 
appeal. 
 
Maryland School for the Blind – Eligibility for Public School Construction Program 
Funding 
 
MSB is an independent, nonprofit organization. As it is not administered by a local school 
system, it is not otherwise eligible for funding from PSCP. However, Chapter 144 of 2012 
made MSB eligible for PSCP funding from fiscal 2013 through 2028. The State currently 
funds 93% of eligible costs for MSB’s school construction projects. Since fiscal 2013, IAC 
has approved funding for MSB construction projects totaling approximately $85.3 million. 
MSB is subject to the same application and approval process as local school systems that 
apply for PSCP funding.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 175 (Senators Guzzone and Benson) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 366/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3