START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 394 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 394 
(Delegate Watson) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act - Denial of Claims - Notice 
 
 
This bill alters the notification requirements under the Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA) 
for the State Treasurer or designee when denying a tort claim by authorizing the written 
notice of denial to be made by email or regular mail, as specified. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for postage and handling decrease by 
approximately $17,800 beginning in FY 2024. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
(17,800) 
(17,800) 
(17,800) 
(17,800) 
(17,800) 
Net Effect 
$17,800 
$17,800 
$17,800 
$17,800 
$17,800  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act – Denial of Claims Notice 
 
Under current law, a tort claim is denied finally when the Treasurer or designee sends the 
claimant written notice of denial by certified mail. The bill repeals this requirement and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 394/ Page 2 
authorizes the Treasurer or designee to send the claimant written notice of denial by email 
or regular mail if regular mail is the only available means of notifying the claimant. 
 
A tort claim may also be deemed denied if the Treasurer or designee fails to give notice of 
a final decision within six months after the filing of the claim. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under MTCA, the State statutorily waives its own 
common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA applies to tortious acts or 
omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel performed in the course 
of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made without malice or gross 
negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign or governmental 
immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the state employee 
committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004). 
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the 
scope of the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the 
State’s color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable. 
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if liability of 
the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a 
constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following limits on 
liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic damages may 
not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, 
regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a 
wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award 
for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of 
claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Treasurer sends out approximately 1,857 denial letters per year 
at a total cost of $17,846, which includes the cost of certified mail ($3.66 per letter over 
and above regular postage) as well as additional labor costs to handle the processing of 
certified mail (averaging $5.95 per letter). Under the bill, the Treasurer is authorized to 
send denial notices via email, which will result in an estimated annual savings of $17,846 in 
postage and handling expenses beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 394/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 150 (Senator Augustine)(By Request - Joint Committee on 
the Management of Public Funds) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3