START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 346 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 346 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Clinics for Low-Income Marylanders - Funding - Repeal of Sunset 
 
   
This bill makes the $250,000 distribution from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund by the 
Comptroller to the Tax Clinics for Low-Income Marylanders Fund (TCLIM) permanent 
beginning in fiscal 2024; the authorization for the Governor to include an appropriation to 
TCLIM in the annual budget is unaffected. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $250,000 annually beginning in FY 2024, 
reflecting the ongoing and now permanent distribution to TCLIM. In FY 2024 only, due to 
$250,000 in discretionary funding in the budget as introduced, TCLIM revenues and 
expenditures increase by $250,000 and higher education revenues and expenditures 
increase by $166,700. Annually thereafter, however, general fund expenditures are 
assumed to decrease by $250,000, and TCLIM and higher education revenues and 
expenditures are not affected (due to the required distribution). This bill establishes a 
mandated distribution beginning in FY 2024.    
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
SF Revenue 
$250,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Rev. 
$166,700 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
SF Expenditure 
$250,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$166,700 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 346/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  After making certain required distributions, for fiscal 2022 and 2023 only, 
the Comptroller was required to distribute $250,000 to TCLIM before the remaining net 
funds were distributed to the general fund. Beginning in fiscal 2024, the Governor may 
include in the annual budget an appropriation to TCLIM. 
 
TCLIM is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by the Comptroller. The purpose of the 
fund is to provide grants to the University of Maryland School of Law, the University of 
Baltimore School of Law, and the Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service (MVLS) to 
operate tax clinics for low-income Maryland residents. Money expended from the fund for 
this purpose is supplemental and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise 
would be appropriated for tax clinics. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in 
accordance with the State budget. TCLIM consists of revenue distributed by the 
Comptroller to it as well as any money appropriated in the State budget or from any other 
source.      
 
For each fiscal year, the total amount of grant money expended from the fund to support 
tax clinics must be distributed as follows:  one-third to the University of Maryland School 
of Law; one-third to the University of Baltimore School of Law; and one-third to MVLS.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Beginning in fiscal 2024, $250,000 in abandoned property proceeds 
administered by the Comptroller are permanently diverted to TCLIM to fund tax clinics 
(increasing TCLIM revenues and expenditures and higher education revenues and 
expenditures). It is assumed that the required distribution can be made with existing 
budgeted resources. Under current law, TCLIM received $250,000 in abandoned property 
proceeds in fiscal 2022 and 2023 only.  
 
The abandoned property proceeds in fiscal 2024 are in addition to the $250,000 in general 
fund expenditures for TCLIM reflected in the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced. Thus, 
TCLIM revenues and expenditures increase by $250,000. Based on the distribution 
requirements for TCLIM under current law, higher education revenues and expenditures 
for the two law schools increase by an estimated $166,667 (approximately $83,333 each) 
in fiscal 2024 to provide supplemental funding for existing tax clinics offered by the 
schools.   
 
This analysis assumes that, absent the required distribution, general fund expenditures 
would have continued to be provided at $250,000 in subsequent years as well. However, 
with a permanent funding source for TCLIM, general fund expenditures for TCLIM are 
assumed to decrease by $250,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025. Accordingly, there is 
no net effect on TCLIM or higher education revenues and expenditures in fiscal 2025 and 
beyond. Nevertheless, general fund expenditures for TCLIM continue to be discretionary 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 346/ Page 3 
under the bill; to the extent that general funding continues to be provided, TCLIM and 
related higher education revenues and expenditures increase.  
 
Additional Comments:  Both the University of Maryland and the University of Baltimore 
schools of law operate low-income tax clinics funded by grants from the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS). MVLS is a nonprofit provider of pro bono legal services in the State and 
offers a variety of legal services, including a low-income taxpayer clinic that assists with 
IRS tax issues. The clinics do not help prepare tax returns; rather, they assist individuals in 
dispute with the IRS. The clinics generally focus on issues related to federal, not State, 
taxes.  
 
The IRS awards matching grants of up to $100,000 per year to qualifying organizations to 
develop, expand, or maintain a low-income taxpayer clinic. Such a clinic must provide 
services for free or for no more than a nominal fee. At least 90% of the taxpayers the clinic 
represents must qualify as low income, meaning households below 250% of federal poverty 
guidelines. In addition, when a clinic represents a taxpayer, the dollar amount in 
controversy for any tax year generally must not exceed $50,000.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 312 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Tax Court; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3