START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 117

Chapter 117

(House Bill 395)

AN ACT concerning

State Government – State Facilities Changes and Closures – Procedures

FOR the purpose of requiring a principal department of the Executive Branch to take
certain actions before changing the use, purpose, or function of a State facility or
closing a State facility; and generally relating to changing the use of or closing a
State facility.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 8–306
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

8–306.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Change the use, purpose, or function” means an abrupt and
material change in the type of clients or inmates served in a facility, the licensed purpose
of a facility, or the principal activities carried out within a facility.

(ii) “Change the use, purpose, or function” does not mean a gradual
change in clients, inmates, or activities due to societal trends or needs.

(III) “CHANGE THE USE, PURPOSE, OR FUNCTION” DOES NOT
INCLUDE CLOSING A STATE FACILITY.

(3) “CLOSE A STATE FACILITY” MEANS TO CEASE, DISCONTINUE, OR
SUBSTANTIALLY ELIMINATE ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT WITHIN THE STATE
FACILITY.

(4) “EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
3–101 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 117 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(3)] (5) (i) “Public hearing” means an informational hearing, the sole
purpose of which is to obtain public comment and answer public questions.

(ii) “Public hearing” does not mean a contested case hearing under
Title 10, Subtitle 2 of this article.

[(4)] (6) “State facility” means:

(I) a facility that is owned, leased, or operated by the State for the
purpose of providing health, juvenile, or correctional services to clients or inmates; OR

(II) A FACILITY TO WHICH 25 OR MORE STATE EMPLOYEES ARE
REGULARLY ASSIGNED.

(b) (1) A principal department of the Executive Branch of the State
government may not change the use, purpose, or function of a State facility without [giving
notice as required in] COMPLYING WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF subsection (c) of this
section.

(2) A PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT MAY NOT CLOSE A STATE FACILITY WITHOUT COMPLYING
WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(c) (1) Before SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
BEFORE a principal department changes the use, purpose, or function of a State facility,
the principal department shall [hold a public hearing on the proposed change]:

(I) HOLD A PUBLIC HEARING; AND

(II) AT LEAST 90 DAYS BEFORE THE PUBLIC HEARING, GIVE
NOTICE TO:

1. THE PUBLIC, ON THE PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT’S
WEBSITE AND BY PRESS RELEASE;

2. ANY MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN WHOSE
DISTRICT THE STATE FACILITY IS LOCATED, BY E–MAIL AND CERTIFIED MAIL; AND

3. ANY EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE WITH BARGAINING
UNIT EMPLOYEES ASSIGNED TO THE STATE FACILITY, BY E–MAIL AND CERTIFIED
MAIL.

(2) The principal department shall, AT LEAST 30 DAYS BEFORE THE
PUBLIC HEARING, give notice of the [proposed change and the] hearing:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 117

(i) to the public, [by publication once a week for 2 consecutive weeks
before the hearing in a regularly published newspaper of general circulation in any county
that may be affected by the change] ON THE PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE AND
BY PRESS RELEASE; [and]

(ii) to each member of the General Assembly in whose district the
facility is located, by E–MAIL AND certified mail; AND

(III) TO ANY EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE WITH BARGAINING
UNIT EMPLOYEES ASSIGNED TO THE STATE FACILITY, BY E–MAIL AND CERTIFIED
MAIL.

(3) IF A GOVERNMENT AGENCY OR JUDICIAL BODY DETERMINES
THAT THERE IS AN EMERGENCY SITUATION THAT POSES A RISK TO THE HEALTH OR
SAFETY OF PATIENTS, INMATES, RESIDENTS, OR EMPLOYEES OF A STATE FACILITY,
THE PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT MAY MODIFY THE TIMELINES REQUIRED BY THIS
SUBSECTION, PROVIDED THAT ANY MODIFICATIONS MADE BY THE PRINCIPAL
DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE THE NOTICE, HEARING, AND OPPORTUNITY FOR
COMMENT REQUIRED BY THIS SUBSECTION AT THE EARLIEST POSSIBLE DATE,
UNLESS ORDERED OTHERWISE BY THE GOVERNMENT AGENCY OR JUDICIAL BODY.

(D) (1) BEFORE SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
BEFORE A PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT CLOSES A STATE FACILITY, THE PRINCIPAL
DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(I) HOLD A PUBLIC HEARING;

(II) AT LEAST 180 DAYS BEFORE THE PUBLIC HEARING, GIVE
NOTICE TO:

1. THE PUBLIC, ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE AND BY
PRESS RELEASE;

2. EACH MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
REPRESENTING THE DISTRICT IN WHICH THE STATE FACILITY IS LOCATED, BY
E–MAIL AND CERTIFIED MAIL; AND

3. ANY EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE WITH BARGAINING
UNIT EMPLOYEES ASSIGNED TO THE STATE FACILITY, BY E–MAIL AND CERTIFIED
MAIL;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 117 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) SUBMIT A REPORT JUSTIFYING EXPLAINING THE CLOSURE
TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE:

1. THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE;

2. THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE;

3. THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT
OPERATIONS COMMITTEE; AND

4. THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE;

(IV) AT LEAST 270 DAYS BEFORE HOLDING THE PUBLIC
HEARING, MAKE THE REPORT REQUIRED BY THIS PARAGRAPH PUBLICLY
AVAILABLE; AND

(V) AT LEAST 90 DAYS BEFORE HOLDING THE PUBLIC HEARING,
ALLOW EACH EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE AND A COMMITTEE LISTED UNDER ITEM
(III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH THAT RECEIVES THE REPORT REQUIRED BY THIS
SUBSECTION TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON THE REPORT.

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(III) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL ADDRESS:

(I) THE REASONS FOR THE CLOSURE;

(II) THE PLAN FOR CONTINUING OR DISCONTINUING THE STATE
FACILITY’S OPERATIONS;

(III) THE ANTICIPATED BUDGETARY IMPACT OF THE CLOSURE;

(IV) ANY PLANS FOR ASSISTING STATE EMPLOYEES AFFECTED
BY THE CLOSURE IN FINDING OTHER EMPLOYMENT; AND

(V) ANY PLANS FOR ASSISTING THE PATIENTS, INMATES, OR
RESIDENTS AFFECTED BY THE CLOSURE; AND

(VI) ANY PLANS FOR THE STATE FACILITY AFTER THE CLOSURE.

(3) IF A GOVERNMENT AGENCY OR JUDICIAL BODY DETERMINES
THAT THERE IS AN EMERGENCY SITUATION THAT POSES A RISK TO THE HEALTH OR
SAFETY OF PATIENTS, INMATES, RESIDENTS, OR EMPLOYEES OF A STATE FACILITY,
THE PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT MAY MODIFY THE TIMELINES REQUIRED BY THIS
– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 117

SUBSECTION, PROVIDED THAT ANY MODIFICATIONS MADE BY THE PRINCIPAL
DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE THE NOTICE, HEARING, AND OPPORTUNITY FOR
COMMENT REQUIRED BY THIS SUBSECTION AT THE EARLIEST POSSIBLE DATE,
UNLESS ORDERED OTHERWISE BY THE GOVERNMENT AGENCY OR JUDICIAL BODY.

[(d)] (E) (1) Before a principal department leases or purchases land,
buildings, or office space to be used for the purpose of providing health, juvenile, or
correctional services to clients or inmates, the principal department shall give written
notice of the proposed use of the land, buildings, or office space to each member of the
General Assembly in whose legislative district the property is located.

(2) (i) A member of the General Assembly may request that the
department hold a public hearing on the proposed use.

(ii) The department on whose behalf the property is being procured
or leased shall hold a public hearing on the proposed use upon the request of a member of
the General Assembly.

(iii) The department shall give notice of the hearing to the public as
provided in subsection (c)(2)(i) of this section.

[(e)] (F) (1) If, after a principal department ceases its use of a State facility,
the principal department or any other principal department plans to recommence operation
of the facility as a State facility, and the proposed operation of the facility would change its
use, purpose, or function, the principal department shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed operation.

(2) The principal department shall give notice of the hearing to the public
as provided in subsection (c)(2)(i) of this section.

(G) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO ALTER OR
DIMINISH AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE’S RIGHT TO BARGAIN.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5