START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 618

Chapter 618

(House Bill 316)

AN ACT concerning

Income Tax Checkoff – Maryland Veterans Trust Fund

FOR the purpose of establishing a certain income tax checkoff for voluntary contributions
to the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund; requiring the Comptroller to include a
checkoff on individual income tax return forms for voluntary contributions to the
Fund and to include certain information in each individual income tax return
package; and generally relating to an income tax checkoff for contributions to the
Maryland Veterans Trust Fund.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – General
Section 2–117 and 10–804(l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–913
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

2–117.

(A) (1) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL INCLUDE ON THE INDIVIDUAL
INCOME TAX RETURN FORM A CHECKOFF DESIGNATED AS THE “MARYLAND
VETERANS TRUST FUND CONTRIBUTION”.

(2) THE CHECKOFF SHALL STATE THAT:

(I) THE INDIVIDUAL, OR EACH SPOUSE IN THE CASE OF A JOINT
RETURN, MAY CONTRIBUTE TO THE MARYLAND VETERANS TRUST FUND THE
AMOUNT DESIGNATED BY THE INDIVIDUAL; AND

(II) 1. THE INDIVIDUAL SHALL DEDUCT THE AMOUNT OF THE
CONTRIBUTION FROM ANY REFUND TO WHICH THE INDIVIDUAL IS ENTITLED; OR
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 618 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS NOT ENTITLED TO A REFUND,
THE INDIVIDUAL SHALL ADD THE AMOUNT OF THE CONTRIBUTION TO THE INCOME
TAX TO BE PAID WITH THE RETURN.

(3) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL INCLUDE, WITH THE INDIVIDUAL
INCOME TAX RETURN PACKAGE, A DESCRIPTION OF THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE
MARYLAND VETERANS TRUST FUND WAS ESTABLISHED AND THE PURPOSES FOR
WHICH THE FUND MAY BE USED.

(B) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL:

(1) COLLECT THE CHECKOFF CONTRIBUTIONS AND ACCOUNT TO THE
STATE TREASURER FOR THE MONEY COLLECTED;

(2) FROM THE CONTRIBUTIONS COLLECTED, DISTRIBUTE THE
AMOUNT NECESSARY TO ADMINISTER THE CHECKOFF TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE COST
ACCOUNT; AND

(3) AFTER THE DISTRIBUTION UNDER ITEM (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
DISTRIBUTE THE REMAINDER OF THE MONEY COLLECTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
TO THE MARYLAND VETERANS TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–913 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

10–804.

(L) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY DESIGNATE A CONTRIBUTION TO THE MARYLAND
VETERANS TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–913 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE BY THE CHECKOFF ON THE RETURN.

Article – State Government

9–913.

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund.

(b) (1) There is a Maryland Veterans Trust established for the purpose of
providing monetary and other assistance to:

(i) veterans and their families; and

(ii) public and private programs that support veterans and their
families.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 618

(2) There is a Maryland Veterans Trust Fund.

(c) The Trust shall be a body corporate and shall have perpetual existence,
subject to modification or termination by the General Assembly if necessary to effectuate
its purpose or if its substantial purpose ceases to exist.

(d) The Fund consists of:

(1) gifts and grants that the Trust receives under § 9–914.2(a)(1) of this
subtitle; [and]

(2) contributions to the Fund from:

(i) the sale of tickets from instant ticket lottery machines under §
9–112(d) of this title;

(ii) the donations from video lottery facility players under §
9–1A–04(d)(19) of this title;

(iii) the designated fees from special registration plates for recipients
of an individually earned, combat–related armed forces medal under § 13–619.1 of the
Transportation Article; and

(iv) civil penalties collected in accordance with § 9–905.1 of this
subtitle; AND

(3) THE NET PROCEEDS FROM CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER THE INCOME
TAX CHECKOFF ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–117 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(e) Money in the Fund may only be used to:

(1) make grants and loans under § 9–914.2(a)(3) of this subtitle;

(2) be invested under § 9–914.3(b) of this subtitle; and

(3) pay the costs of administering the Fund through distribution to an
administrative cost account in the Department.

(f) Money expended from the Fund is not intended to take the place of funding
that would otherwise be appropriated to the Department.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, ~~2022~~
2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 12, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3