START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 749

Chapter 749

(House Bill 384)

AN ACT concerning

Institutions of Higher Education – Transcripts – Prohibition on Punitive
Measures Related to Student Debt

FOR the purpose of prohibiting an institution of higher education from refusing to provide
a current or former student with a transcript or taking other punitive measures
regarding a student’s transcript request because the student owes a debt to the
institution of higher education; and generally relating to the prohibition on punitive
measures by institutions of higher education regarding transcript requests from
students who owe debts to the institution.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 15–118
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

15–118.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “DEBT” MEANS ANY MONEY, OBLIGATION, CLAIM, OR SUM
DUE OR OWED BY A STUDENT TO AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

(II) “DEBT” INCLUDES:

1. CREDIT EXTENDED BY OR ON BEHALF OF THE
INSTITUTION THAT A STUDENT IS OBLIGATED TO REPAY; AND

2. A NONFEDERAL LOAN OR DEBT AGREEMENT THAT IS
ISSUED EXPRESSLY FOR POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION EXPENSES AND THAT IS
GUARANTEED BY:

A. AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION; OR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 749 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

B. A PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL LENDER THAT IS
AFFILIATED WITH AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

(III) “DEBT” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE FEE, IF ANY, CHARGED TO
A STUDENT FOR THE ACTUAL COSTS OF PROVIDING A TRANSCRIPT.

(3) “STUDENT” INCLUDES CURRENT STUDENTS AND FORMER
STUDENTS OF AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

(B) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION MAY NOT:

(1) REFUSE TO PROVIDE A TRANSCRIPT TO A STUDENT BECAUSE THE
STUDENT OWES A DEBT;

(2) CONDITION THE ISSUANCE OF A TRANSCRIPT ON THE PAYMENT
OF A DEBT;

(3) CHARGE A HIGHER FEE FOR OBTAINING A TRANSCRIPT BECAUSE
A STUDENT OWES A DEBT;

(4) PROVIDE LESS FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF A TRANSCRIPT
REQUEST BECAUSE A STUDENT OWES A DEBT; OR

(5) USE TRANSCRIPT ISSUANCE AS A TOOL FOR DEBT COLLECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2