START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 388 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 388 
(Delegate Watson) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Bond Sales - Notification of the Public 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Board of Public Works (BPW) and the State Treasurer to give 
public notice of a State bonds sale through the Municipal Market Monitor (TM3) or a 
similar service or method as the State Treasurer deems appropriate. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in general fund expenditures as the bill will 
enable BPW and the State Treasurer to utilize less costly forms of notification. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  BPW must give public notice of the sale of State bonds at least 10 days 
prior to the public sale. The notice must state the date, time, and place of the public sale. 
 
BPW must sell State bonds to the bidder who offers the lowest net interest cost to the State 
or meets the other terms or conditions of sale or issuance set by BPW. However, BPW may 
reject all bids if it determines that no bid is satisfactory and that it is in the best interest of 
the State to reject all bids. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 388/ Page 2 
By resolution, BPW may postpone the time for receipt of proposals for the bonds without 
republishing the form of advertisement for the bonds. 
 
The State Treasurer must provide notice of the new date and time of sale at least 24 hours 
prior to the time proposals are to be submitted; however, the new date may not be more 
than 30 days after the originally scheduled date of sale. The public notice may be given by 
Munifacts News Service or a similar service or method the State Treasurer deems 
appropriate. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 152 (Senator Augustine)(By Request - Joint Committee on 
the Management of Public Funds) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Treasurer’s Office; Board of Public Works; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2