START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 371 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 371 
(Delegate Attar) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Recordation Tax - Indemnity Mortgage Exemption - Threshold Amount 
 
 
This bill increases the exemption threshold for certain indemnity mortgage transactions 
from $3.0 million to $12.5 million. The bill requires either the tax collector or Clerk of the 
Circuit Court in a jurisdiction that provides the tax exemption to submit a specified report 
each year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and applies to instruments of writing 
recorded on or after July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease beginning in FY 2025 as a result of 
commissions not being collected by the clerks of the circuit court, to the extent the 
exemption is granted. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant reduction in local recordation tax revenues beginning 
in FY 2025, to the extent the exemption is granted. Reporting requirements can be handled 
with existing local government resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires either the tax collector or Clerk of the Circuit Court in 
each jurisdiction that provides the recordation tax exemption to submit an annual report to 
the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee 
beginning July 1, 2025, and each July 1 thereafter. The report must include the following:  
(1) the total number of indemnity mortgages recorded that were exempt from recordation 
tax; (2) the amount of debt secured by each indemnity mortgage that was exempt from 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 371/ Page 2 
recordation tax; and (3) the amount of recordation tax revenue forgone by the county due 
to the indemnity mortgage exemption. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 267 and 268 of 2013 (1) increased the value of an indemnity 
mortgage that is exempt from recordation tax to $3.0 million; (2) required that a series of 
indemnity mortgages that are part of the same transaction must be considered as one for 
purposes of the recordation tax; (3) allowed indemnity mortgages recorded before 
July 1, 2012, to be amended without incurring the recordation tax on the original loan 
amount; (4) altered the definition of supplemental instrument of writing to include an 
instrument of writing that amends and restates a previously recorded instrument of writing 
regardless of whether the recordation tax was paid on such an instrument of writing; 
(5) specified that an indemnity mortgage that is recorded in multiple counties is not subject 
to the recordation tax on the full value of the mortgage in each county; (6) required that 
recordation tax be paid on the difference between the unpaid principal balance of the 
original loan and the amount of any new loan; and (7) allowed commercial mortgages, 
including indemnity mortgages, to be refinanced without incurring recordation tax in the 
same manner as residential mortgages. 
 
An indemnity mortgage works as follows. A lender agrees to loan money to a borrower on 
two conditions:  (1) that a third party guarantees repayment of the loan; and (2) that the 
guarantor executes a mortgage on real property to secure the guarantee. An indemnity 
mortgage is the instrument that manifests the pledge of the property. An indemnity 
mortgage is recorded so as to establish a lien on the property. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As of July 1, 2019, the clerks of the circuit court collect local 
recordation taxes in 10 counties – Allegany, Calvert, Dorchester, Garrett, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, Somerset, St. Mary’s, Washington, and Worcester. In the other 
14 jurisdictions, local finance offices are responsible for the collection of recordation taxes. 
 
The clerks of the court who collect the tax are entitled to a commission of between 3% and 
5% of all public monies collected, which, unless otherwise specified, are remitted to the 
State general fund. As a result, any decrease in local recordation tax revenue will also 
decrease the amount of the commissions collected by the clerks and remitted to the 
general fund. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local recordation tax revenues may decrease by a potentially 
significant amount beginning in fiscal 2025, to the extent the tax exemption is granted. 
However, the exact amount of the revenue decrease cannot be reliably estimated and 
depends on (1) the number of jurisdictions granting the recordation tax exemption; (2) the 
number of transactions that occur each year; and (3) the value of the consideration for these 
transactions. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 371/ Page 3 
Local recordation tax revenues are projected to total $609.0 million in fiscal 2023. 
Recordation tax rates range from $2.50 per $500 of transaction in Baltimore and Howard 
counties to $7.00 per $500 of transaction in Frederick County. A majority of counties have 
tax rates set between $3.00 and $5.00. 
 
Additional information on local recordation tax rates and revenues can be found in the 
County Revenue Outlook report. A copy of the report is available on the Department of 
Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 476 (Senators Zucker and Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3