START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 25

Chapter 25

(House Bill 388)

AN ACT concerning

Bond Sales – Notification of the Public

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of Public Works and the State Treasurer to
provide public notice of a public sale of State bonds by a service or method deemed
appropriate by the State Treasurer; and generally relating to public notification of
the sale of State bonds.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 8–123
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

8–123.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the Board shall offer State bonds
at a public sale.

(b) (1) At least 10 days before the date of a public sale, the Board shall give
public notice of the sale.

(2) The notice shall state the date, time, and place of the public sale.

(3) THE NOTICE MAY BE GIVEN BY THE MUNICIPAL MARKET
MONITOR (TM3) OR A SIMILAR SERVICE OR SUCH OTHER METHOD AS THE
TREASURER DEEMS APPROPRIATE.

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, at a public sale,
the Board shall sell State bonds for cash to the responsible bidder who:

(i) offers the lowest net interest cost to the State; or

(ii) meets other terms or conditions of sale or issuance that the Board
has set.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 25 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Whenever the Board determines that no bid is satisfactory and that it
is in the best interests of the State to reject all bids, the Board may reject the bids.

(d) (1) By resolution, the Board may postpone the time for receipt of proposals
for the bonds without republishing the form of advertisement for the bonds.

(2) (i) The Treasurer shall provide notice of the new date and time of
sale not less than 24 hours prior to the time proposals are to be submitted, which date may
not be more than 30 days after the originally scheduled date of sale.

(ii) The notice may be given by [Munifacts News Service] THE
MUNICIPAL MARKET MONITOR (TM3) or a similar service or such other method as the
Treasurer deems appropriate.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2