START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 370 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 370 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
6888th Central Postal Directory Battalion Day 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to annually proclaim March 9 as 6888th Central Postal 
Directory Battalion Day in recognition of the service of the women of the 6888th Central 
Postal Directory Battalion during World War II. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Commemorating 6888th Central Postal Directory Battalion Day does 
not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Sixteen official commemorative days, seven months, and one week are 
recognized in State law, as shown in Exhibit 1. The Governor also must issue a 
proclamation each year encouraging citizens and other individuals to observe a moment of 
silence at 3:00 p.m. on Memorial Day to unite in remembrance and commemorate the 
heroic acts and efforts of Marylanders who have served and died in the U.S. Armed Forces. 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 370/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Official Commemorative Days and Months in Maryland 
 
Asian Lunar New Year Day1 
January/February 
Black History Month 
February 
Irish-American Heritage Month 
March 
Women’s History Month 
March 
Tuskegee Airmen Commemoration Day2 
March 
Welcome Home Vietnam Veterans Day 
March 30 
Crime Victim and Advocate Commemorative Day 
April 3 
John Hanson’s Birthday3 
April 13 
National Healthcare Decisions Day 
April 16 
Maryland Centenarians Day4 
May 
Negro Baseball League Day5 
May 
Law Day U.S.A. 
May 1 
Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Services Workers Day6 
June 
Chesapeake Bay Awareness Week7 
June 
Maryland Charter Day 
June 20 
Thurgood Marshall Day 
July 2 
Caribbean Heritage Month 
August 
Hispanic Heritage Month8 
September/October 
German-American Heritage Month 
October 
South Asian American Heritage Day 
October 2 
Poetry Day 
October 15 
American Indian Heritage Month 
November 
Maryland Emancipation Day 
November 1 
Annapolis Charter Day 
December 17 
 
1 Day designated as new year on the Asian lunar calendar. 
2 Commemorated on the fourth Thursday in March. 
3 John Hanson served as the first president of the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation 
from 1781 to 1782. 
4 Commemorated on the second Thursday in May. 
5 Commemorated on the second Saturday in May. 
6 Commemorated on the first Sunday in June. 
7 Commemorated during the second week in June. 
8 Commemorated from September 15 to October 15. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 370/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 265 (Senator Watson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Samuel A. Kebede 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3