START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 372 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 372 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education – Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship – 
Altering Name of Scholarship 
 
 
This bill renames the Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship to be the 
Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can rename the 
scholarship with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Veterans and active-duty members of the U.S. Armed Forces who served 
in Afghanistan and Iraq, and members of the reserve or Maryland National Guard who 
were activated as a result of the conflicts, are eligible for the scholarships, as are their 
children, stepchildren, and spouses. To qualify, an applicant must also be a Maryland 
resident and must be accepted for admission or enrolled in a regular undergraduate program 
at a Maryland institution of higher education or a two-year terminal certificate program in 
which the course work is eligible for transfer into a baccalaureate program at a Maryland 
institution of higher education. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 372/ Page 2 
A recipient is not required to file for financial aid; however, a recipient who does file for 
financial aid must file by March 1. A scholarship may supplement, but is not contingent 
on, any federal education benefits for which a recipient qualifies as a result of an 
individual’s military or military dependent status. Recipients must maintain a grade point 
average of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale and may hold the scholarship for up to five years of 
full-time study or eight years of part-time study. 
 
The annual amount of a scholarship may not exceed 50% of the equivalent annual tuition, 
mandatory fees, and room and board at the University System of Maryland institution with 
the highest annual expenses for full-time resident undergraduates, excluding the University 
of Maryland, Baltimore Campus and the University of Maryland Global Campus. The 
Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) in MHEC may not award an initial 
scholarship under the program after June 30, 2030, although existing scholarships may be 
renewed after that date. 
 
Funding for the scholarship program is as provided in the annual State budget. In addition, 
senators and delegates may authorize OSFA to award their senatorial and delegate 
scholarship funds to eligible recipients of the scholarships. There is a Veterans of the 
Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship Fund. MHEC may accept gifts or grants for the 
fund and must report annually on the status of the fund. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although MHEC advises that it incurs approximately $1,500 in 
contractual costs to update the Maryland College Aid Processing System to reflect the 
name change, the Department of Legislative Services advises this cost can likely be 
absorbed within existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 289 (Senator King, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 372/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3