START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 778

Chapter 778

(House Bill 320)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Longitudinal Data System – Definition of Student Data – Alteration

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “student data” for purposes of the Maryland
Longitudinal Data System to include student disability data by specific disability
category; and generally relating to student data and the Maryland Longitudinal
Data System.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 24–701(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 24–701(l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

24–701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Center” means the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center.

(l) (1) “Student data” means data relating to or impacting student
performance.

(2) “Student data” includes:

(i) State and national assessments;

(ii) Course–taking and completion;

(iii) Grade point average;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 778 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) Remediation;

(v) Retention;

(vi) Degree, diploma, or credential attainment;

(vii) Enrollment;

(viii) Demographic data;

(ix) Juvenile delinquency records;

(x) Elementary and secondary school disciplinary records;

(xi) Child welfare data;

(xii) License, industry certificate, or vocational certificate; [and]

(xiii) Personally identifiable information; AND

(XIV) STUDENT DISABILITY DATA BY SPECIFIC DISABILITY
CATEGORY.

(3) “Student data” does not include medical and health records.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2