START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 345 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 345 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County - Alcohol Beverage Services - Advisory Board MC 04-23 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Montgomery County Alcohol Beverage Services 
(ABS) Advisory Board to allow designees of the directors of ABS and the 
Montgomery County Department of Police, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Montgomery County 
operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  ABS operates dispensaries for the wholesale distribution and retail sale of 
alcoholic 
beverages 
in 
Montgomery 
County. 
ABS 
is 
separate 
from 
the 
Montgomery County Board of License Commissioners, which issues alcoholic beverages 
licenses. Generally, ABS maintains a monopoly on the wholesale distribution of beer, 
wine, and liquor and the retail sale of liquor for off-premises consumption. Among other 
responsibilities, ABS must report at least quarterly to the Montgomery County Executive 
on recommendations for the improvement of (1) the alcoholic beverages control and 
enforcement activities of the county and (2) the operations of the dispensary and 
distribution systems from the standpoint of efficiency, service provided, and convenience 
to the public. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 345/ Page 2 
The ABS Advisory Board is comprised of the following eight members: (1) the director of 
ABS; (2) the director of the Montgomery County Department of Police; (3) the chair of the 
Montgomery County Board of License Commissioners; and (4) five members who are 
county residents appointed by the county executive with the consent of the county council. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2