START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 90

Chapter 90

(House Bill 345)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County – Alcohol Beverage Services – Advisory Board

MC 4–23

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Advisory Board of the Alcohol Beverage
Services of Montgomery County to include a designee of the Director of the Services
and a designee of the Director of the Montgomery County Department of Police; and
generally relating to the Alcohol Beverage Services of Montgomery County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 25–102 and 25–306(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 25–306(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

25–102.

This title applies only in Montgomery County.

25–306.

(a) There is an Advisory Board in the Services.

(b) The Advisory Board consists of the following eight members:

(1) the Director OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(2) the Director of the County Department of Police OR THE DESIGNEE OF
THE DIRECTOR OF THE COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF POLICE;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 90 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) the Chair of the Board of License Commissioners; and

(4) five members who are county residents appointed by the County
Executive with the consent of the County Council.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2