START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 321 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 321 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Cigarette Restitution Fund - Payments for Sale and Marketing of Electronic 
Smoking Devices - Use 
 
 
This bill requires the Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF) to include a separate account 
consisting of payments received by the State from any judgment, settlement, penalty, offer 
of compromise, or any other enforcement action related to the sale and marketing of 
electronic smoking devices (ESDs). Distributions from the separate account may be used, 
consistent with any other provision of State law, to supplement general fund appropriations 
for specified programs that aim to reduce the use of tobacco products by individuals 
younger than age 21. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the bill does not directly affect the total amount of funds available 
to Maryland from any judgment, settlement, penalty, offer of compromise, or any other 
enforcement action, it is not anticipated to significantly affect overall State finances, but 
may redirect future spending, as discussed below. Any additional costs to administer an 
additional account can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local government operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An “ESD” is a device that can be used to deliver aerosolized or vaporized 
nicotine to an individual inhaling from the device. “ESD” includes (1) an electronic 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 321/ Page 2 
cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic 
hookah, a vape pen and vaping liquid and (2) any component, part, or accessory of such a 
device regardless of whether or not it is sold separately, including any substance intended 
to be aerosolized or vaporized during use of the device. “ESD” excludes a drug, device, or 
combination product authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration under 
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or a battery or battery charger when sold separately.   
 
Chapters 172 and 173 of 1999 established CRF, which is supported by payments made 
under the Master Settlement Agreement (MSA). Through the MSA, settling tobacco 
manufacturers pay the litigating parties – 46 states, 5 territories, and the District of 
Columbia – substantial annual payments in perpetuity. The distribution of MSA funds 
among the states is determined by formula; as of April 2022, Maryland has received over 
$3.3 billion since 1999.  
 
The use of CRF funds is restricted by statute. The Governor must include appropriations 
from CRF in the annual budget bill equivalent to the lesser of $100.0 million or 90% of the 
funds estimated to be available to CRF in the fiscal year for which the appropriations are 
made. At least 30% of the appropriations must be made to Medicaid. At least 50% of the 
appropriations must be dedicated to the Tobacco Use Prevention and Cessation Program; 
the Cancer Prevention, Education, Screening, and Treatment Program; specified activities 
of the Southern Maryland Agricultural Development Commission; and other programs that 
serve the following purposes:  
 
 
reduction of the use of tobacco products by individuals younger than age 21; 
 
implementation of the Southern Maryland Regional Strategy-Action Plan for 
Agriculture with an emphasis on alternative crop uses for agricultural land now used 
for growing tobacco; 
 
public and school education campaigns to decrease tobacco use with initial 
emphases on areas targeted by tobacco manufacturers in marketing and promoting 
cigarette and tobacco products; 
 
smoking cessation programs; 
 
enforcement of laws regarding tobacco sales; 
 
the Maryland Health Care Foundation; 
 
primary health care in rural areas of the State and areas targeted by tobacco 
manufacturers in marketing and promoting their products; 
 
prevention, treatment, and research concerning specified diseases, tobacco product 
use, and tobacco control, including operating costs and related capital projects;  
 
substance abuse treatment and prevention programs; and 
 
any other public purpose. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 321/ Page 3 
For each fiscal year for which appropriations are made, 0.15% of CRF must be 
appropriated for the purposes of enforcement of Title 16, Subtitle 5 of the Business 
Regulation Article (which governs escrow requirements for nonparticipating tobacco 
product manufacturers). Any additional appropriations from CRF may be made for any 
lawful purpose. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill directs payments received by the State from any judgment, 
settlement, penalty, offer of compromise, or other enforcement action related to the sale 
and marketing of ESDs to a new account within CRF. The bill does not affect the amount 
or timing of any special fund revenues that may be received; rather, it redirects such 
revenues to a separate account and specifies how they may be used. 
 
According 
to 
a 
December 
2022 
press 
release 
from 
the 
Office 
of 
the 
Attorney General (OAG), JUUL Labs and 33 states and territories (including Maryland) 
announced an agreement of more than $434.5 million that resolves investigation into the 
manufacturer’s marketing and sales practices directed toward youth. The settlement will 
be paid out over a period of five to nine years. Maryland is expected to receive at least 
$13.0 million from the settlement. However, the exact amount and payment schedule for 
the State remains to be determined. 
 
While the bill does not impact revenues received by the State, it does impact how such 
revenues will be distributed and the purpose for which they may be appropriated. Presently, 
any payments received by the State from any judgment, settlement, penalty, offer of 
compromise, or any other enforcement action related to the sale and marketing of ESDs 
accrue to CRF and are subject to the distribution provisions outlined in statute, which 
include a requirement that 30% of annual appropriations from CRF be made to Medicaid, 
50% to various specified programs, and 0.15% for enforcement of escrow requirements for 
nonparticipating tobacco product manufacturers. Under the bill, any such funds must be 
placed in a separate account and consistent with any other provision of State law, the funds 
may be used to supplement general fund spending on programs aimed at reducing the use 
of tobacco products by individuals younger than age 21. 
 
While the bill does not specify which programs aimed at reducing youth tobacco use may 
receive funding under the bill, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) advises that it 
is statutorily responsible for developing and implementing strategies to prevent persons 
younger than age 21 from accessing and using tobacco products. Thus, MDH anticipates 
that it will be allocated funds from the account. Assuming that funds are allocated to MDH, 
MDH advises that it would need to employ additional staff to manage and implement the 
funding. Any special fund revenues would cover special fund expenditures. 
 
As noted above, Maryland is expected to receive $13.0 million over five to nine years from 
the JUUL Labs settlement. Given the bill’s effective date and the timing of the budget 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 321/ Page 4 
process, any payments received from the settlement in the near term would likely not be 
subject to the required distribution until the fiscal 2025 budget. Accordingly, funding for 
programs within MDH (and/or another entity that targets underage use) likely increases, 
while funding available for other programs likely decreases beginning in fiscal 2025 until 
the payments under the settlement expire. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4