START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 309 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 309 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Employee Rights and Protections - Personnel Actions and Harassment - 
Complaints 
 
   
This bill expands the timeframe for a State employee in the Executive Branch, or an 
applicant to an Executive Branch agency, to file a complaint alleging that political 
affiliation, belief, opinion, or other nonmerit factors were used in an employment decision. 
The bill also expressly allows a State employee in the Executive Branch, or an applicant to 
an Executive Branch agency, to file a complaint that alleges harassment by an employer 
and requires such a complaint to be filed within two years after the alleged violation that 
is the basis for the complaint.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent that the bill results in additional complaints; however, any such impact cannot be 
reliably predicted or estimated without actual experience under the bill. Revenues are not 
affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  State law governs both personnel actions by public-sector 
employers, (such as State agencies and local governments), and private-sector employers 
through various rights granted to employees and prohibitions against certain activities and 
actions. For example, all employers are expressly prohibited from, among other things, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 309/ Page 2 
(1) requesting or requiring genetic tests or genetic information as a condition of hiring or 
determining benefits; (2) failing or refusing to make a reasonable accommodation for the 
known disability of an otherwise qualified employee or an applicant for employment; and 
(3) (directly related to the bill and discussed more thoroughly in the following section) 
engaging in harassment of an employee. 
 
Specific to State employees in, and applicants to be employed by the Executive Branch of 
State government, most employment and appointment decisions (with limited exceptions 
for certain special appointments) must be made without regard to the applicant or 
employee’s political affiliation, belief, or opinion. For a general employee, any other 
nonmerit factor is also prohibited from being considered; however, this prohibition does 
not apply for management positions and appointments. An applicant or employee may file, 
with the head of a principal unit, a written complaint that alleges a violation of this 
requirement; however, under current law, the complaint must be filed within 30 days after 
the complainant first knew of or reasonably should have known of the alleged violation 
that is the basis for the complaint. 
 
Under the bill:  
 
 
the aforementioned 30-day time limit for a complainant to file a complaint is 
increased to one year after the complainant first knew or reasonably should have 
known of the alleged violation that is the basis for the complaint; and  
 
 
a State employee in, or an applicant to be employed by the Executive Branch of 
State government, may file with the head of a principal unit a written complaint that 
alleges harassment by the employer; such a complaint must be filed within two years 
after the alleged violation that is the basis for the complaint.  
 
Unlawful Employment Practices – Harassment  
 
Employers in the State, including public-sector employers, are expressly prohibited from 
taking certain discriminatory or adverse actions against their employees, including 
engaging in harassment of an employee. “Harassment” includes sexual harassment and 
other unwelcome and offensive conduct, which need not be severe or pervasive, when 
(1) the conduct is based on race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, 
marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability and (2) affects someone’s 
working environment or employment, as specified. 
 
When an instance of harassment occurs, the employer is liable for the acts or omissions 
toward an employee or applicant for employment committed by an individual who directs, 
supervises, or evaluates the work activities of the employee or who otherwise undertakes 
or recommends tangible employment actions for the affected individual. An employer is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 309/ Page 3 
also liable if the negligence of the employer led to the harassment or continuation of 
harassment. 
 
The Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) is granted authority to receive 
harassment complaints and may take specified enforcement actions, including the 
assessment of a civil penalty and the bringing of a civil action against the offending 
employer. Complaints alleging harassment against an employer must be filed within 
two years after the harassment allegedly occurred. Civil penalties range from $500 to 
$2,500, based on the previous number of unlawful employment practices committed by the 
employer, and accrue to the general fund. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill’s significant extension of the timeframe during which an 
individual may file one of the complaints affected by the bill (which are commonly referred 
to as equal employment opportunity complaints) and express authorization to file an equal 
employment opportunity complaint about harassment may increase the number of 
complaints filed throughout State government. The Department of Budget and 
Management advises that many agencies have only a single staff to handle equal 
employment opportunity issues; thus, if a significant number of complaints is filed, 
affected State agencies are likely to experience additional costs for staff or contractual 
assistance to investigate and otherwise manage the complaint process. Moreover, 
complaints that are made near the end of the extended timeframes established by the bill 
may be particularly difficult and/or costly to investigate if the employees involved in the 
complaint are in different positions, or cannot remember details about an alleged incident, 
or if potential witnesses are no longer employed by the State.  
 
However, any such impact wholly depends on whether additional complaints are filed and 
the timing of their filing, which cannot be reliably predicted or estimated without actual 
experience under the bill.  
 
Regarding the express authorization to file a complaint of harassment, as noted above, the 
State already has a regulatory process in place to handle harassment through MCCR. It is 
unclear at this time if and how the two regulatory processes would interact under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 574 (Senators Lewis Young and Salling) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 309/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; University System of Maryland; Office of Administrative Hearings; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4