START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 395 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 395 
(Delegate White, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government - State Facilities Changes and Closures - Procedures 
 
   
This bill establishes specified notice, public hearing, and reporting requirements when a 
principal department of the Executive Branch of State government seeks to close a State 
facility. The bill also modifies existing notice and public hearing requirements that 
generally must be followed when a principal department seeks to (1) change the use, 
purpose, or function of a State facility; (2) lease or purchase property for the purpose of 
providing health, juvenile, or correctional services to clients or inmates; or (3) recommence 
operations of a State facility. The bill expands the notice and hearing requirements in each 
of these circumstances to apply for a facility to which 25 or more State employees are 
regularly assigned. The bill may not be construed to alter or diminish an exclusive 
representative’s right to bargain.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. State operations and finances may be affected to the extent that the bill delays 
the closure, reopening, or change in use of any State facility, but any such effect is likely 
to be minimal and absorbable.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations and finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The definition of “State facility” is expanded to include any facility to 
which 25 or more State employees are regularly assigned. Thus, the following notice and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 395/ Page 2 
hearing requirements apply for any such facility in addition to a facility owned, leased, or 
operated by the State for the purpose of providing health, juvenile, or correctional services 
to clients or inmates.  
 
Closure of State Facilities 
 
Before a principal department of the Executive Branch of State government closes a State 
facility, the principal department must hold a public hearing. At least 180 days before the 
public hearing, the department must (1) give notice to the public, each member of the 
General Assembly that represents the district in which the facility is located, and any 
exclusive representative with bargaining unit employees assigned to the facility and 
(2) submit a report explaining the closure to the Governor and specified committees of the 
General Assembly. At least 270 days before the hearing, the department must make the 
report publicly available, and at least 90 days before the hearing, allow each exclusive 
representative and committee that receives the report to submit comments on the report.  
 
The report must address the reasons for the closure; the plan for continuing or discontinuing 
State facility operations; the anticipated budgetary impact of the closure; any plans for 
assisting State employees affected by the closure in finding other employment; any plans 
for assisting the patients, inmates, or residents affected by the closure; and any plans for 
the State facility after the closure.  
 
If a government agency or judicial body determines that there is an emergency situation 
that poses a risk to the health or safety of patients, inmates, residents, or employees of a 
State facility, the principal department may modify the aforementioned timelines as long 
as the modifications provide the notice, hearing, and opportunity for comment at the 
earliest possible date, unless ordered otherwise by the government agency or judicial body.  
 
Other State Facility Changes 
 
Before a principal department changes the use, purpose, or function of a State facility, the 
principal department must hold a public hearing and, at least 90 days before the hearing, 
give notice to (1) the public, using the department’s website and by press release; (2) any 
member of the General Assembly in whose district the State facility is located, by 
electronic mail and certified mail; and (3) any exclusive representative with bargaining unit 
employees assigned to the State facility, by electronic mail and certified mail. The principal 
department must again give notice of the hearing at least 30 days before the hearing to the 
same parties in the same manner.  
 
The same notice and hearing requirements apply under specified circumstances when a 
principal department leases or purchases land, buildings, or office space to be used for the 
purpose of providing health, juvenile, or correctional services to clients or inmates and if 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 395/ Page 3 
the use of a State facility is ceased and recommences for a different use, purpose, or 
function.  
 
If a government agency or judicial body determines that there is an emergency situation 
that poses a risk to the health or safety of patients, inmates, residents, or employees of a 
State facility, the principal department may modify the aforementioned timelines as long 
as the modifications provide the notice, hearing, and opportunity for comment at the 
earliest possible date, unless ordered otherwise by the government agency or judicial body. 
 
Current Law:  A principal department of the Executive Branch of State government that 
seeks to modify its use of a State facility that is owned, leased, or operated by the State for 
the purpose of providing health, juvenile, or correctional services to clients or inmates, 
must hold a public hearing in the following three circumstances and using the following 
procedures.  
 
 
First, before a principal department of the Executive Branch of State government 
changes the use, purpose, or function of a State facility, notice of the proposed 
change and the public hearing must be given to (1) each member of the 
General Assembly in whose district the facility is located, by certified mail and 
(2) the general public, by publication once a week for two consecutive weeks before 
the hearing in a regularly published newspaper of general circulation in any county 
that may be affected by the change.  
 
 
Second, before a principal department leases or purchases land, buildings, or office 
space to be used for the purpose of providing health, juvenile, or correctional 
services to clients or inmates, the principal department must give written notice of 
the proposed use of the land, buildings, or office space to each member of the 
General Assembly in whose legislative district the property is located. In this 
circumstance, a member of the General Assembly may request that the department 
hold a public hearing on the proposed use. If a request is made, the department on 
whose behalf the property is being procured or leased must hold a public hearing on 
the proposed use and provide notice to the general public in the same manner 
described above.  
 
 
Third, if after a principal department ceases its use of a State facility, and the 
principal department or any other principal department plans to recommence 
operation of the facility as a State facility, and the proposed operation of the facility 
would change its use, function, or purpose, the principal department must hold a 
public hearing of the proposed operations. Notice of the hearing must be given to 
the general public in the manner described above.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 395/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 223 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Governor’s 
Office; Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department 
of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Department of General 
Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Commerce; Department of Veterans Affairs; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4