START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 386 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 386 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Blue and Flathead Catfish Finfish Trotline License - 
Establishment 
 
   
This emergency bill establishes a commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline 
license. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by up to $1,500 in FY 2023 and by 
approximately $1,500 annually thereafter. Expenditures are not affected; the Department 
of Natural Resources (DNR) can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources.     
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
SF Revenue 
$1,500 
$1,500 
$1,500 
$1,500 
$1,500 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$1,500 
$1,500 
$1,500 
$1,500 
$1,500  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes a commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline 
license, which authorizes the holder to catch for sale blue and flathead catfish in the tidal 
waters of the State using a finfish trotline, as defined in DNR regulations. A licensee must 
fish in accordance with DNR regulations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 386/ Page 2 
A person who wishes to obtain the license must complete and submit an application for the 
license to DNR or any person designated by DNR. An applicant does not need to hold a 
tidal fish license to be eligible for the license. The term of the license is one-year, from 
September 1 through August 31, and the annual license fee is $15. The bill also makes a 
seafood dealer license available to a commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline 
licensee at the reduced fee ($50, rather than $250) applicable to a person authorized to 
harvest fish under a tidal fish license. 
 
A licensee may not transfer a license and must have the license in their possession when 
fishing under the license.           
 
Current Law:   
 
Chapter 80 of 2019 – Terminated 
 
Chapter 80 of 2019, which took effect June 1, 2019, established the same license proposed 
by the bill; however, Chapter 80 had a termination date of June 30, 2022.  
 
Tidal Fish License  
 
With the exception of a commercial northern snakehead license established in 2016, DNR 
uses a single, commercial license, known as a tidal fish license, which authorizes a licensee 
to engage in each activity indicated on the license. The department may issue 
authorizations for activities listed in statute – which include catching finfish for sale – for 
which the indicated fee has been paid. DNR is authorized to set, by regulation, specified 
targets for the number of tidal fish license authorizations and may modify the target number 
of authorizations for specified reasons. The department must provide for reallocation of 
any authorizations that are revoked or voluntarily relinquished and, pursuant to DNR 
regulations, those authorizations are reallocated to individuals on the commercial waiting 
list maintained by the department. 
 
Seafood Dealer License  
 
A seafood dealer license (a tidal fish license with a seafood dealer authorization) is needed 
to buy, process, pack, resell, market, or otherwise deal in fish caught in tidal waters. The 
fee is $50 for a person also authorized to harvest fish under a tidal fish license (or who 
holds a commercial northern snakehead license) and $250 for any other person. DNR’s 
tidal fish license application indicates that harvesters must either sell to a licensed dealer 
or be a licensed dealer in order to sell their catch.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 386/ Page 3 
Pilot Program Authority 
 
DNR regulations authorize the department to conduct pilot programs, with the participation 
of tidal fish licensees, to demonstrate and evaluate new approaches to managing fisheries 
under the fishery management plans the department has adopted for various species, 
including catfish. The department has established a pilot program to allow tidal fish 
licensees – those that do not otherwise have the necessary authorization on their tidal fish 
license to use finfish trotlines – to continue to use finfish trotlines to catch blue and flathead 
catfish, under a pilot program permit (with no fee), despite the termination of Chapter 80 
in June 2022.  
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues increase by up to $1,500 in fiscal 2023 and by 
approximately $1,500 annually thereafter, which accounts for the bill taking effect upon 
enactment, in fiscal 2023. This estimate reflects the collection of annual license fees  
($15 per license) for the commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline license and is 
based on the following information and assumptions: 
 
 
of the 101 individuals that purchased commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish 
trotline licenses for the 2021-2022 license year (prior to the termination of 
Chapter 80), DNR indicates that 80 of those were also tidal fish licensees and that 
to date, 24 pilot program permits have been issued to tidal fish licensees; 
 
based on that information, up to 100 individuals purchase the license in fiscal 2023 
authorizing them to fish for the partial, remaining license year, through 
August 2023; 
 
approximately 100 individuals purchase the license in subsequent fiscal years, 
authorizing them to fish for the full, subsequent license years (September 2023 
through August 2024, September 2024 through August 2025, etc.); and 
 
the re-established license supplants the pilot program permit that DNR has made 
available to tidal fish licensees to continue to use finfish trotlines to catch blue and 
flathead catfish after the termination of Chapter 80. 
 
Revenues from commercial fishing license fees are deposited in the Fisheries Research and 
Development Fund.   
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill is expected to have a meaningful small business impact. 
The re-establishment of the commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline license 
will allow individuals that do not have a tidal fish license to harvest blue and flathead 
catfish for sale using a finfish trotline. DNR also indicates that the license will provide a 
faster and more streamlined process, in comparison to the pilot program permit, for tidal 
fish licensees – those that are not authorized under their tidal fish license to use finfish 
trotlines – to be able to use finfish trotlines to catch blue and flathead catfish for sale.    

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 386/ Page 4 
DNR indicates that the total dockside value of blue catfish harvested in the State was 
$237,014 in calendar 2020, $362,522 in calendar 2021, and $484,176 in calendar 2022. 
The total dockside value of flathead catfish harvested in the State was $11,479 in 
calendar 2020, $10,462 in calendar 2021, and $9,178 in calendar 2022.        
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 80 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4