START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 391 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 391 
(Delegate Healey, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Parking Enforcement - Citations 
 
 
This bill requires a parking citation issued by a political subdivision, State agency, or 
third-party contractor to include a box that the person issued the citation may check to 
indicate that the registration plates cited were not issued for the vehicle described in the 
citation. If a person returns a citation with the box checked, a political subdivision, State 
agency, or third-party contractor authorized to conduct parking enforcement on behalf of a 
political subdivision or State agency must verify through the Motor Vehicle Administration 
(MVA) whether the person should be held liable for the violation and may contact the 
person as part of the verification process. If, after the verification process, the political 
subdivision, State agency, or third-party contractor finds that the person should not be held 
liable, the citation must be dismissed. The bill prohibits a person from submitting a citation 
with the box checked if the registration plates cited were issued for the vehicle described 
in the citation.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures increase in FY 2024 to reprint and/or modify parking 
citation materials. Additional costs may be incurred beginning in FY 2024 for State 
agencies that operate parking facilities, to the extent a high number of verifications are 
required. Revenues may be delayed but likely are not otherwise materially affected. MVA 
already has an interface in place that facilitates the verification of a vehicle make and 
model; thus, there is likely no material impact on MVA due to the bill’s requirements. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government operations and expenditures are affected as for State 
agencies. Revenues may be delayed but likely are not otherwise materially affected. This 
bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 391/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, any State agency authorized by law and any political 
subdivision may adopt ordinances or regulations that: 
 
 
regulate the parking of vehicles; 
 
provide for the impounding of vehicles parked in violation of the ordinances or 
regulations; 
 
regulate the towing of vehicles from both public and private parking lots; and 
 
provide for the issuance of a citation by an officer for a violation of an ordinance or 
regulation adopted pursuant to the authorization noted above. 
 
“Officer” means a police officer (or a person other than a police officer) who is authorized 
to issue a citation for a violation of an ordinance or regulation that is adopted under 
specified provisions of State law. 
 
An officer who discovers a vehicle parked in violation of an ordinance or regulation must 
(1) deliver a citation to the driver or, if the vehicle is unattended, attach a citation to the 
vehicle in a conspicuous place and (2) keep a copy of the citation, bearing the officer’s 
certification under penalty of perjury that the facts stated in the citation are true. In the 
absence of the driver, the registered owner of the vehicle is presumed to be the person 
receiving the citation. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  In fiscal 2024, the bill’s requirements likely result in 
additional expenditures for State agencies and local governments, as any existing citations 
must be reprinted and/or modified in order to comply with the bill. The exact cost for each 
entity likely varies, based on a variety of factors (e.g., the size of the entity issuing citations 
and the number of citations issued annually) and, thus, cannot be reliably estimated by the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) at this time. 
 
The bill’s requirement that a verification process be conducted by a State agency or local 
government is generally expected to apply only in limited circumstances, as the bill 
explicitly prohibits an individual from requesting a verification process unless there is a 
discrepancy with the cited registration plates. Nevertheless, should a high number of 
verifications be required, State agencies and local governments must be prepared to 
accommodate an influx of verification requests. DLS generally assumes the majority of 
entities subject to the bill’s requirements already have an appeals and/or verification 
process in place and that existing processes can be modified to comply with the bill. 
However, for entities without such processes already in place, the bill may have more 
significant operational impacts and require staff time to implement. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 391/ Page 3 
The bill is not anticipated to have any significant effect on the District Court, which only 
handles parking citations in contested cases. To the extent the verification process required 
by the bill results in more dismissed citations (i.e., before they would otherwise be 
contested in District Court), fewer trials may be requested. Any impact is likely negligible. 
 
Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties advise the bill has no significant 
impact on county finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Many third-party contractors authorized to conduct parking 
enforcement on behalf of political subdivisions or State agencies are assumed to be small 
businesses and, as a result, may be meaningfully affected under the bill. Any such 
businesses must comply with the verification procedures required by the bill, which may 
entail procedural changes and administrative costs. To the extent political subdivisions or 
State agencies conduct the required verification procedures on behalf of their respective 
third-party contractors, such businesses are likely only minimally affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of General 
Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3