START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 376 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 376 
(Delegate Sample-Hughes, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Diagnostic and Supplemental Examinations and Biopsies for 
Breast Cancer - Cost-Sharing 
 
 
This bill prohibits insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) that provide coverage for a “diagnostic 
breast examination” or a “supplemental breast examination” from imposing a copayment, 
coinsurance, or deductible requirement for such examinations, except as specified. If an 
insured or enrollee is covered under a high-deductible health plan (HDHP), a carrier may 
subject diagnostic breast examinations or supplemental breast examinations to the HDHP’s 
deductible requirement. By October 1, 2023, the Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC) must study and report to the Governor and specified committees of the 
General Assembly on the financial impact of eliminating health insurance cost sharing for 
diagnostic image-guided biopsies for breast cancer. The bill’s study and reporting 
requirement takes effect July 1, 2023; the bill’s cost-sharing prohibitions take effect 
January 1, 2024, and apply to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, 
delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2024 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Review of 
filings can be handled with existing MIA budgeted resources. MHCC can complete the 
required study and report using existing budgeted resources. Any impact on the State 
Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is indeterminate. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases health insurance costs, expenditures for local 
governments that purchase fully insured medical plans increase. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 376/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Diagnostic breast examination” means a medically necessary and 
appropriate examination of the breast that is used to evaluate an abnormality that is either 
(1) seen or suspected from a prior screening examination for breast cancer or (2) detected 
by another means of prior examination. A diagnostic breast examination includes an 
examination using diagnostic mammography, breast magnetic resonance imaging, or 
breast ultrasound. 
 
“Supplemental breast examination” means a medically necessary examination of the breast 
that is used to screen for breast cancer when (1) there is no abnormality seen or suspected 
from a prior examination and (2) there is a personal or family medical history or other 
factors present that may increase an individual’s risk of breast cancer. A supplemental 
breast examination includes the usage of breast magnetic resonance imaging or breast 
ultrasound. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. Carriers must cover breast 
cancer screenings in accordance with the latest screening guidelines issued by the 
American Cancer Society. Currently, the guidelines specify that (1) women ages 40 to 
44 may elect to get annual breast cancer screenings with mammograms and (2) starting at 
age 45, women should have mammograms every year. Carriers are also required to provide 
coverage for digital tomosynthesis – a radiologic procedure that involves the acquisition of 
projection images over the stationary breast to produce cross-sectional digital 
three-dimensional images of the breast – if an enrollee’s treating physician determines it is 
medically appropriate and necessary. A deductible may not be imposed for covered digital 
tomosynthesis or mammograms. A carrier is not required to cover breast cancer screenings 
used to identify breast cancer in asymptomatic women that are provided by a facility that 
is not accredited by the American College of Radiology or certified or licensed in 
Maryland. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered 
health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services 
in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 376/ Page 3 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. Beyond requiring that benefits be provided for breast cancer screening in 
accordance with the latest screening guidelines issued by the American Cancer Society or 
mandated by the ACA, the Maryland benchmark plan also includes reconstructive breast 
surgery or breast prothesis – for individuals who have undergone a mastectomy – as EHBs. 
 
Section 223 of the Internal Revenue Code permits eligible individuals to establish health 
savings accounts that require, among other things, that individuals be covered under an 
HDHP and have no disqualifying health coverage. An HDHP may not provide benefits to 
an individual – unless the benefits are for “preventive care” – until the individual has 
satisfied their annual minimum deductible. According to Internal Revenue Service 
guidelines, diagnostic and supplemental breast examinations do not qualify as preventive 
care.  
 
State Expenditures:  The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program currently covers preventive breast cancer screening with no cost sharing 
beginning at age 35. The Department of Budget and Management advises that any impact 
on the State Plan from prohibiting cost sharing for diagnostic or supplemental breast 
examinations is indeterminate. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Health insurance premiums in the small group market may 
increase to the extent cost sharing is currently required for diagnostic or supplemental 
breast examinations. MIA advises that the bill’s changes are not anticipated to result in 
more than a 0.5% increase in premiums in the small group market to cover the cost of 
reduced cost sharing. Alternatively, carriers could choose to raise cost sharing on other 
services to maintain premium neutrality. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 184 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 376/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4