START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 11

Chapter 11

(House Bill 339)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission – Reporting and
Sunset Extension

FOR the purpose of extending the time for the submission of the final report of the
Maryland Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission; extending the
termination date for the Commission; and generally relating to the Maryland
Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 41 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2019, as amended by Chapter 92
of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 1(h) and 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Chapter 41 of the Acts of 2019, as amended by Chapter 92 of the Acts of 2021

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(h) (1) On or before September 1, 2020, the Commission shall submit an
interim report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with
§ 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

(2) On or before December 1, [2023] 2024 2025, the Commission shall
submit a final report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2019. It shall remain effective for a period of [5] 6 7 years and 1 month and, at the end
of June 30, [2024] 2025 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1