START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 155

Chapter 155

(House Bill 328)

AN ACT concerning

State Finance and Procurement – Grants – Prompt Payment Requirement

FOR the purpose of establishing invoicing and prompt payment requirements for certain
State grants; and generally relating to State grants.

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 2–211
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

2–211.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “GRANT” MEANS A LEGAL INSTRUMENT OF FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE BETWEEN A STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY AND A NON–STATE ENTITY
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION EXEMPT FROM TAXATION UNDER § 501(C) OF THE
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE THAT IS:

1. USED TO ENTER INTO A RELATIONSHIP THE
PRINCIPAL PURPOSE OF WHICH IS TO TRANSFER ANYTHING OF VALUE FROM THE
STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY TO THE GRANT RECIPIENT TO CARRY OUT A PUBLIC
PURPOSE AUTHORIZED BY LAW AND NOT TO ACQUIRE PROPERTY OR SERVICES FOR
THE DIRECT BENEFIT OR USE OF THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY;

2. USED TO PROVIDE FOR ONE OR MORE PAYMENTS IN
REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES OR OTHER PERFORMANCE UNDER THE
AGREEMENT ON A SCHEDULED OR OTHER INCREMENTAL BASIS;

3. DISTINGUISHED FROM A COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT
IN THAT IT DOES NOT PROVIDE FOR SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT BETWEEN THE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 155 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY AND THE GRANT RECIPIENT IN CARRYING OUT THE
ACTIVITY CONTEMPLATED BY THE AWARD; AND

3. 4. EXECUTED EXECUTED, RENEWED, OR EXTENDED ON
OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2022 JUNE 1, 2023.

(II) “GRANT” DOES NOT INCLUDE AN INSTRUMENT THAT
PROVIDES ONLY:

1. DIRECT GOVERNMENT CASH ASSISTANCE TO AN
INDIVIDUAL;

2. A SUBSIDY;

3. A LOAN;

4. A LOAN GUARANTEE;

5. INSURANCE; OR

6. STATE FUNDING THAT IS REQUIRED ANNUALLY AND
IS CALCULATED THROUGH A FORMULA SET IN STATUTE.

(3) “LATE PAYMENT” MEANS ANY AMOUNT THAT IS DUE AND PAYABLE
BY LAW UNDER A WRITTEN GRANT AGREEMENT, WITHOUT DEFERRAL, DELAY, OR
SET–OFF, AND REMAINS UNPAID MORE THAN 30 DAYS AFTER A STATE
GRANT–MAKING ENTITY RECEIVES A PROPER INVOICE.

(4) (3) “PAYMENT” INCLUDES ALL REQUIRED PROCESSING AND
AUTHORIZATION BY THE COMPTROLLER, AS PROVIDED UNDER STATE
REGULATIONS.

(5) (4) “PROPER INVOICE” MEANS A BILL, A WRITTEN DOCUMENT,
OR AN ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION READABLE BY THE STATE GRANT–MAKING
ENTITY, PROVIDED BY A GRANT RECIPIENT, THAT:

(I) REQUESTS AN AMOUNT THAT IS DUE AND PAYABLE BY LAW
UNDER A WRITTEN GRANT AGREEMENT; AND

(II) MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
SECTION.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO GRANTS:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 155

(1) MADE BY A UNIT IN THE JUDICIAL BRANCH OF STATE
GOVERNMENT; OR

(2) FUNDED FROM GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND PROCEEDS OR FROM
A GENERAL FUND CAPITAL APPROPRIATION TO THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.

(C) IT IS THE POLICY OF THE STATE TO MAKE A PAYMENT UNDER A GRANT
AGREEMENT WITHIN 30 37 DAYS AFTER:

(1) THE DAY ON WHICH THE PAYMENT BECOMES DUE UNDER THE
GRANT AGREEMENT; OR

(2) IF LATER, THE DAY ON WHICH THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY
RECEIVES A PROPER INVOICE.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
GRANT–MAKING ENTITY SHALL BE LIABLE FOR INTEREST THAT SHALL ACCRUE AT
THE RATE OF 9% A YEAR ON ANY AMOUNT THAT:

(I) THAT IS DUE AND PAYABLE BY LAW AND UNDER A WRITTEN
GRANT AGREEMENT; AND

(II) FOR WHICH THE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY HAS RECEIVED,
AND FAILED TO SUBMIT TO THE COMPTROLLER WITHIN 30 DAYS OF ITS RECEIPT, A
PROPER INVOICE.

(II) REMAINS UNPAID MORE THAN 30 DAYS AFTER A STATE
GRANT–MAKING ENTITY RECEIVES A PROPER INVOICE.

(2) INTEREST SHALL ACCRUE BEGINNING ON THE 31ST 38TH DAY
AFTER:

(I) THE DAY ON WHICH PAYMENT BECOMES DUE UNDER THE
GRANT AGREEMENT; OR

(II) IF LATER, THE DAY ON WHICH THE STATE GRANT–MAKING
ENTITY RECEIVES A PROPER INVOICE.

(3) A STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY IS NOT LIABLE FOR INTEREST:

(I) UNLESS WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE ON THE STATE’S
CHECK FOR THE AMOUNT ON WHICH THE INTEREST ACCRUED, THE GRANT
RECIPIENT SUBMITS AN INVOICE FOR THE INTEREST;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 155 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IF THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY HAS INITIATED
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS TO DISPUTE THE AMOUNT OWED TO THE GRANT RECIPIENT;

(III) ACCRUING MORE THAN 1 YEAR AFTER THE 31ST DAY AFTER
THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY RECEIVES AN INVOICE; OR

(IV) ON AN AMOUNT THAT REPRESENTS UNPAID INTEREST.

(4) INTEREST FOR WHICH A STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY IS LIABLE
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) SHALL BE PAID FROM THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY’S
OPERATING BUDGET; AND

(II) MAY NOT BE PAID FROM FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO FUND A
GRANT.

(E) A PROPER INVOICE, REQUIRED AS PAYMENT DOCUMENTATION, SHALL
INCLUDE WITHOUT ERROR:

(1) THE GRANT RECIPIENT’S FEDERAL EMPLOYER IDENTIFICATION
NUMBER OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER;

(2) THE GRANT AGREEMENT IDENTIFICATION NUMBER OR ANOTHER
ADEQUATE DESCRIPTION OF THE GRANT AGREEMENT; AND

(3) ANY DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED BY REGULATION OR THE GRANT
AGREEMENT.

(F) FOR THE PURPOSES OF DETERMINING A PAYMENT DUE DATE AND THE
DATE ON WHICH INTEREST WILL BEGIN TO ACCRUE IF A PAYMENT IS LATE, AN
INVOICE SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE RECEIVED:

(1) FOR INVOICES THAT ARE MAILED, WHEN A PROPER INVOICE IS
RECEIVED BY THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY, AS OF THE DATE THE STATE
GRANT–MAKING ENTITY ANNOTATES THE INVOICE WITH THE DATE AND TIME OF
RECEIPT; OR

(2) FOR INVOICES ELECTRONICALLY TRANSMITTED, ON THE DATE
THE TRANSMISSION IS RECEIVED BY THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY, OR THE
NEXT BUSINESS DAY IF RECEIVED AFTER 5 P.M.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 155

(G) (1) ON RECEIPT OF AN INVOICE, A STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY
SHALL:

(I) MARK THE INVOICE WITH THE DATE THE INVOICE WAS
RECEIVED; AND

(II) REVIEW THE INVOICE AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE, BUT NOT
LATER THAN 5 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER RECEIPT, TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE
INVOICE IS A PROPER INVOICE.

(2) IF THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY DETERMINES THAT THE
INVOICE IS A PROPER INVOICE, THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY SHALL SUBMIT
THE INVOICE TO THE COMPTROLLER FOR PAYMENT WITHIN 1 BUSINESS DAY AFTER
THE DETERMINATION AND SUBMITS THE INVOICE TO THE COMPTROLLER, THE
COMPTROLLER SHALL MAKE PAYMENT WITHIN 5 BUSINESS DAYS.

(3) (I) IF THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY DETERMINES THAT
THE INVOICE IS NOT A PROPER INVOICE, THE STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY SHALL
NOTIFY THE GRANT RECIPIENT OF ALL DEFECTS THAT PREVENT PROCESSING AND
SPECIFY ALL REASONS WHY THE INVOICE IS NOT PROPER WITHIN 2 BUSINESS DAYS
AFTER THE DETERMINATION.

(II) IT IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE GRANT RECIPIENT TO
SUBMIT A CORRECTED INVOICE.

(4) STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITIES:

(I) MAY USE MEDIA THAT PRODUCE TANGIBLE RECORDINGS OF
INFORMATION TO EXPEDITE THE PAYMENT PROCESS, RATHER THAN DELAYING THE
PROCESS BY REQUIRING ORIGINAL PAPER DOCUMENTS; AND

(II) SHALL PROVIDE ADEQUATE SAFEGUARDS AND CONTROLS
TO ENSURE THE INTEGRITY OF THE DATA AND TO PREVENT DUPLICATE
PROCESSING.

(5) FAILURE BY A STATE GRANT–MAKING ENTITY TO COMPLY WITH
THE PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A
LATE PAYMENT.

(6) THIS SECTION DOES NOT CREATE LIABILITY ON THE
COMPTROLLER FOR INTEREST ACCRUED ON A LATE PAYMENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 155 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6