START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 238

Chapter 238

(House Bill 377)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County – Village of Friendship Heights Special Taxing District
– Procurement

MC 15–23

FOR the purpose of increasing the threshold amount above which the Friendship Heights
Village Council is prohibited from entering into a certain contract without a
competitive bidding process; authorizing the village council to enter into a certain
contract that exceeds the threshold amount without a competitive bidding process if
the procurement is in response to an emergency; and generally relating to
procurement in the Village of Friendship Heights special taxing district.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Montgomery County
Section 66–10
Article 16 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2004 Edition and September 2022 Supplement, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 16 – Montgomery County

Sec. 66–10.

(a) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
“Friendship Heights Village Council” may not expend for material or work a sum exceeding
[$5,000] $20,000 without having first advertised the specifications therefor and inviting
bids for it, after which the village council may purchase whatever material or make contract
for work or have the work done by employed labor or otherwise, as it may deem best.

(b) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “EMERGENCY” MEANS AN OCCURRENCE OR
CONDITION THAT:

(I) THE VILLAGE COUNCIL REASONABLY COULD NOT FORESEE;
AND

(II) REQUIRES AN ACTION TO AVOID OR MITIGATE SERIOUS
DAMAGE TO PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, OR WELFARE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 238 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE VILLAGE COUNCIL, BY MAJORITY VOTE, MAY ENTER INTO A
CONTRACT EXCEEDING $20,000 WITHOUT SEEKING COMPETITIVE BIDS IF THE
PROCUREMENT IS IN RESPONSE TO AN EMERGENCY.

(C) The village council may engage in cooperative procurement with other
governmental entities in Montgomery County.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2