START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 377 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 377 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Montgomery County - Village of Friendship Heights Special Taxing District - 
Procurement  
MC 15-23 
 
 
This bill raises the contract value threshold, from $5,000 to $20,000, above which the 
Friendship Heights Village Council must solicit competitive bids for a contract. It also 
authorizes the council, by majority vote, to enter into an emergency contract that exceeds 
$20,000 in value without seeking competitive bids. An “emergency” is an occurrence that 
the village council reasonably could not foresee and that requires an action to avoid or 
mitigate serious damage to public health, safety, or welfare.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only the Village of Friendship Heights.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill likely has limited or no effect on Village of Friendship Heights 
finances but creates operational and administrative efficiencies by giving the council 
greater flexibility to respond to emergencies.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Village of Friendship Heights is a special taxing district in 
Montgomery County formed by an Act of the General Assembly in 1914. 
 
Under the Montgomery County Code, the Friendship Heights Village Council may not 
spend more than $5,000 for material or work without first advertising the specifications 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 377/ Page 2 
and inviting bids for the contract. After soliciting bids, the council may purchase whatever 
material or work it may deem best.  
 
There are no provisions in current law allowing for an emergency procurement by the 
council.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Village of Friendship Heights; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2