START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 382 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 382 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health and Prescription Drug Affordability Board - 
Managed Care Organizations and Prescription Drug Claims - Study 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and the 
Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) to jointly study (1) the total amount that 
Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) paid pharmacies for prescription drug 
claims in calendar 2021 and 2022; (2) what the total amount paid to pharmacies would 
have been if claims had been reimbursed at Medicaid fee-for-service rates (FFS); and 
(3) how to best address the inconsistency between these amounts by considering the total 
cost to the State and recommending a methodology for determining the most accurate 
ingredient cost of a drug and an appropriate dispensing fee. MDH and PDAB must jointly 
report their findings to Maryland Medicaid and specified committees of the  
General Assembly by October 31, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH and PDAB can conduct and report on the joint study with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid must establish maximum reimbursement levels for the drug 
products for which there is a generic equivalent based on the cost of the generic product. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 382/ Page 2 
If the prescriber directs a brand name drug, the reimbursement level must be based on the 
cost of the brand name product. 
 
Chapter 534 of 2019, among other things, required Medicaid to contract with an 
independent auditor for an audit of pharmacy benefits managers (PBMs) that contract with 
Medicaid MCOs and provide the results to the General Assembly. 
 
Outpatient pharmacy coverage is an optional benefit under Medicaid. Reimbursement for 
prescription drugs varies between FFS Medicaid (which covers about 15% of Medicaid 
enrollees) and HealthChoice (under which Medicaid MCOs cover about 85% of Medicaid 
enrollees).  
 
In FFS, Medicaid reimburses pharmacies based on a two-part formula consisting of the 
ingredient cost of the drug and the professional dispensing fee. Effective April 2017, 
Maryland adopted the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC) methodology 
to calculate the ingredient cost of the drug. This methodology estimates the national 
average drug invoice price paid by independent and retail chain pharmacies. For any drug 
not included in NADAC, the State uses its own State actual acquisition cost (SAAC) as a 
secondary benchmark. Thus, for FFS pharmacy expenditures, Medicaid reimburses 
pharmacies as follows:   
 
 
the ingredient cost of the drug based on NADAC or a provider’s usual and 
customary charges, whichever is lower; if there is no NADAC, the lowest of the 
wholesale acquisition cost, the federal upper limit, SAAC, or a provider’s usual and 
customary charges; and 
 
a professional dispensing fee of $10.67 for brand name and generic drugs. 
 
In HealthChoice, eight out of nine Medicaid MCOs use a PBM (Kaiser Permanente 
purchases drugs directly from manufacturers). PBM reimbursement amounts are 
proprietary and confidential. However, narrative in the 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report 
requested that MDH report on various aspects of pharmacy reimbursement. MDH’s 
response summarized MCO PBM costs for a sample of drugs according to a low, high, and 
average rate across all MCOs. 
 
The report noted that the FFS average ingredient cost per unit was lower than the MCO 
average ingredient cost per unit for 37 of the drugs analyzed. However, the professional 
dispensing fees paid by MCOs were much lower than those paid under FFS. Of the drugs 
sampled, only 3 had higher MCO dispensing fees than the FFS rate, and the average 
dispensing fee paid by MCOs across the sample was only $2.63. 
 
Additional Comments:  It is anticipated that MDH will oversee the study and provide the 
total amount that MCOs paid pharmacies for prescription drug claims in calendar 2021 and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 382/ Page 3 
2022 and what the total amount would have been if claims had been reimbursed at 
Medicaid FFS rates. PDAB advises that it will (1) provide input on the design of the study; 
(2) examine and assess alternatives for best capturing the accurate ingredient costs of 
various drugs; and (3) analyze claims data to consider the total cost to the State of 
instituting certain reimbursement schemes for dispensing fees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 895 (Senators Ready and Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3