START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 389 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 389 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Agriculture - State Specialist for Value-Added Agriculture 
 
 
This bill establishes the State Specialist for Value-Added Agriculture as a position in the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $81,500 in FY 2024 and by ongoing 
amounts in future years, reflecting annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
81,500 
97,400 
101,700 
106,200 
111,800 
Net Effect 
($81,500) 
($97,400) 
($101,700) 
($106,200) 
($111,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Value-added Agriculture  
 
The bill defines “value-added agriculture” as the alteration or enhancement of a raw 
agricultural product, including livestock, or an agricultural service in a way that increases 
the product or service’s worth to a consumer and brings more revenue to a farmer, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 389/ Page 2 
producer, or processor. This includes all enterprises, including those providing equine 
activities, in which an agricultural business or the agricultural business’s products or 
services are altered, marketed, produced, or processed in a way that adds income to a 
farmer, producer, or processor.  
 
State Specialist 
 
The State Specialist for Value-Added Agriculture is appointed by the Secretary of 
Agriculture and must: 
 
 
serve as the primary point of contact for individuals engaging in, or interested in 
engaging in, value-added agriculture in the State; 
 
provide information regarding State and federal regulations relating to value-added 
agriculture; 
 
act as a liaison between State and federal partners involved in value-added 
agriculture; and 
 
perform any other duty or function that supports value-added agriculture in the 
State, as required by the Secretary. 
 
During the first year after the initial appointment, the priority function of the State 
Specialist for Value-Added Agriculture is to focus on implementing the recommendations 
of the Task Force to Study the Feasibility of Return to State Meat Process Inspection 
(discussed below under Additional Comments).  
 
The bill requires a position identification number (PIN) to be created in MDA for the State 
Specialist for Value-Added Agriculture. The specialist must receive a salary as provided 
in the State budget.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture Positions and Units Identified in Statute 
 
There is a list of 10 positions and units specified in statute as included within MDA: 
 
 
the Maryland Agricultural Fair Board; 
 
the Chief of Weights and Measures; 
 
the State Chemist; 
 
the State Veterinarian; 
 
the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners; 
 
the State Soil Conservation Committee; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 389/ Page 3 
 
the Maryland Agricultural Commission; 
 
the Maryland Horse Industry Board; 
 
the Maryland Winery and Grape Growers’ Advisory Board; and 
 
the Seafood Marketing Advisory Commission. 
 
The State Chemist, the State Veterinarian, and the Chief of Weights and Measures are 
appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture. MDA also includes any other position or unit 
which is declared within the department pursuant to law. 
 
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation 
 
The Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation 
(MARBIDCO) – a body politic and corporate, and instrumentality of the State, established 
under Chapter 467 of 2004 – helps Maryland’s farm, forestry, seafood, and related rural 
business achieve profitability and sustainability. MARBIDCO has various purposes 
established in statute, including (1) assisting the viability of the State’s diverse agricultural 
industry through technical and other assistance to support, create, and sustain agricultural 
businesses throughout the State and (2) facilitating and supporting access to high quality 
technical resources for agricultural entrepreneurs. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $81,473 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one administrator to serve as the State Specialist for Value-Added Agriculture and, 
among other things, implement the recommendations of the Task Force to Study the 
Feasibility of Return to State Meat Process Inspection. MDA indicates that it does not have 
an existing position that is able to fulfill this role. The estimate includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$74,064 
Operating Expenses 
    7,409 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$81,473 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill is expected to have a meaningful impact on small 
businesses. MDA indicates that the bill will help farmers to increase the monetary value of 
their raw agricultural products.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 389/ Page 4 
According to a February 2020 economic analysis of value-added agriculture in the State, 
citing data from the Business Economic and Community Outreach Network of 
Salisbury University, Maryland’s value-added agriculture industry supports close to 
74,000 jobs and brings a total economic impact of more than $20.6 billion annually to the 
State’s economy.  
 
Additional Comments:  In the 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (p. 87), the budget 
committees expressed intent that MDA establish and lead a task force to study the 
feasibility of returning to State meat processing inspection and related topics. The task 
force submitted a report in December 2022 in which it indicated its view that there is no 
benefit in returning to a State meat inspection program; instead, the task force suggested 
the need for a State assistance program or the establishment of an ombudsman at MDA to 
assist new and existing meat and poultry harvest and processing businesses in navigating 
the regulatory process at the local, State, and federal levels, which could include, but not 
be limited to, understanding local zoning, permitting for water and wastewater, and writing 
food safety and standard operating procedures. MDA indicates that after the report was 
submitted, interested parties concluded that the ombudsman’s assistance should be 
expanded to all value-added agriculture businesses.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 34 (Senators Hester and Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and 
Management; Grow & Fortify; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4