START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 734

Chapter 734

(House Bill 372)

AN ACT concerning

Higher Education – Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship
– Altering Name of Scholarship

FOR the purpose of altering the name of the Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts
Scholarship to be the Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq
Conflicts Scholarship; and generally relating to the Veterans of the Afghanistan and
Iraq Conflicts Scholarship.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–604(b) and (k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

18–604.

(b) There is a DOUGLAS J. J. PETERS Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq
Conflicts Scholarship.

(k) (1) Funds for the DOUGLAS J. J. PETERS Veterans of the Afghanistan
and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship shall be as provided in the annual budget of the Commission
by the Governor.

(2) (i) In this subsection, “Fund” means the DOUGLAS J. J. PETERS
Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship Fund.

(ii) There is a DOUGLAS J. J. PETERS Veterans of the Afghanistan
and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship Fund in the Commission.

(iii) The Commission shall administer the Fund.

(iv) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to §
7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 734 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(vi) The Commission:

1. May accept any gift or grant from any person or
corporation for the Fund;

2. Shall use any gift or grant that it receives for a scholarship
from the Fund; and

3. Shall deposit any gift or grant that it receives for the Fund
with the State Treasurer.

(3) (i) At the end of the fiscal year, the Commission shall prepare an
annual report on the Fund that includes an accounting of all financial receipts and
expenditures to and from the Fund.

(ii) The Commission shall submit a copy of the report to the General
Assembly as provided under § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2