START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 420 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 420 
(Delegate M. Morgan, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission - Hospital Rates - All-Payer Model 
Contract 
 
   
This bill requires the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), when 
considering objective standards of efficiency and effectiveness to determine the 
reasonableness of hospital rates, to do so in a manner consistent with the All-Payer Model 
Contract.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practices as HSCRC currently considers the 
All-Payer Model Contract (and its successor agreements, currently the Total Cost of Care 
Model (TCOC)) when reviewing hospital rates. 
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission 
 
HSCRC is an independent State agency charged with constraining hospital growth and 
establishing hospital rates to promote cost containment, access to care, equity, financial 
stability, and hospital accountability. HSCRC oversees acute and chronic care hospitals.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 420/ Page 2 
HSCRC may review the costs, and rates, quality, and efficiency of facility services, and 
make any investigation it considers necessary to assure each purchaser of health care 
facility services that (1) the total costs of all hospital services are reasonable; (2) the 
aggregate rates of the facility are related reasonably to the aggregate costs of the facility; 
and (3) the rates are set equitably among all purchasers. HSCRC may review and approve 
or disapprove the reasonableness of any rate. In determining the reasonableness of rates, 
HSCRC must take into account objective standards of efficiency and effectiveness.  
 
Consistent with the All-Payer Model Contract, HSCRC may establish hospital rate levels 
and rate increases in the aggregate or on a hospital-specific basis, promote and approve 
alternate methods of rate determination and payment that are of an experimental nature, 
and, on request of the Secretary of Health, assist in the implementation of federally 
approved model programs. Consistent with the All-Payer Model Contract, HSCRC must 
(1) permit a nonprofit facility to charge reasonable rates that will permit the facility to 
provide, on a solvent basis, effective and efficient service that is in the public interest and 
(2) permit a proprietary profit-making facility to charge reasonable rates that will permit 
the facility to provide effective and efficient service that is in the public interest, and based 
on the fair value of the property and investments that are related directly to the facility, 
include enough allowance for and provide a fair return to the owner of the facility. If 
HSCRC considers a further investigation necessary or desirable to authenticate information 
in a report that a facility files, consistent with the All-Payer Model Contract, HSCRC may 
make any necessary further examination of the records or accounts of the facility. 
 
Maryland’s Total Cost of Care Model 
 
HSCRC is responsible for implementing TCOC, the successor to the All-Payer Model 
Contract. In calendar 2019, Maryland entered a new TCOC Model designed to (1) improve 
population health; (2) improve care outcomes for individuals; and (3) control growth in the 
total cost of care for Medicare beneficiaries. To accomplish these goals, the model is 
designed to move beyond hospitals to address Medicare patients’ care in the community. 
The hospital rate-setting system is the primary mechanism used to ensure Maryland’s 
compliance with TCOC requirements related to health care cost and hospital quality.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 234 (Senator Klausmeier, et al.) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 420/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3