START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

Chapter 792

(House Bill 437)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County Public Schools – Alterations to Title of Chief Executive
Officer and Establishment of Office of Integrity and Compliance ~~–~~
~~Establishment~~

PG 501–23

FOR the purpose of changing the title of the Chief Executive Officer of the Prince George’s
County public school system to the County Superintendent of the Prince George’s
County public school system; establishing the Office of Integrity and Compliance in
the Prince George’s County public school system to evaluate, examine, investigate,
report, and make recommendations on certain issues related to the Prince George’s
County public school system’s effectiveness, productivity, efficiency, accountability,
internal controls, and compliance with applicable laws, policies, and standards;
requiring the County Council of Prince George’s County to select and appoint an
Integrity and Compliance Officer to publish certain information on the Office of
Integrity and Compliance’s website, establish and follow certain confidentiality
procedures, report certain violations, coordinate with the Prince George’s County
public school system to develop a certain work plan, administer an oath or
affirmation, take an affidavit or deposition, issue a subpoena, and submit an annual
budget for the Office of Integrity and Compliance to the Prince George’s County
Board of Education; requiring an employee, official, or vendor of the Prince George’s
County public school system to provide certain information to the Integrity and
Compliance Officer; prohibiting a Prince George’s County public school system
employee, vendor, or employee of a vendor from being retaliated against, penalized,
or threatened with retaliation for certain actions; authorizing a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with a certain order or subpoena or compel
testimony or the production of evidence; requiring the county board to include in its
annual budget proposal certain amounts for the Office of Integrity and Compliance;
~~transferring~~ ~~the~~ ~~functions,~~ ~~powers,~~ ~~and~~ ~~duties~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Internal~~ ~~Audit~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~system~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Integrity~~ ~~and~~
~~Compliance~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ and generally relating to alterations to the title of the
Chief Executive Officer of the Prince George’s County public school system and the
establishment of the Office of Integrity and Compliance in the Prince George’s
County public school system.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 4–102, 4–120, 4–125.1, 4–201.1, 4–202(a), 4–204(a), 4–206(a), 4–402,
4– 403, and 6–201(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 4–404
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

4–102.

(a) (1) Except in Baltimore City, the county superintendent is the executive
officer, secretary, and treasurer of the county board.

(2) (i) In Baltimore City, the Chief Executive Officer of the Baltimore
City Board of School Commissioners is the executive officer, secretary, and treasurer of the
Board of School Commissioners.

(ii) The Chief Executive Officer shall have the powers and duties
imposed under this article.

(iii) The Chief Executive Officer is not a public officer under the
Constitution or the laws of the State.

(3) [(i) In Prince George’s County, the county superintendent is the Chief
Executive Officer of the Prince George’s County public school system.

(ii) The Chief Executive Officer is the executive officer, secretary, and
treasurer of the county board.

(iii) The Chief Executive Officer shall have the powers and duties
imposed under this article.

(iv) The Chief Executive Officer is not a public officer under the
Constitution or the laws of the State.

(4)] A county superintendent is not a public officer under the Constitution or
the laws of the State.

(b) Unless the tenure or salary or the administration of the office of the county
superintendent is under consideration, the county superintendent or the county
superintendent’s designee shall attend all meetings of the county board and its committees.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

(c) The county superintendent may advise on any question under consideration
but may not vote.

4–120.

(a) [Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, if] IF a county board
considers it practicable, it shall consolidate schools.

(b) [Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, each] EACH county board
shall arrange for the transportation of students to and from consolidated schools.

[(c) In Prince George’s County, the Chief Executive Officer shall have the authority
to:

(1) Consolidate schools if considered practicable; and

(2) Arrange for the transportation of students to and from consolidated
schools.]

4–125.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Certified county–based business participation” has the meaning stated
in § 10A–101 of the Code of Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County.

(3) “Certified county–based minority business participation” has the
meaning stated in § 10A–101 of the Code of Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County.

(4) [“Chief Executive Officer” means the superintendent of the Prince
George’s County public school system as defined in § 4–102(a)(3) of this subtitle.

(5)] “County–based business” has the meaning stated in § 10A–101 of the
Code of Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County.

[(6)] (5) “County–based minority business enterprise” has the meaning
stated in § 10A–101 of the Code of Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County.

[(7)] (6) “County–based small business” has the meaning stated in §
10A–101 of the Code of Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County.

[(8)] (7) “County board” means the Prince George’s County Board of
Education.

[(9)] (8) (i) “Procurement” means the process of buying, leasing,
lease–purchasing, or otherwise obtaining supplies, services, or construction.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) “Procurement” includes all functions that relate to the process of
obtaining supplies, services, or construction, including:

1. Description of requirements;

2. Selection and solicitation of sources; and

3. Preparation, award, and execution of a contract.

[(10)] (9) “Program” means the Certified County–Based Business
Participation Program that may be established under this section.

(b) This section applies only in Prince George’s County.

(c) The county board, after consultation with the [Chief Executive Officer]
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, may establish and implement a Certified County–Based
Business Participation Program to be used in county board procurement.

(d) If the county board exercises the authority granted in subsection (c) of this
section, the county board and the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT
shall:

(1) Consult with the Prince George’s County Council, or its agencies or
agents, on the establishment and implementation of the Program; and

(2) Establish goals and requirements for the Program that may include:

(i) Minimum percentages for certified county–based business
participation;

(ii) Utilization of county–based small businesses;

(iii) Minimum goals and incentives for maximizing certified
county–based minority business participation; and

(iv) The goals established under § 4–125(d) of this subtitle.

(e) To achieve the designated goals of the Program, the county board and the
[Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT may use incentives and bonuses,
including:

(1) Mandatory set–aside procedures;

(2) Mandatory subcontracting procedures with reasonable waiver
provisions;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

(3) The application of bonus points;

(4) The application of percentage points;

(5) Restrictive bidding;

(6) Restrictive price quotations;

(7) The reduction or waiver of bonding requirements; and

(8) Incentives to encourage maximum participation by:

(i) Certified county–based small businesses; and

(ii) A variety of different certified county–based businesses.

(f) If the county board exercises the authority granted in subsection (c) of this
section, the county board and the county council shall enter into a binding memorandum of
understanding outlining the county board’s goals and commitment to implementing the
Program.

(g) On or before December 1, 2015, and each year thereafter, the county board, after
consultation with the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, shall submit
a report to the Prince George’s County delegations to the House of Delegates and Senate of
Maryland, the Prince George’s County Council, and the Prince George’s County Executive,
in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, that specifies:

(1) The respective percentages and dollar amounts of certified county–based
business participation, certified county–based minority business participation, and certified
county–based small business participation in county board procurement for the previous
fiscal year; and

(2) The efforts by the county board and the [Chief Executive Officer]
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT in the previous fiscal year to encourage greater certified
county–based business participation, certified county–based minority business
participation, and certified county–based small business participation in county board
procurement.

4–201.1.

(a) This section applies only in Prince George’s County.

(b) Subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, the [Chief Executive
Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT of the Prince George’s County public school system
shall be:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Selected by the County Executive in accordance with subsection (c) of
this section; and

(2) Appointed by the county board after agreement on contract terms
negotiated by the chair of the county board.

(c) (1) The County Executive shall select a [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT from a list of three nominees recommended by a search committee that
is comprised of:

(i) One member of the State Board, appointed by the State
Superintendent; and

(ii) Two residents of Prince George’s County, appointed by the
Governor.

(2) The search committee shall be chaired by a member selected by the State
Superintendent.

(d) (1) The term of the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT
is 4 years beginning on July 1.

(2) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT continues
to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(3) By February 1 of the year in which a term ends, the [Chief Executive
Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT shall notify the County Executive and the county
board if the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT is a candidate for
reappointment.

(4) (i) In the year a term begins, the County Executive shall select a
[Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT between February 1 and June 1,
and the county board shall complete the appointment on or before June 30.

(ii) If the County Executive decides to select the incumbent [Chief
Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, the county board shall complete the
reappointment no later than March 1 of that year.

(5) If the county board is unable to appoint a [Chief Executive Officer]
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT by July 1 of the year a term begins, the provisions of
subsection (f) of this section apply.

(e) (1) An individual may not be appointed as [Chief Executive Officer]
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT unless the individual:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

(i) Is eligible to be issued a certificate for the office by the State
Superintendent;

(ii) Has graduated from an accredited college or university; and

(iii) Has completed 2 years of graduate work at an accredited college
or university, including public school administration, supervision, and methods of teaching.

(2) The appointment of the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT is not valid unless approved in writing by the State Superintendent.

(3) If the State Superintendent disapproves an appointment, the State
Superintendent shall give the reasons for disapproval in writing to the county board and the
County Executive.

(f) If a vacancy occurs in the office of [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT, the County Executive shall select and the county board shall appoint
an interim [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT to serve until July 1 after
the appointment.

(g) On notification of pending criminal charges against the [Chief Executive
Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT as provided under § 4–206 of this subtitle, the county
board may suspend the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT with pay
until the final disposition of the criminal charges.

4–202.

(a) [(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, each] EACH
county superintendent is entitled to the compensation set by the county board.

[(2) In Prince George’s County, the Chief Executive Officer is entitled to the
compensation set by the contract with the county board.]

4–204.

(a) [(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, acting] ACTING
under the rules and regulations of the county board, the county superintendent is responsible
for the administration of the superintendent’s office.

[(2) In Prince George’s County, the Chief Executive Officer is responsible for
the administration of the office of the Chief Executive Officer, including hiring and setting
the salaries of the executive staff.]

4–206.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) [(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a] A county
superintendent shall immediately notify the county board in writing of any criminal charges
that are punishable by a period of incarceration brought against the county superintendent.

[(2) In Prince George’s County, the Chief Executive Officer shall immediately
notify the County Executive and the county board in writing of any criminal charges that
are punishable by a period of incarceration brought against the Chief Executive Officer.]

4–402.

(a) In addition to the other powers granted to, and duties imposed on, a county
superintendent under this article, the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT has the responsibilities and powers set forth in this section.

(b) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT shall be
responsible for:

(1) The overall administration of the Prince George’s County public school
system;

(2) Subject to the provisions of Title 6 of this article, and after a budget is
submitted by the county board and approved by the County Council at the beginning of each
fiscal year, the day–to–day management and oversight of the fiscal affairs of the Prince
George’s County public school system, including the management of activities related to:

(i) Administration;

(ii) Mid–level administration;

(iii) Instructional salaries;

(iv) Textbooks and other classroom instructional supplies;

(v) Instructional costs;

(vi) Special education;

(vii) Student personnel services;

(viii) Health services;

(ix) Student transportation;

(x) Operation of plants and equipment;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

(xi) Plant maintenance;

(xii) Fixed charges;

(xiii) Food services; and

(xiv) Capital planning and expenditures; and

(3) The development and implementation of the curriculum taught and the
instruction provided in the Prince George’s County public school system.

(c) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT:

(1) Shall hire and set the salaries of a chief operating officer, a chief
financial officer, a chief academic officer, a chief of staff, a board liaison, and any other
necessary executive staff in the office of the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT; and

(2) May delegate the responsibilities established under subsection (b) of this
section to appropriately qualified individuals as determined and deemed necessary by the
[Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT.

(d) (1) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT shall enter
into a memorandum of understanding that relates to the provision of policy analysis and
advice to the county board with the following institutions of higher education:

(i) The University of Maryland, College Park Campus;

(ii) The University of Maryland Global Campus;

(iii) Bowie State University; and

(iv) Prince George’s Community College.

(2) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT may
include additional institutions of higher education in the memorandum of understanding
required under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

4–403.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the county board may not
implement a policy or take any action that contradicts the day–to–day management and
oversight of the fiscal affairs of the Prince George’s County public school system by the [Chief
Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT under this subtitle.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) Except for personnel matters and appeals of personnel matters in accordance
with §§ 4–205(c)(2) and (3) of this title and 6–202 of this article, the county board shall
require a two–thirds vote of all voting members of the county board to take an action that is
contrary to an action of the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT.

4–404.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “ABUSE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE’S INTENTIONAL
MISCONDUCT OR MISUSE OF AUTHORITY OR POSITION:

1. INVOLVING PROPERTY OR FUNDS OF THE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM THAT IS IMPROPER OR DEFICIENT WHEN COMPARED TO CONDUCT
A PRUDENT PERSON WOULD CONSIDER REASONABLE UNDER THE SAME FACTS AND
CIRCUMSTANCES; OR

2. FOR THE PURPOSE OF FURTHERING IMPROPERLY
THE PRIVATE INTERESTS OF THE EMPLOYEE, A FAMILY MEMBER, OR A CLOSE
PERSONAL OR BUSINESS ASSOCIATE.

(II) “ABUSE” INCLUDES:

1. THEFT OR MISAPPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY OR
FUNDS OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM; AND

2. DESTRUCTION OR ALTERATION OF OFFICIAL
RECORDS.

(3) (I) “FRAUD” MEANS AN INTENTIONAL ACT OR ATTEMPT TO
OBTAIN SOMETHING OF VALUE FROM THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM OR ANOTHER
PERSON THROUGH WILLFUL MISREPRESENTATION.

(II) “FRAUD” INCLUDES A WILLFUL FALSE REPRESENTATION
OF A MATERIAL FACT, WHETHER BY WORDS OR BY CONDUCT, BY FALSE OR
MISLEADING ALLEGATIONS, OR BY CONCEALMENT OF THAT WHICH SHOULD HAVE
BEEN DISCLOSED, THAT CAUSES THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM TO ACT, OR FAIL TO
ACT, TO THE DETRIMENT OF THE INTEREST OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(4) “LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM” MEANS THE PRINCE GEORGE’S
COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

(5) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
IN THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(6) “VENDOR” MEANS A PARTY OBLIGATED BY CONTRACT OR
SUBCONTRACT TO PROVIDE GOODS, SERVICES, OR PROPERTY TO THE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM FOR CONSIDERATION, INCLUDING CONTRACTS AND
SUBCONTRACTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES RELATED TO
CONSTRUCTION.

(7) (I) “WASTE” MEANS AN INAPPROPRIATE ACT OR OMISSION BY
AN EMPLOYEE WITH CONTROL OVER OR ACCESS TO LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM
PROPERTY OR FUNDS THAT UNREASONABLY DEPRIVES THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM
OF VALUE.

(II) “WASTE” INCLUDES MISMANAGEMENT OR OTHER
UNINTENTIONAL CONDUCT THAT IS DEFICIENT OR IMPROPER WHEN COMPARED TO
CONDUCT THAT A PRUDENT PERSON WOULD CONSIDER NECESSARY TO PRESERVE
THE VALUE OF PROPERTY OR FUNDS OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM UNDER THE
SAME FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(C) (1) THERE IS AN OFFICE OF INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE IN THE
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(2) (I) THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
SHALL SELECT AND APPOINT AN INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER.

(II) THE COUNTY COUNCIL SHALL SELECT THE INTEGRITY AND
COMPLIANCE OFFICER SOLELY ON THE BASIS OF PROFESSIONAL ABILITY AND
PERSONAL INTEGRITY, WITHOUT REGARD TO POLITICAL AFFILIATION.

(III) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER MUST BE
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONALLY BY EXPERIENCE OR EDUCATION IN AUDITING,
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, OR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.

(D) (1) THE TERM OF THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER IS 4
YEARS BEGINNING ON THE DATE OF APPOINTMENT.

(2) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT SERVE AS INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
OFFICER FOR MORE THAN THREE TERMS.

(3) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER CONTINUES TO
SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED.
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) IF A VACANCY OCCURS FOR THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
OFFICER, THE COUNTY COUNCIL SHALL APPOINT AN INTERIM INTEGRITY AND
COMPLIANCE OFFICER TO SERVE FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE UNEXPIRED TERM.

(5) THE COUNTY COUNCIL MAY REMOVE THE INTEGRITY AND
COMPLIANCE OFFICER ONLY THROUGH A MAJORITY VOTE OF THE COUNTY
COUNCIL FOR NEGLECT OF DUTY, MALFEASANCE, CONVICTION OF A FELONY, OR
OTHER GOOD CAUSE.

(6) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL DISCHARGE
THE DUTIES OF OFFICE ON A FULL–TIME BASIS AND WITH NO SECONDARY
EMPLOYMENT OF ANY NATURE DURING THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
OFFICER’S TERM.

(E) (1) THE OFFICE SHALL:

(I) ASSIST THE COUNTY COUNCIL AND THE LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM BY PROVIDING INDEPENDENT EVALUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING OPPORTUNITIES TO:

1. PRESERVE THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM’S
REPUTATION; AND

2. IMPROVE THE EFFECTIVENESS, PRODUCTIVITY, OR
EFFICIENCY OF LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM PROGRAMS, POLICIES, PRACTICES, AND
OPERATIONS;

(II) ENSURE PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY BY PREVENTING,
INVESTIGATING, AND REPORTING INSTANCES OF FRAUD, WASTE, AND ABUSE OF
PROPERTY OR FUNDS OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM;

(III) EXAMINE, EVALUATE, AND REPORT ON THE ADEQUACY AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE SYSTEMS OF INTERNAL CONTROLS AND THEIR RELATED
ACCOUNTING, FINANCIAL, TECHNOLOGY, AND OPERATIONAL POLICIES; AND

(IV) REPORT NONCOMPLIANCE WITH AND PROPOSE WAYS TO
IMPROVE EMPLOYEE COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW, POLICY, AND ETHICAL
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.

(2) IN DEVELOPING RECOMMENDATIONS, THE OFFICE MAY:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

(I) CONDUCT ADMINISTRATIVE INVESTIGATIONS, BUDGETARY
ANALYSES, AND FINANCIAL, MANAGEMENT, OR PERFORMANCE AUDITS AND SIMILAR
REVIEWS;

(II) PROVIDE MANAGEMENT ADVISORIES; AND

(III) UTILIZE THE ASSISTANCE FROM ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT
AGENCY OR PRIVATE PARTY TO COMPLETE A PROJECT INITIATED BY THE OFFICE.

(3) WHEN APPLICABLE, THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER
SHALL COMPLY WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS.

(4) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL PUBLISH ON THE
OFFICE’S WEBSITE, IN A READILY AVAILABLE LOCATION:

1. PERIODIC REPORTS THAT SUMMARIZE THE
ACTIVITIES, FINDINGS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE
OFFICE; AND

2. ANY OFFICIAL WRITTEN COMMENTS OR RESPONSES
OFFERED BY THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION WITH ANY REPORT
PUBLISHED BY THE OFFICE.

(II) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER:

1. MAY NOT DISCLOSE ANY RECORD, REPORT, OR
RELATED INFORMATION THAT IS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE UNDER THE
PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT;

2. MAY PROVIDE AN ORAL REPORT IF APPROPRIATE
UNDER GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS; AND

3. SHALL ESTABLISH AND FOLLOW PROCEDURES FOR
SAFEGUARDING THE IDENTITY OF CONFIDENTIAL SOURCES AND PROTECTING
PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.

(5) IF REASONABLE GROUNDS EXIST TO BELIEVE THAT A SERIOUS
VIOLATION OF FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAW HAS OCCURRED, THE INTEGRITY
AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL REPORT THE ALLEGATION TO:

(I) AN APPROPRIATE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;

(II) THE STATE ETHICS COMMISSION; OR
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) ANY OTHER AGENCY WITH JURISDICTION TO ENFORCE THE
LAW.

(F) (1) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL COORDINATE
WITH THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM TO DEVELOP A WRITTEN WORK PLAN AND
ESTABLISH PERIODIC GOALS AND PRIORITIES FOR THE OFFICE BASED ON AN
ASSESSMENT OF RELATIVE RISKS.

(2) IN DEVELOPING THE WORK PLAN, THE INTEGRITY AND
COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION REQUESTS FROM:

(I) OFFICERS, ADMINISTRATORS, AND EMPLOYEES OF THE
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM;

(II) ELECTED OFFICIALS; AND

(III) MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC.

(3) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL MAKE THE
WRITTEN WORK PLAN AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC, SUBJECT TO THE PUBLIC
INFORMATION ACT.

(G) (1) (I) ON REQUEST FROM THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
OFFICER, AN EMPLOYEE OR OFFICIAL OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL
PROVIDE PROMPTLY TO THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER ANY
AVAILABLE DOCUMENT OR OTHER INFORMATION CONCERNING THE LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM’S OPERATIONS, BUDGET, PROGRAMS, OR VENDOR CONTRACTS.

(II) 1. THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL
NOTIFY THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT IF ANY EMPLOYEE OR OFFICIAL OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM
FAILS TO PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION OR DOCUMENT REQUESTED UNDER THIS
PARAGRAPH WITH REASONABLE PROMPTNESS.

2. THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT SHALL TAKE APPROPRIATE ADMINISTRATIVE
ACTION TO PRODUCE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM COMPLIANCE WITH A PENDING
REQUEST FOR INFORMATION BY THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER.

(2) (I) ON REQUEST FROM THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
OFFICER, A VENDOR OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL PROVIDE PROMPTLY TO
THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER ANY AVAILABLE DOCUMENT OR OTHER

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

INFORMATION CONCERNING ANY LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM VENDOR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE PROCUREMENT OF THE CONTRACT.

(II) 1. THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL
NOTIFY THE COUNTY BOARD, THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT, AND THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM IF ANY VENDOR FAILS TO
PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION OR DOCUMENT REQUESTED UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH
WITH REASONABLE PROMPTNESS.

2. THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT SHALL TAKE APPROPRIATE ADMINISTRATIVE
OR CIVIL ACTION TO PRODUCE VENDOR COMPLIANCE WITH A PENDING REQUEST
FOR INFORMATION BY THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER.

(H) (1) EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM EMPLOYEE SHOULD REPORT ANY
FRAUD, WASTE, OR ABUSE TO THE OFFICE.

(2) A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM EMPLOYEE, VENDOR, OR EMPLOYEE OF
ANY VENDOR MAY NOT BE RETALIATED AGAINST OR PENALIZED, OR THREATENED
WITH RETALIATION OR PENALTY, FOR PROVIDING INFORMATION TO, COOPERATING
WITH, OR IN ANY WAY ASSISTING THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER IN
CONNECTION WITH ANY ACTIVITY AUTHORIZED BY THIS SECTION.

(3) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER MAY NOT DISCLOSE
THE IDENTITY OF A PERSON THAT REPORTS AN ALLEGATION OF FRAUD, WASTE, OR
ABUSE UNLESS:

(I) THE REPORTING PERSON CONSENTS TO DISCLOSURE OF
THE PERSON’S IDENTITY;

(II) DISCLOSURE IS REASONABLY NECESSARY TO COMPLETE AN
AUDIT OR INVESTIGATION; OR

(III) ANOTHER PERSON IS LEGALLY ENTITLED TO DISCLOSURE
OF THE IDENTITY OF THE REPORTING PERSON.

(I) (1) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER MAY ADMINISTER AN
OATH OR AFFIRMATION OR TAKE AN AFFIDAVIT FROM ANY PERSON IF NECESSARY
TO PERFORM THE DUTIES UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER MAY ADMINISTER AN
OATH AND TAKE A DEPOSITION AND OTHER TESTIMONY FOR THE PURPOSE OF
INVESTIGATING FRAUD, WASTE, OR ABUSE WITHIN THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 792 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER MAY SUBPOENA ANY
PERSON OR EVIDENCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATING FRAUD, WASTE, OR
ABUSE WITHIN THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(4) IF A PERSON FAILS TO COMPLY WITH A LAWFUL ORDER OR
SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, ON PETITION OF THE INTEGRITY AND
COMPLIANCE OFFICER, A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION MAY COMPEL:

(I) COMPLIANCE WITH THE ORDER OR SUBPOENA; OR

(II) TESTIMONY OR THE PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE.

(J) (1) EACH YEAR THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL
SUBMIT TO THE COUNTY BOARD A PROJECTED BUDGET FOR THE OFFICE FOR THE
UPCOMING FISCAL YEAR.

(2) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL INCLUDE IN THE COUNTY BOARD’S
ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET PROPOSAL THE AMOUNTS RECOMMENDED BY THE
INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER FOR THE OFFICE FOR THE UPCOMING
FISCAL YEAR.

6–201.

(a) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the county board shall
employ individuals in the positions that the county board considers necessary for the
operation of the public schools in the county.

(2) In Prince George’s County, the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT of the Prince George’s County public school system shall hire and set
the salaries of a chief operating officer, a chief financial officer, a chief academic officer, a
chief of staff, a board liaison, and any other necessary executive staff in the office of the
[Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~functions,~~ ~~powers,~~ ~~duties,~~
~~and~~ ~~employees~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Internal~~ ~~Audit~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~
~~system~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~transferred~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Integrity~~ ~~and~~ ~~Compliance~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~
~~system~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~effective~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~all~~ ~~employees~~ ~~who~~ ~~are~~
~~transferred~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Integrity~~ ~~and~~ ~~Compliance~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~
~~school~~ ~~system~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~result~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~transferred~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~effective~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~
~~without~~ ~~any~~ ~~diminution~~ ~~of~~ ~~their~~ ~~rights,~~ ~~including~~ ~~collective~~ ~~bargaining~~ ~~rights,~~ ~~benefits,~~ ~~or~~
~~employment~~ ~~or~~ ~~retirement~~ ~~status.~~

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 792

SECTION ~~4.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023, ~~contingent~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~taking~~ ~~effect~~ ~~of~~ ~~Chapter~~ ~~____~~ ~~(H.B.~~ ~~432)~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~of~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~and~~ ~~if~~ ~~Chapter~~ ~~____~~ ~~(H.B.~~ ~~432)~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect,~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~
~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~null~~ ~~and~~ ~~void.~~

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17