START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 410 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 410 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Elections - Polling Place Plan, Prohibited Acts, and 2024 Primary Election Date 
 
 
This bill makes changes to State election law relating to (1) public input on changes in 
polling place locations; (2) the submission of a polling place plan by local boards of 
elections to the State Board of Elections (SBE); (3) expansion of an existing prohibition 
against willfully and knowingly influencing or attempting to influence a voter’s decision 
whether to vote through specified means; and (4) the date, in 2024, of the statewide 
primary election and the Baltimore City primary election for municipal offices. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $156,400 in FY 2024 and by varying 
amounts in future years. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
156,400 
109,400 
152,500 
119,300 
164,500 
Net Effect 
($156,400) 
($109,400) 
($152,500) 
($119,300) 
($164,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, collectively, by at least $37,500 in 
FY 2024 and by similar, increasing minimum amounts in future years in which a primary 
election occurs, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 410/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Public Input on Changes to Polling Place Locations  
 
The bill requires that each local board of elections maintain a contact list of individuals and 
organizations who wish to be notified about local board meetings at which proposed 
changes to the locations of polling places will be discussed and enable individuals and 
organizations to register for the contact list.  
 
The bill prohibits a local board from voting to change the location of a polling place unless 
the local board first holds a meeting to discuss the proposed change and provides an 
opportunity for interested individuals and organizations to testify on the proposed change 
at the meeting. The local board must provide, at least 14 days before the meeting, written 
notice of the meeting to each individual and organization on the contact list, as well as the 
following elected officials if the official is elected by eligible voters residing in the precinct 
containing either the current polling place location or the proposed polling place location: 
(1) the mayor; (2) the county executive; (3) each county commissioner; (4) each county 
council member; (5) each municipal council member; and (6) each member of the 
Maryland General Assembly.  
 
These provisions do not apply if a local board is creating a new precinct or changing a 
precinct boundary or polling place, due to an emergency, during the period beginning 
21 days before Election Day through Election Day. 
 
Polling Place Plan 
 
The bill requires each local board of elections, at least six months before each statewide 
primary election, to submit a polling place plan to SBE for approval. 
 
A polling place plan must include (1) evidence that the plan complies with § 10-101(a)(2) 
(governing polling place sites) of the Election Law Article and (2) an analysis of how to 
maximize voter participation in each precinct. 
 
If the polling place plan proposes to reduce the total number of separate buildings used as 
polling places below the total number of separate buildings used as polling places in the 
2018 general election, the plan must include:   
 
 
the address and a description of the location of each affected polling place;  
 
 
an analysis of available suitable buildings within the precinct boundary, including 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 410/ Page 3 
the availability of parking and a determination regarding building compliance with 
the federal Americans with Disabilities Act; 
 
of the voters who cast ballots in each affected precinct in the three most recent 
statewide elections (1) the percentage who voted in person on Election Day; (2) the 
percentage who voted by mail; (3) the number who registered to vote on Election 
Day; and (4) the number who voted at an early voting center; 
 
the proximity of the proposed polling place to a dense concentration of voters in the 
affected precinct; 
 
the change in the number of registered voters in the affected precinct from the last 
statewide election; 
 
the public transportation options that voters in each affected precinct could use to 
access the polling place that would serve the precinct under the plan; and 
 
an analysis of the impact on the ability of historically disenfranchised communities 
to cast a ballot, including demographic information of the voters in the affected 
precinct from the most recent report published by the Maryland Vital Statistics 
Administration. 
 
SBE must approve a polling place plan if the polling place plan (1) complies with the 
polling place plan requirements and § 10-101(a)(2) of the Election Law Article and (2) will 
not negatively affect access to voting for historically disenfranchised communities. SBE 
must reject a polling place plan that does not meet the requirements for approval. If SBE 
rejects a polling place plan, the local board must submit a revised polling place plan to SBE 
within 15 days after the date on which SBE rejected the previous plan. 
 
“Historically disenfranchised communities” means racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic groups 
that have historically been subject to voter suppression efforts. 
 
The bill makes an existing authorization – for a local board to create a new precinct or 
change a precinct boundary or polling place in an emergency – subject to these polling 
place plan provisions. 
 
Influencing or Attempting to Influence a Voter’s Decision Whether to Vote 
 
The bill adds to a provision that prohibits a person from willfully and knowingly 
influencing or attempting to influence a voter’s decision whether to go to the polls to cast 
a vote through the use of force, fraud, threat, menace, intimidation, bribery, reward, or offer 
of reward, so that the provision instead prohibits a person from willfully and knowingly 
influencing or attempting to influence – through any of those means – a voter’s decision 
whether to (1) go to the polls to cast a vote or (2) vote by other lawful means. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 410/ Page 4 
Date of the 2024 Primary Election 
 
The bill alters the date, in 2024, of the statewide primary election and the primary election 
for municipal offices in Baltimore City so that they are held on the second Tuesday in May, 
instead of the fourth Tuesday in April. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Precinct Boundaries and Polling Places 
 
As it deems it expedient for the convenience of voters, a local board of elections may 
(1) create and alter the boundaries for precincts in the county; (2) designate the location for 
polling places in any election district, ward, or precinct in the county; and (3) combine or 
abolish precincts. 
 
When a local board of elections is establishing precinct boundaries and designating the 
location of polling places, the local board must contact and obtain input from large 
residential institutional communities including institutions of higher education, continuing 
care retirement communities, senior communities, and military installations. 
 
Except in an emergency, a local board may not create or change a precinct boundary or 
polling place during the period beginning the Tuesday that is 13 weeks prior to a primary 
election, through the day of the general election. Subject to the approval of SBE, a local 
board may create a new precinct or change a precinct boundary or polling place, 
irrespective of other restrictions in statute, if the local board determines that an emergency 
exists. 
 
Under § 10-101(a)(2) of the Election Law Article, each polling place must (1) provide an 
environment that is suitable to the proper conduct of an election; (2) be located as 
conveniently as practicable for the majority of registered voters assigned to that polling 
place; (3) be in a public building, if suitable space is available; (4) be in the precinct that it 
serves unless no suitable location for a polling place can be found within the precinct, in 
which case the polling place can be established in an adjacent precinct; and (5) whenever 
practicable, be selected and arranged to avoid architectural and other barriers that impede 
access or voting by elderly and physically disabled voters. 
 
Changes in Administrative Policy Affecting Voting Rights 
 
SBE or a local board of elections may not consider a change in an administrative policy 
affecting voting rights at a meeting unless the board has posted a prominent public notice 
on its website at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting stating that the board will consider 
an administrative policy affecting voting rights at the meeting. If a change is adopted, SBE 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 410/ Page 5 
and, if applicable, the local board that adopts the change, must provide public notice of the 
change within 48 hours of its adoption. “Administrative policy affecting voting rights” 
means any action relating to voter registration, provisional voting, absentee voting, or the 
location of a polling place or early voting center. 
 
Influencing or Attempting to Influence a Voter’s Decision Whether to Vote 
 
A person may not willfully and knowingly influence or attempt to influence a voter’s 
decision whether to go to the polls to cast a vote through the use of force, fraud, threat, 
menace, intimidation, bribery, reward, or offer of reward. 
 
A person who violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of 
up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to five years. A person who violates the 
prohibition without knowing the act is illegal is subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000. 
 
Date of the Primary Election 
 
In the year in which the President of the United States is elected, the statewide primary 
election and the primary election for municipal offices in Baltimore City must be held on 
the fourth Tuesday in April. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $156,380 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for a 30-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects costs for (1) SBE to hire 
one full-time program administrator to contribute to SBE’s efforts to assist local boards in 
their development of polling place plans and SBE’s review and approval of the plans and 
(2) the State’s 50% share of mapping services procured by SBE to assist the local boards 
in their development of polling place plans. The estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. This estimate is based on the 
following information and assumptions:   
 
 
SBE provides assistance to local boards, under this bill, that is similar to the 
technical assistance and mapping services it currently provides to the local boards 
for the evaluation of early voting center and ballot drop box locations. 
 
Existing SBE staff cannot absorb the additional work of assisting local boards in 
their development of polling place plans and managing the State board’s review and 
approval of the plans without additional staff. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$111,206 
Mapping Services 
37,500 
Operating Expenses 
      7,674 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$156,380 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 410/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) mapping services 
only in fiscal years that include a primary election. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, collectively, by at least 
$37,500 in fiscal 2024 and similar, increasing (accounting for inflation) minimum amounts 
in future fiscal years in which a primary election occurs to comply with the bill’s polling 
place plan requirements. 
 
As indicated above under State Fiscal Effect, local boards share 50% of the costs of 
mapping services with the State, in accordance with current cost-sharing ($37,500 in 
fiscal 2024 and similar, increasing amounts in future years in which a primary election 
occurs). 
 
Certain local boards may also incur increased personnel and mileage costs and/or costs to 
hire a consultant in order to meet the polling place plan requirements. Any additional 
personnel/overtime or consulting services supplement efforts of existing local board staff 
and technical assistance and mapping services provided by SBE. The extent of these 
potential additional costs cannot be reliably determined at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Allegany, Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, 
Caroline, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Harford, Howard, Kent, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, 
Somerset, Talbot, Washington, and Wicomico counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; State Prosecutor’s Office; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland 
Association of Election Officials; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 410/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7