START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 251

Chapter 251

(House Bill 477)

AN ACT concerning

Public Senior Higher Education Institutions – Reproductive Health Services
Plans – Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring, on or before a certain date, ~~each~~ certain public senior higher
education ~~institution~~ institutions, in consultation with students, to develop and
implement a reproductive health services plan; requiring a certain public senior
higher education institution, in lieu of developing and implementing a reproductive
health services plan, to provide students with access to certain contraception through
certain means; requiring the Maryland Department of Health, on request, to provide
assistance to a public senior higher education institution in developing the plan; and
generally relating to reproductive health services and public senior higher education
institutions.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 15–136
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

15–136.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION
INSTITUTION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–101 OF THIS ARTICLE MEANS:

(I) THE CONSTITUENT INSTITUTIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM OF MARYLAND;

(II) MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY; AND

(III) ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF MARYLAND.

(2) “PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION” DOES NOT
INCLUDE:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 251 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND CENTER FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES; OR

(II) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND GLOBAL CAMPUS.

(B) (1) (I) ON EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 1, 2024, EACH PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTION, IN CONSULTATION WITH STUDENTS, SHALL DEVELOP AND
IMPLEMENT A REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES PLAN TO PROVIDE AT THE PUBLIC
SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION OR TO REFER STUDENTS TO A
COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES.

(II) IN LIEU OF DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING A PLAN
UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE
SHALL PROVIDE STUDENTS WITH ACCESS TO OVER–THE–COUNTER
CONTRACEPTION THROUGH ON–CAMPUS RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS OR VENDING
MACHINES.

(2) THE PLAN REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE PROVISION OF OR REFERRAL TO OFF–CAMPUS
SERVICES FOR OBTAINING:

1. ALL METHODS OF FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED CONTRACEPTION, INCLUDING PRESCRIPTION
EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION;

2. PREVENTION AND TREATMENT SERVICES FOR
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS, INCLUDING HIV PREVENTION; AND

3. ABORTION CARE SERVICES;

(II) 24–HOUR ACCESS TO OVER–THE–COUNTER
CONTRACEPTION THROUGH THE STUDENT HEALTH CENTER, RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENTS ON CAMPUS, OR VENDING MACHINES;

(III) THE AVAILABILITY OF EVIDENCE–BASED REPRODUCTIVE
HEALTH EDUCATION SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE STUDENT HEALTH CENTER, PEER
EDUCATORS, OR OTHER HEALTH EDUCATION PROGRAMS; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 251

(IV) DEVELOPMENT OF A REFERRAL NETWORK OF OFF–CAMPUS
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS, INCLUDING PHARMACIES,
LOCATED WITHIN A REASONABLE PROXIMITY TO THE CAMPUS; AND

(V) ACCESS TO TRANSPORTATION OR OTHER WRAPAROUND
SERVICES TO SUPPORT STUDENTS USING OFF–CAMPUS REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
~~SERVICES.~~

(3) A PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION SHALL
UPDATE THE REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES PLAN DEVELOPED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION EACH YEAR.

(C) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, ON REQUEST, SHALL
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO A PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION IN
DEVELOPING A REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES PLAN UNDER THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3