START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 423

Chapter 423

(House Bill 438)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Class B–Stadium (Baseball
Stadium) Beer, Wine, and Liquor License

PG 306–23

FOR the purpose of altering the alcoholic beverages that may be sold under a certain
stadium license in Prince George’s County; authorizing the holder of a Class
B–Stadium (baseball stadium) beer, wine, and liquor license to sell beer, wine, and
liquor for on–premises consumption; altering a provision of law providing that the
profit from the sale of certain alcoholic beverages under the license may accrue to
the use of the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission or the
concessionaire; altering the names of certain stadium licenses in the county; and
generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 26–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 26–1014, 26–1015(a), 26–1405(c), 26–1406(c), and 26–1601(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

26–102.

This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

26–1014.

(a) There is a Class B–Stadium (baseball stadium) beer [and light], wine, AND
LIQUOR license.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 423 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) The Board may issue the license to:

(1) the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission; or

(2) a private concessionaire that is under contract with the Commission.

(c) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer [and light], wine, AND
LIQUOR at retail to consumers for on–premises consumption in a baseball stadium owned
or operated by the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission.

(d) Profit from the sale of beer [or light], wine, OR LIQUOR made by a license
holder may accrue to the use of the Commission or the concessionaire.

(e) The annual license fee is $2,420.

26–1015.

(a) There is a Class [B] B–STADIUM (FOOTBALL STADIUM) beer, wine, and
liquor [stadium] license.

26–1405.

(c) (1) This subsection does not apply to a Class B–Stadium (BASEBALL
STADIUM) beer [and light], wine, AND LIQUOR license, a 7–day Class B–ECR on–sale
beer, wine, and liquor license, or a Class B–WPL (waterfront pavilion) beer, wine, and
liquor license.

(2) To be eligible to receive a license, a partner shall:

(i) be a resident of the State at the time the application is filed and
continue to be a resident as long as the license is in effect; and

(ii) be a registered voter of the State.

26–1406.

(c) (1) This subsection does not apply to a Class B–Stadium (BASEBALL
STADIUM) beer [and light], wine, AND LIQUOR license, a 7–day Class B–ECR on–sale
beer, wine, and liquor license, or a Class B–WPL (waterfront pavilion) beer, wine, and
liquor license.

(2) To be eligible to receive a license, an applicant shall:

(i) be a resident of the State at the time the application is filed and
continue to be a resident as long as the license is in effect; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 423

(ii) be a registered voter of the State.

26–1601.

(a) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this title, the number of licenses in a
class issued by the Board may not exceed:

(i) Class A beer, 4;

(ii) Class B beer, 23;

(iii) Class C beer, 3;

(iv) Class D beer, 33;

(v) Class A beer and light wine, 7;

(vi) Class B beer and light wine, 45;

(vii) Class B–GC beer and light wine, 4;

(viii) [Class B–Stadium beer and light wine, 1;

(ix)] Class C beer and light wine, 8;

[(x)] (IX) Class D beer and light wine, 99;

[(xi)] (X) Class A beer, wine, and liquor, 143;

[(xii)] (XI) Class B beer, wine, and liquor, 215;

[(xiii)] (XII) Class B–AE beer, wine, and liquor, 15;

[(xiv)] (XIII) Class BCE beer, wine, and liquor, 8;

[(xv)] (XIV) Class B–CI beer, wine, and liquor, 2;

[(xvi)] (XV) Class B–DD beer, wine, and liquor:

1. under § 26–1614(a)(1) of this subtitle, 4;

2. under § 26–1614(a)(2) of this subtitle, 4;

3. under § 26–1614(a)(3) of this subtitle, 6;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 423 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. under § 26–1614(a)(4) of this subtitle, 6;

5. under § 26–1614(a)(5) of this subtitle, 4;

6. under § 26–1614(a)(6) of this subtitle, 10; and

7. under § 26–1614(a)(7) of this subtitle, 3;

[(xvii)] (XVI) Class B/ECF beer, wine, and liquor, 1;

[(xviii)] (XVII) Class B–ECF/DS beer, wine, and liquor, 2;

[(xix)] (XVIII) Class B–ECR beer, wine, and liquor, 1;

[(xx)] (XIX) Class B–Stadium (BASEBALL STADIUM) beer, wine, and
liquor, 1;

(XX) CLASS B–STADIUM (FOOTBALL STADIUM) BEER, WINE, AND
LIQUOR, 1;

(xxi) Class B–WPL (waterfront pavilion) beer, wine, and liquor, 3; and

(xxii) Class C beer, wine, and liquor:

1. under § 26–1002 of this title, 1;

2. under § 26–1005 of this title, 12;

3. under § 26–1011 of this title, 25;

4. under § 26–1017 of this title, 30; and

5. under § 26–1019 of this title, 4.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect April
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4