START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 495 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 495 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Early Childhood Development - Child Care Scholarship Program - Alterations 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) from 
making the following alterations to the Child Care Scholarship (CCS) Program in effect as 
of January 1, 2023:  (1) increasing the copayment levels; (2) reducing the reimbursement 
rates; (3) reducing the income eligibility requirements; or (4) implementing a freeze in 
program enrollment. However, MSDE may do so if (1) it submits a notification to specified 
committees of the General Assembly on the intended program alterations, including the 
reason for, and expected duration of, the proposed actions and (2) the program alterations 
identified in the notification are not implemented until the completion of the regular 
legislative session immediately following the submission of the notification. If the Board 
of Public Works approves budget reductions for the program pursuant to its current 
statutory authority for a certain fiscal year, MSDE may increase the copayment levels, 
reduce the reimbursement rates, reduce the income eligibility requirements, or implement 
a freeze in enrollment at any time during the fiscal year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No anticipated impact in FY 2024. The bill’s impact in any given fiscal year 
is indeterminate; however, the bill may significantly limit MSDE’s ability to respond to 
changing fiscal circumstances in future years, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 495/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The CCS Program (formerly known as the Child Care Subsidy Program) 
provides financial assistance with child care costs to low-income families that meet 
applicable State or federal requirements. The program is funded through a combination of 
State funds and the federal Child Care and Development Block Grant. All participating 
parents or guardians must meet a variety of technical requirements and must be working or 
enrolled in school, a training program, or a work-related activity. 
 
To meet income requirements, an individual must meet income guidelines that vary based 
on family size or be a recipient of Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) or Supplemental 
Security Income (SSI). Beginning July 1, 2023, MSDE will establish a process for granting 
presumptive eligibility to individuals who attest to meeting the eligibility requirements for 
a scholarship, as required by Chapters 525 and 526 of 2022. Effective May 23, 2022, 
MSDE also increased the income eligibility threshold to 75% of the State median income 
using federal assistance distributed to states during the COVID-19 pandemic (as discussed 
below). 
 
For each child needing care, eligible families receive a voucher with the subsidy rate, which 
is used to purchase child care directly from the provider of their choice. Families also 
receive access to information and referral services to assist them in finding appropriate 
child care. Subsidy rates are determined by the geographic region, type of provider, and 
age of the child. For purposes of the program, the State is divided into seven geographic 
regions. A family that does not receive TCA or SSI may be required to contribute a 
copayment, and any remaining balance between the actual rate charged by the provider and 
the voucher amount. In accordance with Chapters 525 and 526, MSDE must award 
subsidies in an amount sufficient to ensure that an individual will not be required to pay a 
copay if they participate in certain programs, such as the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program or the federal Housing Choice Voucher Program. Effective 
May 23, 2023, MSDE also reduced copays for all other participating families to a range of 
$1 to $3 per week. 
 
Registered family child care homes or licensed child care centers are able to serve families 
receiving child care subsidies. Under certain circumstances, a voucher may be used for 
informal child care, such as relative care or in-home care, if approved by the State. Child 
care providers accepting child care scholarships must participate in the Maryland EXCELS 
program. MSDE determines provider reimbursement rates based on market rate surveys of 
the geographic regions conducted every two years. Providers who go beyond the State’s 
licensing and registration requirements and meet specified quality standards are also 
eligible to receive higher payments from the program through a tiered reimbursement 
system. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 495/ Page 3 
According to the Administration of Children and Families under the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, the benchmark for child care subsidy rates is at least the 
seventy-fifth percentile of market rates. Chapters 595 and 596 of 2019 required the State 
to adjust reimbursement rates to a minimum of the sixtieth percentile of the most recent 
market rate survey beginning in fiscal 2021. MSDE further raised reimbursement rates to 
the seventieth percentile on May 23, 2022, using supplemental Child Care and 
Development Block Grant funding allocated during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
State Expenditures:  The CCS Program provided financial assistance with child care 
tuition to slightly over 16,000 eligible children and over 10,000 families per month on 
average in fiscal 2022. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$58.5 million in general funds and $105.1 million in federal funds (with an authorization 
to process a budget amendment during the fiscal year adding $10.0 million in federal funds, 
for a total of $115.1 in federal funds). 
 
As noted above, numerous changes have been made to the CCS Program in recent years, 
with many related expenditures being supported in part by an influx of federal funds made 
available through the American Rescue Plan Act. Specifically, due to the severe impact of 
the COVID-19 pandemic on child care providers, Maryland received $193.2 million in 
supplemental Child Care and Development Block Grant funding that could be used on a 
discretionary basis to support child care providers and improve child care access for 
families. MSDE allocated approximately $81.0 million of this funding to the CCS Program 
to expand income eligibility, among other uses. 
 
The exact impact the aforementioned change will have on CCS Program operations is not 
known, although it is generally expected to significantly increase State expenditures in the 
coming years. A cost estimate of the impact of certain changes – including raising provider 
reimbursement rates and waiving and reducing copayments – as prepared by MSDE’s 
research and data analysis vendor for the CCS Program (the Regional Economic Studies 
Institute at Towson University), advised of expenditures (exclusive to the expansion 
efforts) totaling $67.2 million in fiscal 2024 and 2025. While budgeted (or otherwise 
available) funds are sufficient to support estimated program costs in fiscal 2024, the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) has already advised of concerns regarding the 
sustainability of the CCS Program expansion beginning in fiscal 2025 when supplemental 
federal funding is no longer available. 
 
In prior years, MSDE has instated enrollment freezes (restricting the ability of families, 
typically those with the highest income eligibility levels, to participate in the CCS 
Program) when program costs outpaced the program’s budget. The bill potentially delays 
the ability of MSDE to implement specified changes (except in limited circumstances) that 
may otherwise reduce program costs, thereby restricting the State’s flexibility to modify 
the program to adapt to fiscal circumstances. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 495/ Page 4 
Although the bill is not expected to have any impact in fiscal 2024, DLS is unable to 
provide a precise estimate regarding how the bill may affect State expenditures in later 
years. Nevertheless, DLS advises the impact of the bill may have a significant effect on 
general fund expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Private child care providers that qualify as small businesses and 
accept child care scholarships may benefit from the bill’s limitation on MSDE’s ability to 
make changes to the CCS Program. Specifically, the bill may ensure more stable funding 
for the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 350 (Senator King, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Regional Economic Studies Institute; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4