START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 376

Chapter 376

(House Bill 454)

AN ACT concerning

Health Occupations – Licenses, Certificates, and Registrations – ~~Immigrants~~
Lawful Presence and Identification Numbers

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a health occupations board from ~~denying~~ ~~a~~ ~~license,~~
~~certification,~~ ~~or~~ ~~registration~~ ~~to~~ ~~an~~ ~~immigrant~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~individual~~ ~~meets~~ ~~certain~~
~~requirements~~ requiring that an applicant provide proof that the applicant is lawfully
present in the United States or have a Social Security number or Individual
Taxpayer Identification Number as a condition for licensure, certification, or
registration; requiring each health occupations board to require each applicant for a
license to disclose the Social Security number or Individual Taxpayer Identification
Number of the applicant ~~and~~ or, as permitted under federal law, provide alternative
documentation, record the number ~~on~~ or alternative documentation in the
application file, and include certain information in a list provided to the Department
of Assessments and Taxation; and generally relating to ~~applications~~ ~~for~~ health
occupations licenses, certifications, ~~or~~ and registrations ~~by~~ ~~immigrants.~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 10–119.3(a) and (c)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 10–119.3(b), (c)(2), and (d)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 1–210
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 1–227
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 376 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Family Law

10–119.3.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “License” means any license, certificate, registration, permit, or other
authorization that:

(i) is issued by a licensing authority;

(ii) is subject to suspension, revocation, forfeiture, or termination by
a licensing authority; and

(iii) is necessary for an individual to practice or engage in:

1. a particular business, occupation, or profession; or

2. recreational hunting or fishing.

(3) (i) “Licensing authority” means a department, unit of a department,
commission, board, office, or court of the State.

(ii) “Licensing authority” includes:

1. the Maryland Department of Labor;

2. the Maryland Department of Health;

3. the Department of Human Services;

4. the Department of Transportation;

5. the Department of the Environment;

6. the Comptroller of the Treasury;

7. the Department of Agriculture;

8. the Maryland Insurance Administration;

9. the Public Service Commission;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 376

10. the Secretary of State;

11. the State Department of Education;

12. the Department of Natural Resources;

13. the Office of the Attorney General;

14. the clerks of the court that are authorized to issue a license
or certificate for professional services or recreational uses; and

15. the Court of Appeals.

(b) (1) Except as provided in [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of this
subsection, a licensing authority shall:

(i) require each applicant for a license to disclose the Social Security
number of the applicant; and

(ii) record the applicant’s Social Security number on the application.

(2) The Department of Natural Resources shall:

(i) require an applicant for a recreational hunting or fishing license
to disclose only the last four digits of the Social Security number of the applicant instead of
the full Social Security number; and

(ii) record the applicant’s partial Social Security number on the
application.

(3) EACH HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD SHALL:

(I) REQUIRE EACH APPLICANT FOR A LICENSE TO DISCLOSE:

1. DISCLOSE THE SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER OR
INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER OF THE APPLICANT; OR

2. PROVIDE ALTERNATIVE DOCUMENTATION AS
PERMITTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES UNDER
SECTION 466(A)(13) OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT; AND

(II) RECORD THE APPLICANT’S SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER OR,
INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ON, OR ALTERNATIVE
DOCUMENTATION PROVIDED UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IN THE
APPLICATION FILE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 376 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) (1) To carry out its responsibility under State and federal law, the
Administration may request from a licensing authority information concerning any obligor
in arrears in paying child support through a support enforcement agency.

(2) A request for information by the Administration under paragraph (1) of
this subsection:

(i) shall contain:

1. the full name of the obligor; and

2. A. the Social Security number or, as appropriate, the
partial Social Security number OR OF THE OBLIGOR, IF KNOWN; OR

B. THE INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION
NUMBER of the obligor, IF KNOWN; and

(ii) may be transmitted to a licensing authority using an electronic
format.

(d) (1) Upon receipt of a request for information under subsection (c) of this
section, a licensing authority shall submit the following information to the Administration
with respect to each obligor who is licensed by, or has applied for a license from, the
licensing authority:

(i) the full name of the obligor;

(ii) the address of the obligor, if known;

(iii) IF KNOWN:

1. the Social Security number or, as appropriate, the partial
Social Security number OR OF THE OBLIGOR; OR

2. THE INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION
NUMBER of the obligor, if known; and

(iv) a description of the license held by the obligor.

Article – Health Occupations

1–210.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 376

(a) By August 31 of each year, each health [occupation] OCCUPATIONS board
authorized to issue a license or certificate under this article shall provide to the Department
of Assessments and Taxation a list of persons issued licenses or certificates under this
article during the previous fiscal year, to assist the Department of Assessments and
Taxation in identifying new businesses within the State.

(b) The list provided under this section shall:

(1) Be provided free of charge; and

(2) Include, for each person on the list:

(i) The name and mailing address of the person; and

(ii) 1. The federal tax identification number of the person, [or,]
if KNOWN; OR

2. IF the person does not have a federal tax identification
number, the Social Security number of the person, IF KNOWN.

1–227.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “IMMIGRANT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL:

(1) WHOSE COUNTRY OF ORIGIN IS A COUNTRY OTHER THAN THE
~~UNITED~~ ~~STATES;~~

(2) WHO IS NOT A CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES; AND

(3) WHO IS A RESIDENT OF THE STATE.

(B) A HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD MAY NOT DENY A LICENSE,
CERTIFICATION, OR REGISTRATION TO AN IMMIGRANT IF THE INDIVIDUAL
OTHERWISE MEETS ALL EDUCATIONAL, TRAINING, OR PROFESSIONAL
REQUIREMENTS REQUIRE AS A CONDITION FOR LICENSURE, CERTIFICATION, OR
REGISTRATION THAT AN APPLICANT:

(1) PROVIDE PROOF THAT THE APPLICANT IS LAWFULLY PRESENT IN
THE UNITED STATES, AS ALLOWED UNDER 8 U.S.C. § 1621; OR

(2) HAVE A SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER OR INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYER
IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 376 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6