START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 675

Chapter 675

(House Bill 402)

AN ACT concerning

Kent County – Board of Education – Student Member

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Kent County Board of Education to
include a student member; providing for the initial term of the student member of
the county board; and generally relating to the membership of the Kent County
Board of Education.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–801 through 3–803
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–801.

(a) The Kent County Board consists of [five]:

(1) FIVE VOTING members; AND

(2) ONE NONVOTING STUDENT MEMBER.

(b) (1) A candidate elected to the county board shall be a resident and
registered voter of Kent County.

(2) Any member who no longer resides in Kent County may not continue
as a member of the board.

(c) (1) The incumbent VOTING members of the Kent County Board who hold
office on July 1, 2010, shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualify.

(2) [Members] VOTING MEMBERS of the Kent County Board shall be
elected from Kent County at large as follows:

(i) Two VOTING members of the county board shall be elected in the
November general election of 2012 and every 4 years thereafter; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 675 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Three VOTING members of the county board shall be elected in
the November general election of 2014 and every 4 years thereafter.

(D) (1) THE STUDENT MEMBER SHALL:

(I) BE A BONA FIDE RESIDENT OF KENT COUNTY;

(II) BE A REGULARLY ENROLLED JUNIOR OR SENIOR AT THE
KENT COUNTY PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL ELECTED BY THE HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS OF
THE COUNTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

(III) BE A MEMBER OF STUDENT GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION
~~REPRESENTATIVE;~~

(IV) SERVE FOR 1 YEAR BEGINNING ON JULY 1 AFTER THE
ELECTION OF THE STUDENT MEMBER; AND

(V) ADVISE THE COUNTY BOARD ON THE THOUGHTS AND
FEELINGS OF STUDENTS IN THE KENT COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

(2) (I) THE PROCESS FOR APPLYING AND ELECTING A STUDENT AS
A STUDENT MEMBER SHALL BE AS SET FORTH IN THIS PARAGRAPH.

(II) 1. AN ELIGIBLE STUDENT SHALL SUBMIT AN
APPLICATION TO THE COUNTY BOARD ON A FORM PROVIDED BY THE COUNTY BOARD
BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1 OF EACH YEAR.

2. EACH APPLICANT SHALL DELIVER A SPEECH TO THE
STUDENT BODY OF KENT COUNTY HIGH SCHOOL.

(III) 1. ANY HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT IN THE COUNTY MAY
VOTE DIRECTLY FOR THE STUDENT MEMBER CANDIDATES IN AN ELECTION HELD
BEFORE MAY 1 EACH YEAR.

2. THE STUDENT MEMBER CANDIDATE THAT RECEIVES
THE HIGHEST NUMBER OF VOTES SHALL BECOME THE STUDENT MEMBER.

(IV) NOTICE OF THE RESULTS OF THE ELECTION FOR STUDENT
MEMBER SHALL BE REPORTED TO THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT ON OR BEFORE
MAY 1 EACH YEAR.

(3) IF THE STUDENT MEMBER IS UNABLE, INELIGIBLE, OR
DISQUALIFIED TO COMPLETE THE STUDENT MEMBER’S TERM OF THE OFFICE, THE

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 675

COUNTY BOARD SHALL APPOINT A QUALIFIED STUDENT TO SERVE FOR THE
REMAINDER OF THE TERM.

(4) THE STUDENT MEMBER SHALL ATTEND:

(I) THE MAY AND JUNE MEETINGS OF THE COUNTY BOARD
BEFORE BEGINNING THE STUDENT MEMBER’S TERM OF OFFICE ON JULY 1;

(II) THE MARYLAND ASSOCIATION OF BOARDS OF EDUCATION
NEW STUDENT BOARD MEMBER ORIENTATION; AND

(III) (II) ALL REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE COUNTY BOARD.

(5) UNLESS INVITED TO ATTEND BY AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF A
MAJORITY OF THE COUNTY BOARD, THE THE STUDENT MEMBER MAY NOT ATTEND
AN EXECUTIVE SESSION OF THE COUNTY BOARD.

[(d)] (E) (1) (I) Each VOTING member serves for a term of 4 years
beginning on January 1 after his election and until a successor is elected and qualifies.

(II) The terms of members are staggered and elections shall be held
as provided in subsection (c) of this section.

(2) Any vacancy on the county board OF A VOTING MEMBER shall be filled
by a qualified individual appointed by the County Commissioners of Kent County to serve
until a successor is elected and qualifies at the general election next following the creation
of the vacancy and for which the deadline for the filing of candidates has not expired.

(3) An individual may serve for more than 2 consecutive terms.

[(e)] (F) (1) The State Board may remove a member of the county board for:

(i) Immorality;

(ii) Misconduct in office;

(iii) Incompetency; or

(iv) Willful neglect of duty.

(2) Before removing a member, the State Board shall send the member a
copy of the charges against him and give him an opportunity within 10 days to request a
hearing.

(3) If the member requests a hearing within the 10–day period:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 675 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) The State Board promptly shall hold a hearing, but a hearing
may not be set within 10 days after the State Board sends the member a notice of the
hearing; and

(ii) The member shall have an opportunity to be heard publicly
before the State Board in his own defense, in person or by counsel.

(4) A member removed under this subsection has the right to a de novo
review of the removal by the Circuit Court for Kent County.

3–802.

At its first meeting at the beginning of each year, the county board shall elect a
president and a vice president from among its VOTING members.

3–803.

(a) The chairman of the county board is entitled to receive $2,400 annually as
compensation and the other VOTING members are entitled to receive $2,000 each annually
as compensation.

(b) The chairman and the other VOTING members are entitled to the allowances
for travel and other expenses provided in the Kent County budget.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the term of the initial student
member of the Kent County Board of Education elected in accordance with § 3–801 of the
Education Article as enacted by Section 1 of this Act shall begin on July 1, 2024.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4