START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 64

Chapter 64

(House Bill 492)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – School Vehicles – Duration of Operation

FOR the purpose of altering the number of years that a school vehicle may be operated in
Anne Arundel County; and generally relating to operating school vehicles in Anne
Arundel County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–804
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–804.

(a) In this section, “school vehicle” has the meaning stated in § 11–154 of the
Transportation Article.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, unless
it fails to meet the applicable school bus and motor vehicle safety standards, a school vehicle
may be operated for 12 years.

(2) (i) In Allegany, ANNE ARUNDEL, Calvert, Caroline, Cecil, Charles,
Dorchester, Garrett, Kent, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and
Worcester counties, unless it fails to meet the applicable school bus and motor vehicle safety
standards, a school vehicle may be operated for 15 years.

(ii) A school vehicle operating under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph shall be maintained as provided in subsection (c) of this section.

(3) Any school vehicle in operation or accepted before July 1, 2004, or under
contract to be purchased before July 1, 2004, that meets the specifications of the
Department and of the Motor Vehicle Administration for transit style school vehicles may
be operated for 15 years.

(c) Notwithstanding the 12–year limitation in subsection (b)(1) of this section, a
school vehicle may be operated for additional years if:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 64 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) The school vehicle is maintained under a preventive maintenance plan
approved by the Motor Vehicle Administration and the Automotive Safety Enforcement
Division of the Department of State Police that includes an inspection at the end of the 12th
year and a minimum of 2 inspections by the Motor Vehicle Administration each year
thereafter;

(2) Any structural repairs to the school vehicle necessitated by accident,
metal fatigue, or any other cause are certified by an independent expert approved by the
Motor Vehicle Administration to meet or exceed the manufacturer’s original manufacturing
standards;

(3) The school vehicle is equipped with:

(i) The body originally placed on the chassis by the manufacturer;

(ii) An 8 light warning system;

(iii) A left side stop arm;

(iv) A fire–retardant driver’s seat;

(v) Fire–retardant barriers in the case of a school vehicle with a
front engine; and

(vi) A fire–retardant rear seating area in the case of a school vehicle
with a rear engine; and

(4) The State Superintendent grants approval.

(d) If a school vehicle passes an inspection that is required under subsection (c)(1)
of this section:

(1) The inspection shall be valid in the county in which the inspection was
completed; and

(2) If ownership of the school vehicle is transferred to a person who
operates the school vehicle in a county in which school vehicles are authorized under
subsection (b)(2) of this section to be operated for 15 years, the inspection shall be valid in
that county for the length of time that the inspection would have been valid in the county
where the inspection was completed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2