START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 456 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 456 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Pharmacy - Accessible Prescription Labels, Bag Tags, and 
Medical Guides for Blind, Visually Impaired, and Print Disabled Individuals - 
Regulations 
 
   
This bill requires the State Board of Pharmacy (MBOP), by January 1, 2025, to adopt 
regulations necessary to ensure that an individual who is blind, visually impaired, or 
otherwise print disabled has appropriate access to prescription labels, bag tags, and medical 
guides. Access must be at (1) no additional cost to the individual; (2) in a format option 
through which the information is fully accessible; and (3) within a timeframe comparable 
to that in which the information is provided to an individual who is not visually impaired. 
MBOP must give visually impaired individuals an opportunity to provide input regarding 
the regulations, which must (1) follow the guidelines and recommendations of a specified 
report and (2) include a method for providing notice to customers that accessible 
prescription labels, bag tags, and medical guides are available, including in audio format. 
By December 1, 2023, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must submit a report 
to the General Assembly on the potential process for and costs of implementing enhanced 
professional dispensing fees for providing accessible labels and compliant packaging to 
blind, visually impaired, and otherwise print disabled individuals. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBOP can adopt regulations and MDH can prepare and submit the required 
report using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 456/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person must hold a pharmacy permit issued by MBOP before the person 
may establish or operate a pharmacy in the State. A separate pharmacy permit is required 
for each pharmacy that a person establishes or operates. Among other requirements, a 
pharmacy for which a permit has been issued must ensure that a licensed pharmacist is 
immediately available on the premises to furnish pharmacy services at all times the 
pharmacy is operating; provide complete pharmaceutical service by preparing and 
dispensing all prescriptions that reasonably may be expected; and utilize such personnel, 
automation, and technology as are necessary to comply with specified labeling 
requirements. 
 
Each prescription drug container dispensed by a pharmacy must include labels that contain 
specified information, as follows:  (1) the date the prescription is filled; (2) an expiration 
date for the prescription; (3) any appropriate special handling instructions regarding proper 
storage of the drugs; and (4) the name and strength of the drugs. For drugs dispensed in the 
manufacturer’s original packaging, a pharmacy must use an expiration date for a 
prescription that is no later than the expiration date set by the manufacturer. For drugs 
dispensed in a container other than the manufacturer’s original packaging, a prescription’s 
expiration date must be set as the lesser of the following:  one year from the date of 
dispensing; the month and year when the drugs expire; the appropriate expiration date for 
repackaged drugs; or a shorter period as determined by the pharmacist.  
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business pharmacy that does not currently provide 
accessible prescription labels, bag tags, and medical guides may incur additional expenses 
to make those items available. However, the extent to which a pharmacy’s expenses may 
increase will depend on the regulations adopted by MBOP. 
 
Additional Information:  MDH advises that the report they are required to complete under 
the bill would cover fee-for-service Medicaid enrollees only as this is the only population 
for which the department has authority over reimbursement or dispensing fees.  
 
The U.S. Access Board advises that prescription drug container labels can be made 
accessible for individuals with visual impairments using a range of delivery mechanisms, 
including hard copy braille and large print; digital voice or text to speech recorder; radio 
frequency identification device; and smart devices and computers.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 456/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 940 (Senator Muse, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3