START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 486 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 486 
(Delegates Attar and Stein) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Task Force to Study Nonpublic Student Bus Transportation 
 
 
This bill establishes a Task Force to Study Nonpublic Student Bus Transportation, to be 
staffed by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). The task force must 
collect specified information from each local board of education and any other relevant 
county department regarding nonpublic school student busing programs in the county, 
other than programs for the transportation of students in special education placements. In 
addition, the task force must evaluate the impact on State revenues and expenditures, traffic 
congestion, and environmental and safety goals of the adoption of programs used in other 
states to provide transportation to nonpublic school students or otherwise reduce the use of 
passenger vehicles for the transportation of nonpublic school students. The task force must 
submit its findings and recommendations to specified committees of the General Assembly 
by December 15, 2023. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for task force members and staffing costs for 
MSDE can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments can participate in and provide information to the task 
force with existing budgeted resources. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 486/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A member of the task force may not receive compensation as a member 
of the task force but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the standard State 
travel regulations, as provided in the State budget.  
 
As noted above, the task force must evaluate the impact of specified programs relating to 
the transportation of nonpublic school students, such as (1) through consultation with the 
Comptroller, a State income tax credit for student bus transportation expenses or other 
financial support; (2) utilizing public school buses during off hours; (3) transporting 
nonpublic school students in buses along with public school students; and (4) transporting 
nonpublic school students in separate buses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 324 (Senator Rosapepe) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Association of Counties; National 
Association of Independent Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2