START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 454 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 454 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Licenses, Certificates, and Registrations - Lawful Presence 
and Identification Numbers 
 
 
This bill prohibits a health occupations board from requiring as a condition for licensure, 
certification, or registration that an applicant (1) provide proof of lawful presence in the 
United States or (2) have a Social Security number or individual taxpayer identification 
number. The bill authorizes the use of an individual taxpayer identification number or 
alternative documentation (as permitted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services under the federal Social Security Act) for licensing purposes. It does so by 
specifying that each health occupations board must require each applicant for a license to 
either disclose the applicant’s Social Security number (as required under current law) or 
individual taxpayer identification number or provide alternative documentation. The bill 
makes other related changes in the Family Law Article and the Health Occupations Article.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for health occupations boards increase by an 
indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2024 if additional licenses are issued that otherwise 
could not be. Special fund expenditures for the State Board of Nursing (BON) increase by 
up to $100,000 in FY 2024 only for one‐time programming costs and likely further increase 
for additional staffing needs, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, qualifications for the various professions governed by the 
State’s health occupations boards are specified in statute and regulations. Qualifications 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 454/ Page 2 
vary by profession but typically require, among other requirements, specified education 
and experience and passage of a national and/or State examination. 
 
The Child Support Administration (CSA) within the Department of Human Services has 
various enforcement methods against an obligor who is in arrears in paying child support, 
including the potential suspension or denial of occupational licenses. To facilitate these 
efforts, provisions under the Family Law Article require a licensing authority (including 
the Maryland Department of Health) to obtain the Social Security number of the applicant 
and record the number on the application. If CSA requests information from a licensing 
authority regarding an obligor in arrears, the request must meet specified requirements, 
including containing the full name of the obligor and the Social Security number; the 
required response from the licensing authority must also include this information. 
 
The federal Social Security Act prescribes procedures that must be contained in state law 
to improve the effectiveness of child support enforcement. Under § 466(A)(13) of the 
Social Security Act, a Social Security number must be recorded on the application for any 
applicant for a professional license, driver’s license, occupational license, recreational 
license, or marriage license. Guidance issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office of Child Support Enforcement has indicated that the provisions are not 
interpreted as requiring an individual to have a Social Security number as a condition of 
receiving a license, but requiring the states to have procedures in place that require an 
individual to furnish any Social Security number that the individual may have. 
 
The federal Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 
1996 generally denies eligibility for many State or local public benefits to an alien (any 
person not a citizen or national of the United States). Certain exceptions apply, both to 
eligible individuals and to eligible public benefits. However, federal law expressly denies 
eligibility to nonexempt aliens for a professional license or commercial license provided 
by an agency of a state or local government or by appropriated funds of a state or local 
government. 
 
A state may establish that an individual who is not lawfully present in the United States is 
eligible for any state or local public benefit for which such an individual would otherwise 
be ineligible only through the enactment of a state law after August 22, 1996, which 
affirmatively makes such individuals eligible for specified benefits. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the bill’s provisions increase the number of licenses 
(and possibly certificates and registrations) issued by a health occupations board, special 
fund revenues increase. As nearly all of the health occupations boards are special funded, 
general fund revenues are less likely to be affected. With the exception of the impact on 
BON (discussed below) and based on responses from numerous other health occupations 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 454/ Page 3 
boards, it is assumed that implementation of the bill can generally be handled within 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
BON advises that the bill has an operational and fiscal impact requiring a one‐time 
programming cost of approximately $100,000. BON also estimates that five additional staff 
are needed to process an anticipated influx of applications at an annual cost of 
approximately $293,587 in fiscal 2024 (which reflects the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective 
date) and a minimum of $337,100 annually thereafter. BON advises that it needs one nurse 
program consultant in the education department to verify every new applicant’s education 
and training with the Commission of Graduates of Foreign Nursing Schools, and 
four administrative specialists to verify that an applicant has met all educational, training, 
and professional requirements for the license. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) acknowledges that, because BON issues a 
significantly higher number of licenses annually compared to other health occupations 
boards, an increase in license applications to BON under the bill’s provisions is anticipated 
and likely necessitates additional staff. However, DLS is unable to independently verify 
the precise need for staff that may be required for the bill’s implementation and advises 
that the extent of any additional resources needed can only be determined with actual 
experience under the bill. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances related to the 
work of CSA. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses by 
expanding the number of licensed workers for specified professions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 523 and HB 533 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 187 (Senator Kagan) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 454/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4