START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 732

Chapter 732

(House Bill 495)

AN ACT concerning

Early Childhood Development – Child Care Scholarship Program – ~~Funding~~
Alterations

FOR the purpose of ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~calculation~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~funding~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Child~~ ~~Care~~ ~~Scholarship~~
~~Program~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year;~~ ~~limiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~circumstances~~ ~~under~~ ~~which~~
~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~frozen;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~certain~~ ~~reimbursement~~ ~~rates~~ ~~and~~ ~~income~~
~~eligibility~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program;~~ ~~prohibiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~copayment~~ ~~levels~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~Program~~ ~~from~~ ~~exceeding~~ ~~certain~~ ~~copayment~~ ~~levels;~~ prohibiting the State Department
of Education from increasing the copayment levels, reducing the reimbursement
rates, reducing the income eligibility requirements, or implementing an enrollment
freeze for the Child Care Scholarship Program in effect as of a certain date unless
certain conditions are met; and generally relating to the Child Care Scholarship
Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.5–111 and 9.5–113
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

9.5–111.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Analysis” means the market rate survey or an alternative method
allowable under federal law.

(3) “Program” means the Child Care [Subsidy] SCHOLARSHIP Program.

(b) (1) Beginning in 2017, and every 2 years thereafter, the Department shall
conduct an analysis in order to formulate appropriate reimbursement rates for the
Program.

(2) The Department, before conducting the analysis, shall consult with:

(i) The Office of Child Care Advisory Council;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 732 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Child care resource and referral agencies;

(iii) Child care worker organizations; and

(iv) Any other appropriate entities.

(c) On or before September 1, 2017, and by September 1 every 2 years thereafter,
the Department shall report to the Joint Committee on Children, Youth, and Families, the
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and the House Appropriations Committee, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on:

(1) The methodology of the analysis required under subsection (b) of this
section;

(2) Cost estimates for raising the Program’s reimbursement rates to the
45th, 55th, 65th, and 75th percentile of child care providers in each of the State’s market
regions;

(3) The minimum base payment rate that is required for child care
providers to meet health, safety, quality, and staffing requirements in accordance with
federal law and the factors used to determine that rate;

(4) The rate adjustment that the Department will implement based on the
analysis;

(5) Any adjustments to Program eligibility or family copay amount that
will be implemented; and

(6) Any potential impacts on families and providers due to any adjustments
made to the Program.

(d) (1) [The] FOR FISCAL YEARS 2023 AND 2024, THE Governor shall
include in the annual State budget an appropriation from all fund sources for the Program
that is not less than the total appropriation for the Program in fiscal year 2018 or fiscal
year 2019, whichever is greater.

(2) (I) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL STATE BUDGET AN
APPROPRIATION FROM ALL FUND SOURCES FOR THE PROGRAM IN AN AMOUNT
SUFFICIENT TO PROVIDE A SUBSIDY TO ALL ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS.

(II) THE PROGRAM MAY BE FROZEN ONLY WHEN:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 732

1. THE LIST OF AVAILABLE PROVIDERS HAS BEEN
EXHAUSTED; AND

2. ADDITIONAL PROVIDERS CANNOT BE LOCATED WHO
ARE ACCEPTABLE TO PARENTS AND APPROPRIATE FOR CHILDREN.

(3) AT LEAST 60 DAYS BEFORE IMPLEMENTING A PROGRAM FREEZE,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE INTENDED
PROGRAM FREEZE, INCLUDING THE REASON FOR AND EXPECTED DURATION OF THE
FREEZE. EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT MAY NOT MAKE THE FOLLOWING ALTERATIONS TO THE PROGRAM IN
EFFECT AS OF JANUARY 1, 2023:

(I) INCREASE THE COPAYMENT LEVELS;

(II) REDUCE THE REIMBURSEMENT RATES;

(III) REDUCE THE INCOME ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS; OR

(IV) IMPLEMENT A FREEZE IN PROGRAM ENROLLMENT.

(3) (I) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ALTER THE PROGRAM IN EFFECT
AS OF JANUARY 1, 2023, BY INCREASING THE COPAYMENT LEVELS, REDUCING THE
REIMBURSEMENT RATES, REDUCING THE INCOME ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS, OR
IMPLEMENTING A FREEZE IN PROGRAM ENROLLMENT, IF:

1. THE DEPARTMENT SUBMITS A NOTIFICATION TO THE
SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE, THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON
EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS
COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE INTENDED
PROGRAM ALTERATIONS, INCLUDING THE REASON FOR, AND EXPECTED DURATION
OF, THE PROPOSED ACTIONS; AND

2. THE PROGRAM ALTERATIONS IDENTIFIED IN THE
NOTIFICATION ARE NOT IMPLEMENTED UNTIL THE COMPLETION OF THE REGULAR
LEGISLATIVE SESSION IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE SUBMISSION OF THE
NOTIFICATION.

(II) IF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS APPROVES BUDGET
REDUCTIONS FOR THE PROGRAM UNDER § 7–213 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE FOR A CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT MAY
INCREASE THE COPAYMENT LEVELS, REDUCE THE REIMBURSEMENT RATES,
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 732 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

REDUCE THE INCOME ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS, OR IMPLEMENT A FREEZE IN
PROGRAM ENROLLMENT AT ANY TIME DURING THE FISCAL YEAR.

(e) (1) [The] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
Governor shall, from all fund sources, appropriate funds in the annual State budget in an
amount sufficient to raise the Program’s reimbursement rates for each region to:

[(1)] (I) For fiscal year 2020, not less than the 30th percentile of the most
recent market rate survey or its equivalent if an alternative methodology defined by the
Department is used; and

[(2)] (II) For fiscal year 2021 and each fiscal year thereafter, not less than
the 60th percentile of the most recent market rate survey or its equivalent if an alternative
methodology defined by the Department is used.

(2) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE PROGRAM’S REIMBURSEMENT
~~RATES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~REGION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~EQUAL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OR~~ ~~GREATER~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~THE~~
~~REIMBURSEMENT~~ ~~RATES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~REGION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~EFFECT~~ ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~
PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR.

9.5–113.

(a) In this section, “Program” means the Child Care Scholarship Program.

(b) The Department shall administer the Program in accordance with federal law.

(c) (1) The Department shall award a subsidy SCHOLARSHIP under the
Program in an amount sufficient to ensure that an individual will not be required to pay a
copay for child care if the individual provides proof, as determined by the Department, of:

[(1)] (I) Participation in one of the following programs:

[(i)] 1. Federal Special Supplemental Food Program for Women,
Infants, and Children;

[(ii)] 2. Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program;

[(iii)] 3. Federal Housing Act Housing Choice Voucher Program;

[(iv)] 4. Supplemental Security Income benefits; or

[(v)] 5. Temporary cash assistance; and

[(2)] (II) Employment or enrollment in an education or career training
program.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 732

(2) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR OF THE PROGRAM:

(I) THE COPAYMENT LEVELS MAY NOT EXCEED THE
~~COPAYMENT~~ ~~LEVELS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~EFFECT~~ ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~ ~~PRECEDING~~ ~~FISCAL~~
YEAR; AND

(II) THE INCOME ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS MAY NOT BE
~~LESS~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INCOME~~ ~~ELIGIBILITY~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~EFFECT~~ ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR.

(d) An individual is eligible to continue to receive a subsidy SCHOLARSHIP under
the Program:

(1) For at least 90 days in a year if the individual is unemployed and
seeking employment; and

(2) If the individual meets any other eligibility criteria determined by the
Department.

(e) The Department may not require an individual to pursue or receive child
support payments or apply for services from a child support agency to be eligible for a
subsidy SCHOLARSHIP under the Program.

(f) (1) The Department shall notify the Comptroller within 10 days after the
date on which the Department receives an invoice from a child care provider.

(2) The Comptroller shall pay a child care provider within 5 days after the
date on which the Comptroller receives a notice under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(g) The Department shall adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this
section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5