START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 522

Chapter 522

(House Bill 471)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone
Program – Alterations and Financing

FOR the purpose of altering the period of time that an area may be designated as a Regional
Institution Strategic Enterprise (RISE) zone; ~~repealing~~ ~~the~~ ~~prohibition~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~
~~Secretary~~ ~~of~~ ~~Commerce~~ ~~from~~ ~~approving~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~RISE~~ ~~zones~~
~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~area;~~ increasing the number of RISE zones that the Secretary of
Commerce may approve in Baltimore City; extending the termination date of the
RISE Zone Program; authorizing a political subdivision to pledge certain revenues
to secure the payment of obligations to the Maryland Economic Development
Corporation for infrastructure improvements located in a RISE zone; and generally
relating to the Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 1–101(a) and (e), 5–1401(a) and (f), 12–201(a), 12–209(b), and 12–210(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–1404(f), 5–1410, and 12–201(k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

1–101.

(a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Commerce.

5–1401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 522 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) “RISE zone” means a geographic area in immediate proximity to a qualified
institution that is targeted for increased economic and community development that meets
the requirements of § 5–1404 of this subtitle and is designated as a Regional Institution
Strategic Enterprise zone by the Secretary under § 5–1404 of this subtitle.

5–1404.

(f) (1) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the designation of
an area as a RISE zone is effective for [5] 10 years.

(ii) Upon a joint application of a qualified institution, a county and,
if applicable, a municipal corporation, or the economic development agency of a county or
municipal corporation, the Secretary may renew a RISE zone for an additional 5 years.

(2) The Secretary may not[:

(i) 1. EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM 2 OF THIS ITEM, approve
more than three RISE zones in a single county or municipal corporation; or

2. APPROVE MORE THAN FOUR RISE ZONES IN
BALTIMORE CITY; OR

(ii)] approve a RISE zone the geographic area of which exceeds 500
acres.

5–1410.

This subtitle and the tax credits and benefits authorized under it shall terminate on
January 1, [2028] 2030.

12–201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(k) “MEDCO obligation” means a bond, note, or other similar instrument that the
Maryland Economic Development Corporation issues under authority other than this
subtitle to finance the cost of infrastructure improvements located in or supporting a
transit–oriented development, a sustainable community, A RISE ZONE, or a State hospital
redevelopment.

12–209.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the political subdivision that
has created a special fund for a development district, a RISE zone, or a sustainable

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 522

community may pledge under an agreement that amounts deposited to the special fund
shall be paid over to secure payment on MEDCO obligations.

(2) The agreement shall:

(i) be in writing;

(ii) be executed by the political subdivision making the pledge, the
Maryland Economic Development Corporation, and the other persons that the governing
body of the political subdivision determines; and

(iii) run to the benefit of and be enforceable on behalf of the holders
of the MEDCO obligations secured by the agreement.

12–210.

(c) The governing body of a political subdivision, including the issuer, may pledge
by or under a resolution, including by an agreement with the issuer, as applicable, that
alternative local tax revenues generated within, or that are otherwise determined to be
attributable to, a development district that is a transit–oriented development, a RISE zone,
a sustainable community, or a State hospital redevelopment be paid, as provided in the
resolution, into the special fund to:

(1) secure the payment of debt service on bonds or MEDCO obligations; or

(2) be applied to the other purposes stated in § 12–209 of this subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Department of Commerce
shall study, in consultation with higher education institutions, counties, municipal
corporations, economic development agencies, and any other entity or individual that the
Department deems necessary, the effectiveness of the RISE Zone Program established
under Title 5, Subtitle 14 of the Economic Development Article and, on or before December
15, 2024, shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the Department’s recommendations to improve the effectiveness of the
Program.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3