START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 492 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 492 
(Delegate Chisholm, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Anne Arundel County - School Vehicles - Duration of Operation 
 
 
This bill allows a school vehicle to be operated for 15 years, rather than 12 years, in 
Anne Arundel County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Anne Arundel County Public School 
System finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Unless it fails to meet applicable school bus and motor vehicle safety 
standards, a school vehicle may be operated for 12 years. In certain counties, a school 
vehicle may be operated for 15 years (unless it fails to meet applicable school bus and 
motor vehicle safety standards). Those counties include Allegany, Calvert, Caroline, Cecil, 
Charles, Dorchester, Garrett, Kent, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, 
Wicomico, and Worcester. In those counties, a school vehicle must also meet specified 
maintenance standards. 
 
A school vehicle may be operated for additional years if (1) the vehicle is maintained under 
a preventative maintenance plan approved by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) 
and the Maryland State Police that includes an inspection at the end of the twelfth year and 
a minimum of two inspections by MVA each year thereafter; (2) any necessary structural 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 492/ Page 2 
repairs are certified by an independent expert approved by MVA to meet or exceed the 
manufacturer’s original manufacturing standards; (3) the school vehicle is equipped with 
specified features; and (4) the State Superintendent grants approval. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland State Department of Education advised for a 
previous introduction of the bill that, except for the counties allowed under statute to 
operate school buses for 15 years, all other counties must annually submit a waiver request 
to the State Superintendent of Schools seeking approval to continue operation through 
year 15. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1441 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2