START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 580

Chapter 580

(House Bill 470)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – Fire–Fighting Training – Oriented Strand Board – Prohibition

FOR the purpose of prohibiting the setting on fire or burning of oriented strand board for
certain fire–fighting training; and generally relating to fire–fighting training and
oriented strand board.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 6–1701 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 17. Miscellaneous Provisions”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

SUBTITLE 17. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.

6–1701.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ORIENTED STRAND BOARD” MEANS A
MULTILAYERED BOARD THAT IS:

(1) MADE FROM STRANDS OF WOOD, TOGETHER WITH A BINDER, BY
THE APPLICATION OF HEAT AND PRESSURE, WITH THE STRANDS IN THE EXTERNAL
LAYER PRIMARILY ORIENTED ALONG THE STRENGTH AXIS OF THE PANEL IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE VOLUNTARY PRODUCT
STANDARD PS 2–18, PERFORMANCE STANDARD FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS;
AND

(2) INTENDED TO BE USED AS A COVERING MATERIAL FOR ROOFS,
SUBFLOORS, AND WALLS WHEN FASTENED TO SUPPORTS.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO THE MANUFACTURE, SALE, USE, OR
DISTRIBUTION OF PRODUCTS OR MATERIALS THAT CONTAIN ORIENTED STRAND
BOARD FOR PURPOSES OUTSIDE OF FIRE–FIGHTING TRAINING PURPOSES.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 580 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) A PERSON MAY NOT SET ON FIRE OR BURN ORIENTED STRAND BOARD
FOR FIRE–FIGHTING TRAINING PURPOSES.

(D) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO:

(1) FOR A FIRST VIOLATION, A CIVIL AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY
NOT EXCEEDING $500; AND

(2) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION, A CIVIL PENALTY
NOT EXCEEDING $1,000.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2