START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 498 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 498 
(Delegate Korman) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Board of Public Works Public Comment Act 
 
   
This bill requires the Board of Public Works (BPW), for each meeting of the board held on 
or after October 1, 2024, to allow members of the public to electronically submit comments 
on agenda items. The bill’s public comment requirements also include any updates to the 
agenda of the board. The bill requires BPW to employ at least one more staff position than 
the number of positions authorized in fiscal 2023 to carry out the bill’s provisions. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $227,400 in FY 2024 for BPW to 
hire staff and incur one-time technology costs. General fund expenditures increase by 
$92,200 in FY 2025 for ongoing staffing costs and annualization.     
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
227,400 
92,200 
96,300 
100,600 
105,900 
Net Effect 
($227,400) 
($92,200) 
($96,300) 
($100,600) 
($105,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. The change does not directly affect local government finances.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The public comments submitted under the bill’s provisions (or that are 
otherwise received by BPW by electronic or regular mail and relate to a board agenda item) 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 498/ Page 2 
must (1) be included in each meeting packet prepared for members of BPW; (2) be posted 
online at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting, or as soon as practicable after the public 
comment is received; and (3) be retained online through BPW’s public website.  
 
Any BPW discussion items that are not subject for inclusion in a public agenda, as specified 
under existing provisions of the Open Meetings Act, are not subject to public comment as 
established under the bill.  
 
Current Law:  The State Finance and Procurement Article establishes that BPW may 
control procurements by units of the Executive Branch. To exercise that authority, it may 
set policy, adopt regulations, and establish internal operational procedures consistent with 
State procurement law. In general, procurement contracts valued at $200,000 or more must 
be approved by BPW. Typically, the board meets every two weeks to consider contracts 
coming before it for review and approval.  
 
Open Meetings Act, Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A “public 
body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by the 
Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum of 
understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of education 
and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; a rule, 
resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others. 
 
Guidance provided by the Office of the Attorney General indicates that when the meeting 
“place” is a conference call, the public can be provided access through a call-in number or 
by access to a meeting room with a speakerphone. 
 
Agendas 
 
Generally, a public body must make an agenda available to the public prior to meeting in 
an open session. The agenda must include known items of business or topics to be 
discussed at the meeting and indicate whether the public body expects to close any portion 
of the meeting in accordance with State law. The public body is not required to include in 
the agenda any information regarding the subject matter of a closed portion of the meeting. 
If a public body is unable to comply with specified deadlines for the release of a meeting 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 498/ Page 3 
agenda because the meeting is scheduled in response to an emergency, a natural disaster, 
or any other unanticipated situation, the public body must make available, on request, an 
agenda of the meeting within a reasonable time after the meeting occurs. 
 
Minutes 
 
As soon as practicable after an open session, a public body must prepare minutes of the 
meeting. The minutes must reflect each item that the public body considered, the action it 
took on each item, and each vote that was recorded. If a public body meets in closed 
session, the minutes for a public body’s next open session must include a summary that 
includes specified information about the proceedings of the closed meeting. A public body 
need not prepare written minutes of an open session if (1) live and archived video or audio 
streaming of the open session is available or (2) if the public body votes on legislation and 
the individual votes taken by each participating member of the public body are promptly 
posted on the Internet.  
 
In general, with limited exceptions, minutes of a public body must be available for public 
inspection during normal business hours. A public body must retain a copy of the minutes 
of each session and any specified recording for at least five years and, to the extent 
practicable, post them online. 
 
State Expenditures:  BPW advises that all correspondence (both electronic and regular) 
sent to the board from the public relating to an item appearing on the board’s meeting 
agenda is both emailed to BPW members and saved in digital meeting recording files. 
However, correspondence is not currently posted online. BPW requires a new web portal 
to meet the bill’s provisions related to posting public comments online. Consistent with the 
bill’s explicit requirement, BPW also requires additional staff to meet the bill’s 
requirements. The staffing requirement in the bill does not qualify as a mandated 
appropriation as a specific funding level cannot be directly ascertained from the bill’s 
language. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $227,417 in fiscal 2024, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one computer operator manager to oversee the administration of the 
electronically submitted public comments. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs (including a web portal to receive and store public comments), and ongoing 
operating expenses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 498/ Page 4 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$70,008 
One-time Information Technology Costs 
150,000 
Operating Expenses 
7,409 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$227,417 
 
Future year expenditures reflect the full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) provides information technology services to BPW on a fee-for-service 
basis. Therefore, although DoIT likely administers the new portal, this analysis assumes 
that BPW bears the cost of operating it.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 328 (Senator Hettleman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Board of Public Works; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4