START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 465 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 465 
(Delegates Otto and Jacobs) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Recreational Crabbing Gear - Individuals Under the Age of 
16 Years 
 
   
This bill authorizes an individual younger than age 16 – who is catching or attempting to 
catch crabs in the waters of the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal tributaries without a 
recreational crabbing license – to use a collapsible trap, net ring, handline, or dip net, as 
described by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) in regulations. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. Any decrease in license 
fee revenue is expected to be negligible.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Department of Natural Resources’ Regulatory Authority 
 
DNR is authorized to adopt rules and regulations to, among other things, (1) restrict 
catching and possessing any blue crab and (2) establish the methods by which blue crabs 
are taken. DNR also has authority to adopt regulations to establish conservation and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 465/ Page 2 
management measures associated with its responsibility/authority to adopt fishery 
management plans for various species, including blue crabs.  
 
Department of Natural Resources Regulations 
 
DNR regulations require an individual who catches or attempts to catch blue crabs for 
recreational purposes in the waters of the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal tributaries to pay a 
fee and obtain a recreational crabbing license in order to use the following gear to catch 
blue crabs:  a trotline, collapsible traps or net rings, seines, and up to 10 eel pots for catching 
the individual’s own bait. The annual fee for a recreational crabbing license is $5 for a 
Maryland resident; however, if the Maryland resident has a Chesapeake Bay and coastal 
sport fishing license or a resident consolidated senior sport fishing license, the annual fee 
is $2. The fee for a nonresident is $10. A recreational crabbing boat license is also available, 
for an annual fee of $15, which authorizes individuals in the licensed boat to catch or 
attempt to catch blue crabs in the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal tributaries using a trotline 
or collapsible traps or net rings. 
 
An individual is not required to have a recreational crabbing license if the individual uses 
any of the following gear:  a dipnet, a handline, or up to two registered crab pots if the 
person using the crab pots is an owner, lessee, or tenant of a private property along the 
shore, or a guest of an owner, lessee, or tenant of a private property along the shore. An 
individual assisting an individual who has a recreational crabbing license or an individual 
crabbing for recreational purposes from a boat licensed as a recreational crabbing boat is 
also not required to have a recreational crabbing license. An unlicensed individual, 
however, is subject to more restrictive daily catch and possession limits than a licensed 
individual. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 102 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 465/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3