START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 418 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 418 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation and Finance 
 
Mental Health - Workforce Development - Fund Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund to provide 
reimbursement for costs associated with educating, training, certifying, recruiting, placing, 
and retaining behavioral health professionals and paraprofessionals. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must administer the fund and submit a specified annual 
report. The fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA). The 
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), in coordination with specified stakeholders, 
must conduct a comprehensive behavioral health workforce needs assessment. The 
assessment, which must recommend an initial allocation to the fund and identify which 
programs the allocation will support, must be submitted to specified committees of the 
General Assembly by October 15, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for MHCC increase by $75,000 in FY 2024 only 
to conduct the assessment. MDH can administer and OLA can audit the fund within 
existing budgeted resources. General fund expenditures and special fund revenues increase 
by at least $1.0 million annually beginning in FY 2025 to capitalize the fund – under 
assumptions discussed below, with corresponding special fund expenditures to provide 
reimbursement. Special fund revenues may increase for State agencies (not shown below). 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
SF Expenditure 
$75,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
Net Effect 
($75,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  Revenues for local governments and/or local health departments may 
increase to the extent they are eligible for reimbursement from the fund. Expenditures are 
not directly affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 418/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund 
 
The special, nonlapsing fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget, interest 
earnings, and any other money from any source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Each 
year, MDH must report, for the immediately preceding fiscal year (1) the amount of funds 
transferred and distributed from the fund; (2) the number of behavioral health professionals 
and paraprofessionals educated, trained, recruited, certified, placed, or retained with money 
from the fund, aggregated as specified; (3) the amount of any unspent funds; and (4) the 
reason why any unspent funds were not spent. 
 
Comprehensive Behavioral Health Workforce Needs Assessment 
 
The comprehensive behavioral health workforce needs assessment conducted by MHCC, 
in coordination with the Behavioral Health Administration, the Maryland Higher 
Education Commission (MHEC), the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), the Career 
and Technical Education Committee, and other interested stakeholders, must (1) determine 
the unmet need and capacity of the behavioral health workforce in the State; (2) calculate 
the total number of additional behavioral health professionals and paraprofessionals needed 
over specified timeframes; (3) make findings and recommendations regarding the types of 
training, education, and tuition assistance programs necessary to certify, recruit, place, 
supervise, 
and 
retain 
those 
additional 
behavioral 
health 
professionals 
and 
paraprofessionals; and (4) recommend an initial allocation to the fund. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Commission to Study the Health Care Workforce Crisis in Maryland 
 
Chapters 707 and 708 of 2022 established the Commission to Study the Health Care 
Workforce Crisis in Maryland to, among other things, determine the extent of the health 
care workforce shortage in the State including the extent of shortages in community-based 
behavioral health treatment programs, examine the short-term solutions to address the 
immediate needs for identified shortages, and examine future health care workforce needs. 
The commission must issue its final report by December 31, 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 418/ Page 3 
Career Pathways for Health Care Workers Program 
 
Chapter 403 of 2022 established the Career Pathways for Health Care Workers Program 
administered by the Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) 
in MDL. The purpose of the program is to provide matching grants to hospitals or related 
institutions that pay for training programs attended by health care workers, with the goal 
of providing increased opportunities for health care workers to receive training across the 
State. 
 
Direct Care Workforce Innovation Program 
 
Chapter 699 of 2021 established a Direct Care Workforce Innovation Program within 
DWDAL to provide matching grants to eligible entities to create and expand on successful 
recruitment and retention strategies that address the range of potential barriers to increasing 
the number of direct care workers, with the goal of ensuring the availability of trained direct 
care workers across the State.  
 
Employment Advancement Right Now Program  
 
The Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) program was established in 2013 to 
create industry-led partnerships to advance the skills of the State’s workforce, grow the 
State’s economy, and increase sustainable employment for working families. Specifically, 
the program provides general fund grants on a competitive basis for industry partnerships, 
workforce training programs, and job-readiness and skills training, including direct care 
workforce training programs. Under the EARN program, DWDAL has invested in several 
direct care workforce training programs across the State. 
 
Nurse Support Program Assistance Fund  
 
The Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) established the Nurse Support 
Program II (NSPII) to increase the number of nurses and nurse educators. NSPII is 
administered by MHEC in collaboration with HSCRC and was codified by Chapters 221 
and 226 of 2006. NSPII has two components:  (1) competitively awarded grants to fund 
innovative nurse education collaborations between nursing schools and hospitals; and 
(2) statewide stipends and scholarships to support nurse educators and, to a lesser degree, 
service-obligated bedside nurses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 418/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Comprehensive Behavioral Health Workforce Needs Assessment 
 
MHCC advises it will require a one-time expenditure of $75,000 in fiscal 2024 to contract 
with a workforce economist to assist in the completion of the required assessment. Thus, 
MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $75,000 in fiscal 2024 only. MHCC further 
advises that the commission has sufficient funds available to cover this expenditure. 
 
Capitalization of the Behavioral Health Workforce Fund 
 
The bill establishes the Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund to provide 
reimbursement for costs associated with educating, training, certifying, recruiting, placing, 
and retaining behavioral health professionals and paraprofessionals. The bill does not 
specify a funding amount for the fund. However, the MHCC comprehensive behavioral 
health workforce needs assessment must recommend an initial allocation to the fund and 
identify specifically which programs the allocation will support and the number of 
professionals and paraprofessionals the allocation will train, certify, recruit, and place. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that a significant level of funding is likely 
necessary to create a viable fund and provide reimbursement as authorized. The actual level 
of funding and fiscal year for capitalization will depend on the recommendations made in 
the MHCC assessment and timing for completion of the assessment, which is not due until 
October 15, 2024, but could be completed sooner. Nevertheless, for purposes of this 
analysis, it is assumed that at least $1.0 million in general funds is provided to capitalize 
the fund beginning in fiscal 2025. Actual funding may vary significantly and could even 
be provided as early as fiscal 2024, given the bill’s requirement for a report, beginning in 
2024, on how funding was used in the prior year. Alternatively, provision of any funding 
could be delayed until fiscal 2026, the first budget prepared after the assessment is due. 
MDH special fund revenues and expenditures increase accordingly. 
 
The bill does not specify how reimbursement will be provided from the fund or which 
programs or entities will be eligible for reimbursement. While MDH advises that the 
department can administer the fund with existing resources, to the extent that additional 
administrative expenditures are necessary to provide reimbursement based on the 
assessment report, MDH general fund expenditures may increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025. Special funds cannot be used for administrative purposes under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 418/ Page 5 
Other Agency Effects 
 
To the extent that State agencies are eligible for reimbursement from the fund, special fund 
revenues may increase for other State agencies (e.g., MHEC and the University System of 
Maryland.) 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business behavioral health providers benefit to the extent 
they receive reimbursement from the fund and are able to recruit and retain additional 
behavioral health professionals and paraprofessionals.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 283 (Senator Augustine) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5