START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 463 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 463 
(Delegate A. Johnson, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Architects - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Architects within the 
Maryland Department of Labor by 10 years to July 1, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2028. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Architects qualifies and licenses individuals seeking 
architectural licensure. The board also issues permit to businesses practicing architecture. 
In addition, the board investigates complaints against licensees as well as complaints 
related to the unlicensed practice of architecture services. The board may issue a reprimand, 
suspend, or revoke a license or permit, and/or impose a fine. 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation 
Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within the Department of Legislative Services 
prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 463/ Page 2 
by specified entities or by legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2023; 
OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, 
reauthorizing legislation is being introduced. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 199 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2