START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 433 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 433 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prince George's County - Office of the Sheriff - Deputy Sheriffs and Labor 
Organizations  
PG 308-23 
 
 
This bill increases, from four to five, the number of full-time assistant sheriffs provided to 
the Sheriff of Prince George’s County. The bill also makes technical changes by replacing 
obsolete references. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by approximately $331,600 
annually beginning in FY 2024. County revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to statute, the Prince George’s County Sheriff is provided with 
four full‐time assistant sheriffs.  
 
Section 2-330 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article establishes the duties of the 
Prince George’s County Sheriff’s Office to include, among other duties, the service of 
process, the transportation of all legally detained persons, the security of all State and 
county courts, and arrest powers.   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 433/ Page 2 
Statute establishes that duties also include specific duties as authorized by the county 
council, including responding to domestic violence calls; such duties must be enumerated 
in a memorandum of understanding entered into between the Prince George’s County 
Police Department and the sheriff’s office, which may be revised only by the county 
council. In addition, the sheriff’s office may investigate any matter germane to these duties.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill adds one assistant sheriff in Prince George’s County. 
Accordingly, Prince George’s County expenditures increase by approximately $331,600 
annually beginning in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date. 
This estimate is based on the current salary of an assistant sheriff ($190,346, as provided 
by the county) and includes fringe benefits but does not account for future merit or 
cost-of-living adjustments that may be applicable.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 191 (Senator Jackson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2