START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 455 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 455 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Video Lottery Terminal Proceeds - Purse Dedication Account - Ocean Downs 
Race Course Operating Loss Assistance 
 
   
This bill alters and makes permanent the annual distribution to Ocean Downs Race Course 
for operating loss assistance from the Purse Dedication Account (PDA). Specifically, the 
bill authorizes an annual distribution equal to up to $30,000 per live racing day, beginning 
in calendar 2023. The bill also repeals the calendar 2024 sunset date of the annual 
distribution to Ocean Downs Race Course from PDA. Under current law, Ocean Downs 
Race Course receives an annual distribution from PDA of up to $1.2 million through 
calendar 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None, as the bill does not affect overall revenue for PDA. Total special fund 
expenditures from PDA do not change; however, the bill alters and redirects PDA revenues 
for distribution to Ocean Downs Race Course beginning in calendar 2023 as discussed 
below.     
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, 6% of video lottery terminal proceeds, not to exceed 
$100.0 million, is distributed to PDA, which is under the authority of the Maryland Racing 
Commission. PDA is projected to receive $77.9 million in fiscal 2023 and $81.0 million in 
fiscal 2024. Exhibit 1 shows how funds in PDA are distributed. The Maryland Racing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 455/ Page 2 
Commission must allocate 80% of the funds in PDA to the thoroughbred industry and 20% 
to the standardbred industry. Of those amounts, 89% goes directly to purses and 11% to 
the respective bred race funds.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Distribution of Funds within the Purse Dedication Account 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not affect overall revenue for PDA, and total special 
fund expenditures from PDA do not change. The bill alters the annual grant of up to 
$1.2 million from PDA for Ocean Downs Race Course, which under current law ends after 
calendar 2024. The Maryland Racing Commission advises that there were 47 live racing 
days at Ocean Downs Race Course in 2022. Assuming a commensurate number of live 
racing days going forward, the annual grant to Ocean Downs Race Course increases to 
approximately $1.41 million annually in calendar 2023 and 2024 and continues at that 
Purse 
Dedication 
Account
80% 
Thoroughbred 
Industry
89% to 
thoroughbred 
purses at 
Pimlico Race 
Course,    
Laurel Park, 
and Timonium
$100,000 grant 
to Fair Hill
11% to the 
Maryland-bred 
Race Fund
20% 
Standardbred 
Industry
89% to 
standardbred 
purses at 
Rosecroft 
Raceway and 
Ocean Downs 
Race Course
$1,200,000 to 
Ocean Downs 
Race Course
$1,200,000 to 
Rosecroft 
Raceway
11% to the 
Standardbred 
Race Fund

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 455/ Page 3 
amount each year thereafter. Accordingly, PDA funds available for purses at standardbred 
tracks decrease by approximately $210,000 in calendar 2023 and 2024 and by $1.41 million 
annually thereafter.  
        
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 363 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland 
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3