START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 404 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 404 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Local Homeowners' Credit Supplement - Limitation on 
Combined Gross Income 
 
 
This bill authorizes local governments to provide a local supplement to the State 
homeowners’ property tax credit to homeowners whose combined gross income exceeds 
$60,000. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) can 
continue to administer the local supplement to the homeowners’ property tax credit with 
existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2024, to the 
extent local governments alter their existing supplement to the homeowners’ property tax 
credit. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The homeowners’ property tax credit program is a State-funded program 
that provides credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who 
qualify based on a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. Homeowners must 
apply to SDAT each year in order to be eligible for the property tax credit. The application 
is available on the department’s website; current applications may be filed through 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 404/ Page 2 
October 1, 2023. Approximately 45,000 individuals receive the property tax credit each 
year. The fiscal 2024 State budget includes $56.5 million in funding for the program. 
 
The maximum assessment against which the credit may be granted is $300,000, less the 
amount of any homestead property tax credit received (a State program that provides tax 
credits against State, county, and municipal real property taxes for owner-occupied 
residential properties for the amount of real property taxes resulting from annual 
assessment increases that exceeds a certain percentage or “cap” in any given year). To be 
eligible for the property tax credit, a recipient’s net worth may not exceed $200,000 and 
the combined gross household income may not exceed $60,000. 
 
Local Supplement to Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit 
 
Local governments are authorized to grant a local supplement to the homeowners’ property 
tax credit program. While SDAT administers the local program, local governments are 
responsible for covering the cost of the local supplement. Currently, Baltimore City and 
13 counties (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Caroline, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, 
Garrett, Harford, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, and Washington counties) provide a local 
supplement to the State program. In addition, several municipalities also provide a local 
supplement, including the cities of Bowie, College Park, Frederick, Gaithersburg, 
Greenbelt, Hyattsville, and Rockville. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local property tax revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2024, to the 
extent local governments alter their existing supplement to the homeowners’ property tax 
credit by expanding eligibility to additional homeowners. The amount of the revenue 
decrease will vary by jurisdiction and depend on the number of homeowners who qualify 
for the credit based on the eligibility requirements specified by the local jurisdiction. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 404/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3