START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 536

Chapter 536

(House Bill 466)

AN ACT concerning

Worcester County – Natural Resources – Hunting

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Department of Natural Resources to allow a person in
Worcester County to hunt game birds or game mammals on a Sunday, subject to
certain time restrictions, during the open season for that game bird or game
mammal; authorizing the Department to allow a person in Worcester County to hunt
on public land designated for hunting on Sundays, subject to certain time
restrictions; altering the safety zone in Worcester County within which archery
hunting may not take place except under certain circumstances; and generally
relating to hunting in Worcester County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–410(a) and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–410.

(a) (1) (i) The Department may allow a person to hunt on each Sunday of
the game bird and game mammal seasons in:

1. Allegany County;

2. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Calvert
County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

3. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Caroline
County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

4. Cecil County;

5. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Charles
County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 536 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

6. Subject to subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph, Dorchester
County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

7. Garrett County;

8. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Queen
Anne’s County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

9. St. Mary’s County;

10. Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, Somerset
County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.; [and]

11. Washington County; AND

12. SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, WORCESTER COUNTY, FROM 30 MINUTES BEFORE SUNRISE UNTIL
10:30 A.M.

(ii) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)10 AND 12 of this
paragraph do not apply:

1. On each Sunday of the deer firearms season; and

2. On the last three Sundays in October and the first two
Sundays in November of the deer bow hunting season.

(iii) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)2, 3, 5, and 8 of this
paragraph do not apply:

1. On each Sunday during the deer firearms season;

2. On the last three Sundays in October and the first two
Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season; and

3. On each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season.

(iv) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)6 of this paragraph
do not apply:

1. On each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from the first
Sunday in October through the second Sunday in January, inclusive; and

2. On each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 536

(2) The Department may allow a person to hunt deer on each Sunday of the
deer hunting seasons from the first Sunday in October through the second Sunday in
January, inclusive, in:

(i) Carroll County; and

(ii) Frederick County.

(3) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the Department
may allow a person to hunt deer on each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from 30
minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. in:

1. Kent County;

2. Montgomery County; and

3. Talbot County.

(ii) The time restrictions under this paragraph do not apply:

1. To a participant in a junior deer hunt authorized under
this subtitle;

2. On one Sunday designated by the Department during the
deer firearms season;

3. In Kent County, on each Sunday during the deer bow
hunting season and the deer muzzle loader season;

4. In Montgomery County, on one Sunday designated by the
Department during the deer bow hunting season; and

5. In Talbot County, on the last three Sundays in October
and the first two Sundays in November during the bow hunting season.

(4) The Department may allow a person to hunt deer during the deer
firearms season:

(i) On each Sunday in[:

1.] Harford County; [and

2. Worcester County;]

(ii) On the first Sunday in Anne Arundel County; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 536 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) In Wicomico County, on:

1. The first Sunday; and

2. The second Sunday from 30 minutes before sunrise until
10:30 a.m.

(5) The Department may allow a person to hunt deer during the deer bow
hunting season on:

(i) The last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in
November in:

1. Harford County; AND

2. Wicomico County; and

[3. Worcester County; and]

(ii) The first Sunday in November in Anne Arundel County.

(6) The Department may allow a person to hunt turkey on each Sunday of
the spring turkey hunting season in:

(i) Carroll County;

(ii) Kent County; and

(iii) Talbot County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.

(7) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, the Department
may allow a person with a deer management permit to shoot deer on any Sunday
throughout the year in accordance with the terms of the permit.

(8) The Department may allow a person using a State certified raptor to
hunt game birds or mammals on each Sunday during the open season for the game birds
or mammals.

(9) The Department may allow an unarmed person participating in an
organized fox chase to chase foxes on Sunday.

(10) The Department may allow a person shooting pen–reared game birds
or tower–released flighted mallard ducks to hunt on Sunday at a regulated shooting ground
in accordance with § 10–906 of this title.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 536

(11) The Department may allow a person who is 16 years old or younger to
hunt on Sunday if participating in a junior hunt established by the Department in
accordance with this subtitle.

(12) Except as provided in paragraphs (8) through (10) of this subsection and
subject to paragraph (7) of this subsection, a person may not hunt on Sunday in:

(i) Baltimore City;

(ii) Baltimore County;

(iii) Howard County; or

(iv) Prince George’s County.

(13) A person may not hunt migratory game birds on Sunday.

(14) A person may not hunt on public land within the State park system on
Sunday.

(15) (i) The Department may not allow a person to hunt on public land
designated for hunting by the Department on Sunday except in:

1. Allegany County;

2. Cecil County;

3. Garrett County;

4. St. Mary’s County;

5. Washington County;

~~6.~~ ~~WORCESTER~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

[6.] 7.Dorchester County, for turkey during the spring turkey
hunting season;

[7.] 8.Frederick County, for deer from the first Sunday in
October through the second Sunday in January of the following year, inclusive; ~~and~~

[8.] 9.Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, Somerset
County, on public land leased to a hunt club from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30
a.m.; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 536 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9. SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, WORCESTER COUNTY, FROM 30 MINUTES BEFORE SUNRISE UNTIL
10:30 A.M.

(ii) The time restrictions under subparagraph [(i)8] (I)9 (I)8 AND 9
of this paragraph do not apply:

1. On each Sunday of the deer firearms season; and

2. On the last three Sundays in October and the first two
Sundays in November of the deer bow hunting season.

(g) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, a
person, other than the owner or occupant, while hunting for any wild bird or mammal may
not shoot or discharge any firearm or other deadly weapon within 150 yards, known as the
“safety zone”, of a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied by
human beings, or shoot at any wild bird or mammal while it is within this area, without
the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant.

(2) A person, while hunting for any wild bird or mammal, may not shoot or
discharge any firearm within 300 yards of a public or nonpublic school during school hours
or at a time when a school–approved activity is taking place.

(3) (i) For archery hunters in Allegany County, Calvert County, Carroll
County, Cecil County, Frederick County, Garrett County, Harford County, Montgomery
County, St. Mary’s County, [or] Washington County, OR WORCESTER COUNTY, the
safety zone described in paragraph (1) of this subsection extends for 50 yards from a
dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or camp occupied by human beings.

(ii) For archery hunters in Anne Arundel County, the safety zone
described in paragraph (1) of this subsection extends for 100 yards from a dwelling house,
residence, church, or any other building or camp occupied by human beings.

(4) During any open hunting season, a person, other than the owner or
occupant, may not hunt or chase willfully any wild bird or mammal within the safety zone
without the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant.

(5) In Harford County, an archery hunter shall use a tree stand when
hunting any wild bird or mammal within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence,
church, public or nonpublic school, or other building or camp occupied by human beings.

(6) In Montgomery County or Washington County, an archery hunter shall
be in an elevated position that allows the hunter to shoot in a downward trajectory when
hunting any wild bird or mammal within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence,
church, public or nonpublic school, or other building or camp occupied by human beings.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 536

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7