START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

Chapter 221

(House Bill 410)

AN ACT concerning

~~Election~~ ~~Reform~~ ~~Act~~ ~~of~~ ~~2023~~
Elections – Polling Place Plan, Prohibited Acts, and 2024 Primary Election Date

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a local board of elections from voting to change the location
of a polling place unless the local board first holds a meeting to discuss the proposed
change and provides an opportunity for interested individuals and organizations to
testify on the proposed change at the meeting; requiring the local board to provide
written notice of the meeting to certain individuals and organizations; requiring each
local board to submit a polling place plan to the State Board of Elections for approval
by a certain time before each statewide primary election; establishing requirements
and a prohibition for a polling place plan; requiring a local board to submit a revised
polling place plan to the State Board if the State Board rejects a polling place plan;
requiring certain local boards to submit certain information to the State Board
concerning certain precincts at a certain time; prohibiting a person from influencing
or attempting to influence, through certain means, a voter’s decision whether to vote
by any lawful means; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~official~~ ~~custodian~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~board~~ ~~of~~ ~~elections~~ ~~to~~
~~temporarily~~ ~~deny~~ ~~inspection~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~public~~ ~~record~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~official~~ ~~custodian~~ ~~to~~ ~~petition~~ ~~a~~ ~~court~~ ~~to~~ ~~order~~ ~~authorization~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~continued~~ ~~denial~~ ~~of~~ ~~inspection~~ ~~within~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~time~~ ~~period;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~certain~~
~~hearing~~ ~~and~~ ~~appeal~~ ~~procedures;~~ altering, in a certain year, the date of the statewide
primary election and the primary election for municipal offices in Baltimore City;
and generally relating to elections.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~2–303(f)~~ ~~and~~ ~~16–201~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 1–101(a), 10–101(a)(1) and (2), and 16–1002
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Election Law
Section 1–101(aa–1), (hh–1), and (ii–1), 2–303(h), and 2–303.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 221 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~16–1002~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ ~~Provisions~~
~~Section~~ ~~4–359~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 2–303(a)(1) and (f) and 16–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

1–101.

(a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated unless a
different meaning is clearly intended from the context.

(AA–1) “HISTORICALLY DISENFRANCHISED COMMUNITIES” MEANS
RACIAL, ETHNIC, OR SOCIOECONOMIC GROUPS THAT HAVE HISTORICALLY BEEN
SUBJECT TO VOTER SUPPRESSION EFFORTS.

(HH–1) “POLLING PLACE” MEANS A PHYSICAL SPACE INSIDE A BUILDING
WHERE IN–PERSON VOTING IS CONDUCTED ON ELECTION DAY.

(II–1) “PRECINCT POLLING PLACE” MEANS A POLLING PLACE
DESIGNATED TO SERVE A PRECINCT.

2–303.

(a) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection AND § 2–303.1 OF
THIS SUBTITLE, as it deems it expedient for the convenience of voters, a local board may:

(i) create and alter the boundaries for precincts in the county;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

(ii) designate the location for polling places in any election district,
ward, or precinct in the county; and

(iii) combine or abolish precincts.

(f) Notwithstanding any restrictions imposed by SUBSECTIONS (A) THROUGH
(E) OR (G) OF this section, BUT subject to § 2–303.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND the approval
of the State Board, a local board may create a new precinct or change a precinct boundary
or polling place if the local board determines that an emergency exists.

(H) (1) THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION DO NOT APPLY IF A
LOCAL BOARD IS CREATING A NEW PRECINCT OR CHANGING A PRECINCT BOUNDARY
OR POLLING PLACE UNDER SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION DURING THE PERIOD
BEGINNING 21 DAYS BEFORE ELECTION DAY THROUGH ELECTION DAY.

(2) EACH LOCAL BOARD SHALL:

(I) MAINTAIN A CONTACT LIST OF INDIVIDUALS AND
ORGANIZATIONS WHO WISH TO BE NOTIFIED ABOUT LOCAL BOARD MEETINGS AT
WHICH PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE LOCATIONS OF POLLING PLACES WILL BE
DISCUSSED; AND

(II) ENABLE INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS TO REGISTER
FOR THE CONTACT LIST MAINTAINED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITEM (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH.

(3) A LOCAL BOARD MAY NOT VOTE TO CHANGE THE LOCATION OF A
POLLING PLACE UNLESS THE LOCAL BOARD FIRST:

(I) HOLDS A MEETING TO DISCUSS THE PROPOSED CHANGE;
AND

(II) PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY FOR INTERESTED
INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS TO TESTIFY ON THE PROPOSED CHANGE AT THE
MEETING.

(4) AT LEAST 14 DAYS BEFORE THE MEETING REQUIRED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (3)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE LOCAL BOARD SHALL PROVIDE
WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE MEETING TO:

(I) EACH INDIVIDUAL AND ORGANIZATION ON THE CONTACT
LIST MAINTAINED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION;
AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 221 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE FOLLOWING ELECTED OFFICIALS IF THE OFFICIAL IS
ELECTED BY ELIGIBLE VOTERS RESIDING IN THE PRECINCT CONTAINING EITHER
THE CURRENT POLLING PLACE LOCATION OR THE PROPOSED POLLING PLACE
LOCATION:

1. THE MAYOR;

2. THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE;

3. EACH COUNTY COMMISSIONER;

4. EACH COUNTY COUNCIL MEMBER;

5. EACH MUNICIPAL COUNCIL MEMBER; AND

6. EACH MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND GENERAL
ASSEMBLY.

2–303.1.

(A) AT LEAST 6 MONTHS BEFORE EACH STATEWIDE PRIMARY ELECTION,
EACH LOCAL BOARD SHALL SUBMIT A POLLING PLACE PLAN TO THE STATE BOARD
FOR APPROVAL.

(B) A POLLING PLACE PLAN MAY NOT PROPOSE TO REDUCE THE TOTAL
NUMBER OF SEPARATE BUILDINGS USED AS POLLING PLACES BY MORE THAN 5%
~~BELOW~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TOTAL~~ ~~NUMBER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~SEPARATE~~ ~~BUILDINGS~~ ~~USED~~ ~~AS~~ ~~POLLING~~ ~~PLACES~~ ~~IN~~
THE 2018 GENERAL ELECTION.

(C) (B) A POLLING PLACE PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A MAP SHOWING THE PRECINCT BOUNDARIES AND THE LOCATION
~~OF~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~POLLING~~ ~~PLACE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~USED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UPCOMING~~ ~~STATEWIDE~~
PRIMARY AND GENERAL ELECTION;

(2) (1) EVIDENCE THAT THE PLAN COMPLIES WITH § 10–101(A)(2)
OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(2) AN ANALYSIS OF HOW TO MAXIMIZE VOTER PARTICIPATION IN
EACH PRECINCT; AND

(3) IF THE POLLING PLACE PLAN PROPOSES TO REDUCE THE TOTAL
NUMBER OF SEPARATE BUILDINGS USED AS POLLING PLACES BELOW THE TOTAL

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

NUMBER OF SEPARATE BUILDINGS USED AS POLLING PLACES IN THE 2018 GENERAL
ELECTION:

(I) THE ADDRESS AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE LOCATION OF
EACH AFFECTED POLLING PLACE;

(II) DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION CONCERNING THE ELIGIBLE
~~VOTERS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~AFFECTED~~ ~~PRECINCT~~ AN ANALYSIS OF AVAILABLE SUITABLE
BUILDINGS WITHIN THE PRECINCT BOUNDARY, INCLUDING THE AVAILABILITY OF
PARKING AND A DETERMINATION REGARDING BUILDING COMPLIANCE WITH THE
FEDERAL AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT;

(III) OF THE VOTERS WHO CAST BALLOTS IN EACH AFFECTED
PRECINCT IN THE THREE MOST RECENT STATEWIDE ELECTIONS:

1. THE PERCENTAGE WHO VOTED IN PERSON ON
ELECTION DAY;

2. THE PERCENTAGE WHO VOTED BY MAIL; AND

3. THE NUMBER WHO REGISTERED TO VOTE ON
ELECTION DAY; AND

4. THE NUMBER WHO VOTED AT AN EARLY VOTING
CENTER;

(IV) THE POPULATION DENSITY OF EACH PROXIMITY OF THE
PROPOSED POLLING PLACE TO A DENSE CONCENTRATION OF VOTERS IN THE
AFFECTED PRECINCT;

(V) THE PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS IN THE COUNTY THAT
HAVE NO VEHICLE OR HAVE ONLY ONE VEHICLE, ACCORDING TO THE MOST RECENT
AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY CONDUCTED BY THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU THE
CHANGE IN THE NUMBER OF REGISTERED VOTERS IN THE AFFECTED PRECINCT
FROM THE LAST STATEWIDE ELECTION;

(VI) THE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS THAT VOTERS IN
EACH AFFECTED PRECINCT COULD USE TO ACCESS THE POLLING PLACE THAT
WOULD SERVE THE PRECINCT UNDER THE PLAN; AND

(VII) AN ANALYSIS OF THE IMPACT ON THE ABILITY OF
HISTORICALLY DISENFRANCHISED COMMUNITIES TO CAST A BALLOT, INCLUDING
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION OF THE VOTERS IN THE AFFECTED PRECINCT FROM

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 221 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE MOST RECENT REPORT PUBLISHED BY THE MARYLAND VITAL STATISTICS
ADMINISTRATION.

(D) (C) THE STATE BOARD MAY SHALL APPROVE A POLLING PLACE PLAN
ONLY IF THE POLLING PLACE PLAN:

(1) COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION AND §
10–101(A)(2) OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(2) WILL NOT NEGATIVELY AFFECT ACCESS TO VOTING FOR
HISTORICALLY DISENFRANCHISED COMMUNITIES.

(E) (D) (1) THE STATE BOARD SHALL REJECT A POLLING PLACE PLAN
THAT DOES NOT MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (D) (C) OF THIS
SECTION.

(2) IF THE STATE BOARD REJECTS A POLLING PLACE PLAN, THE
LOCAL BOARD SHALL SUBMIT A REVISED POLLING PLACE PLAN TO THE STATE
BOARD WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE STATE BOARD REJECTED
THE PREVIOUS PLAN.

10–101.

(a) (1) Each local board shall designate a polling place that meets the
requirements of this subsection for each precinct in the county as established by the local
board in accordance with Title 2 of this article.

(2) Each polling place shall:

(i) provide an environment that is suitable to the proper conduct of
an election;

(ii) be located as conveniently as practicable for the majority of
registered voters assigned to that polling place;

(iii) except as authorized in paragraph (4) of this subsection, be in a
public building;

(iv) be in the precinct that it serves unless no suitable location for a
polling place can be found within that precinct, in which case the board may establish the
polling place in an adjacent precinct; and

(v) whenever practicable, be selected and arranged to avoid
architectural and other barriers that impede access or voting by elderly and physically
disabled voters.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

16–201.

(a) A person may not willfully and knowingly:

(1) (i) impersonate another person in order to vote or attempt to vote;
or

(ii) vote or attempt to vote under a false name;

(2) vote more than once for a candidate for the same office or for the same
ballot question;

(3) vote or attempt to vote more than once in the same election, or vote in
more than one election district or precinct;

(4) vote in an election district or precinct without the legal authority to vote
in that election district or precinct;

(5) influence or attempt to influence a voter’s voting decision through the
use of force, threat, menace, intimidation, bribery, reward, or offer of reward;

(6) influence or attempt to influence a voter’s decision, THROUGH THE
USE OF FORCE, FRAUD, THREAT, MENACE, INTIMIDATION, BRIBERY, REWARD, OR
OFFER OF REWARD, whether to:

(I) go to the polls to cast a vote [through the use of force, fraud,
threat, menace, intimidation, bribery, reward, or offer of reward]; or

(II) VOTE BY OTHER LAWFUL MEANS; OR

(7) engage in conduct that results or has the intent to result in the denial
or abridgement of the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race,
color, or disability.

(b) Except as provided in § 16–1002 of this title, a person who violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 5 years or both.

(c) A person who violates this section is subject to § 5–106(b) of the Courts Article.

16–1002.

A person who violates § 16–201(a)(6) or (7) or § 16–903 of this title without knowing
that the act is illegal shall pay a civil penalty and have the matter adjudicated in accordance
with § 13–604 of this article.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 221 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ ~~Provisions~~

~~4–359.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “BOARD OF ELECTIONS” MEANS THE STATE BOARD
OF ELECTIONS OR A COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS.

(B) WHENEVER THIS TITLE AUTHORIZES INSPECTION OF A PUBLIC RECORD
HELD BY A BOARD OF ELECTIONS, THE OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN MAY DENY INSPECTION
TEMPORARILY IF:

(1) THE REQUEST FOR INSPECTION IS RECEIVED IN THE PERIOD
BEGINNING 90 DAYS BEFORE A PRIMARY OR GENERAL ELECTION AND ENDING WHEN
THE PRIMARY OR GENERAL ELECTION IS CERTIFIED; AND

(2) THE OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN BELIEVES THAT INSPECTION WOULD
~~CAUSE~~ ~~SUBSTANTIAL~~ ~~INJURY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~BY~~ ~~IMPAIRING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ABILITY~~
OF THE BOARD OF ELECTIONS TO PREPARE FOR THE ELECTION.

(C) (1) WITHIN 5 WORKING DAYS AFTER THE DENIAL, THE OFFICIAL
~~CUSTODIAN~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~PETITION~~ ~~A~~ ~~COURT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ORDER~~ ~~AUTHORIZATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
CONTINUED DENIAL OF INSPECTION.

(2) THE PETITION SHALL BE FILED WITH THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR
THE COUNTY WHERE:

(I) THE PUBLIC RECORD IS LOCATED; OR

(II) THE PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS OF THE OFFICIAL
CUSTODIAN IS LOCATED.

(3) THE PETITION SHALL BE SERVED ON THE APPLICANT, AS
PROVIDED IN THE MARYLAND RULES.

(D) THE APPLICANT IS ENTITLED TO APPEAR AND TO BE HEARD ON THE
~~PETITION.~~

(E) WHEN MAKING A DETERMINATION REGARDING A PETITION FILED
UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE COURT SHALL CONSIDER THE
TOTALITY OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES, INCLUDING:

(1) THE PROXIMITY OF THE PRIMARY ELECTION OR GENERAL
ELECTION; AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

(2) WHETHER THE APPLICANT’S REQUEST IS PART OF A PATTERN OF
REQUESTS MADE BY OTHER INDIVIDUALS.

(F) IF, AFTER THE HEARING, THE COURT FINDS THAT INSPECTION OF THE
PUBLIC RECORD WOULD CAUSE SUBSTANTIAL INJURY TO THE PUBLIC INTEREST,
~~THE~~ ~~COURT~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~ISSUE~~ ~~AN~~ ~~APPROPRIATE~~ ~~ORDER~~ ~~AUTHORIZING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONTINUED~~
DENIAL OF INSPECTION.

(G) (1) A JUDICIAL PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE
CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MARYLAND RULES, EXCEPT THAT:

(I) THE CASE SHALL BE HEARD AND DECIDED WITHOUT A JURY
AND AS EXPEDITIOUSLY AS THE CIRCUMSTANCES REQUIRE; AND

(II) AN APPEAL SHALL BE TAKEN DIRECTLY TO THE SUPREME
COURT OF MARYLAND WITHIN 5 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THE DECISION OF THE
CIRCUIT COURT.

(2) THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND SHALL GIVE PRIORITY TO
HEAR AND DECIDE AN APPEAL BROUGHT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS
SUBSECTION AS EXPEDITIOUSLY AS THE CIRCUMSTANCES REQUIRE.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

~~(a)~~ ~~This~~ ~~section~~ ~~applies~~ ~~only~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~local~~ ~~board~~ ~~that~~ ~~used~~ ~~a~~ ~~total~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~separate~~
~~buildings~~ ~~as~~ ~~polling~~ ~~places~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~2022~~ ~~statewide~~ ~~primary~~ ~~or~~ ~~general~~ ~~election~~ ~~that~~ ~~was~~ ~~less~~
~~than~~ ~~the~~ ~~total~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~separate~~ ~~buildings~~ ~~the~~ ~~local~~ ~~board~~ ~~used~~ ~~as~~ ~~polling~~ ~~places~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~
~~2018~~ ~~general~~ ~~election.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~For~~ ~~each~~ ~~precinct~~ ~~that~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~2018~~ ~~general~~ ~~election~~ ~~was~~ ~~served~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~polling~~
~~place~~ ~~located~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~precinct~~ ~~boundaries~~ ~~but~~ ~~that~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~2022~~ ~~primary~~ ~~or~~ ~~general~~
~~election~~ ~~was~~ ~~not~~ ~~served~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~polling~~ ~~place~~ ~~located~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~precinct~~ ~~boundaries,~~ ~~each~~ ~~local~~
~~board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~submit~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~same~~ ~~time~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~local~~ ~~board~~ ~~submits~~ ~~its~~
~~polling~~ ~~place~~ ~~plan~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~2024~~ ~~primary~~ ~~and~~ ~~general~~ ~~elections~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–303.1~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Election~~ ~~Law~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~all~~ ~~the~~ ~~information~~ ~~required~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–303.1(c)(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~
~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~evidence~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~§~~ ~~10–101(a)(2)~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~
~~Article~~ ~~were~~ ~~met.~~

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 221 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding § 8–201
of the Election Law Article, in 2024, the statewide primary election and the primary
election for municipal offices in Baltimore City shall be held on the second Tuesday in May.

SECTION ~~2.~~ ~~4.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10