START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 429 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 429 
(Delegate Charles, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Procurement Improvement Council - Membership 
 
 
This bill adds the Comptroller and the Attorney General as members of the Procurement 
Improvement Council (PIC) and authorizes the Comptroller and the Attorney General to 
each send a designee to PIC if they are unable to attend. The bill also specifies that, among 
its other responsibilities, PIC must provide a forum for the discussion of strategies to 
increase the participation of small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses in State 
procurement contracts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PIC was established by Chapter 590 of 2017 as the successor to the 
Procurement Advisory Council. It has 20 members representing State agencies, local 
government, the Maryland General Assembly, minority-owned businesses, and the general 
public, and is chaired by the Chief Procurement Officer for the State. Statute assigns 
numerous responsibilities to PIC, among them ensuring that the State’s procurement 
system is utilizing the most advanced procurement methods and management techniques 
as well as advising and making recommendations to the Board of Public Works and the 
General Assembly on improving the State’s procurement process. PIC must meet at least 
quarterly each year. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 429/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 451 (Senators Griffith and Hester) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of General Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2