START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 411 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 411 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Violation of Pretrial or Posttrial Condition by Incarcerated 
Person - Victim Contact 
 
 
This bill amends § 5‐213.1 of the Criminal Procedure Article to explicitly prohibit a person, 
including an incarcerated person, from violating a condition of pretrial or posttrial release 
or other pretrial or posttrial condition that prohibits the person from contacting, harassing, 
or abusing an alleged victim or going in or near an alleged victim’s residence or place of 
employment if the person is charged with committing specified offenses. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances and operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person may not violate a condition of pretrial or posttrial release 
prohibiting the person from contacting, harassing, or abusing an alleged victim or going in 
or near an alleged victim’s residence or place of employment if the person is charged with 
committing:  (1) a violation of Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article (sexual 
crimes) against a victim who is a minor; (2) a crime of violence, as defined under § 5-101 of 
the Public Safety Article; (3) a crime against a victim who is a person eligible for relief as 
defined in § 4-501 of the Family Law Article (in regard to eligibility for a protective order); 
or (4) a violation of § 3-802 of the Criminal Law Article (stalking). 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 411/ Page 2 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment of up to 90 days. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:   Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 487 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2