START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 497 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 497 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Rural Health Collaborative Pilot Repeal and Mid Shore Health Improvement 
Coalition Funding 
 
 
This bill repeals the Rural Health Collaborative Pilot (RHCP). Beginning in fiscal 2024, 
the Governor must provide an annual appropriation in the State budget to fund the 
operations of the Mid Shore Health Improvement Coalition. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures of $150,000 annually are maintained beyond 
FY 2023 but shift from RHCP to the Mid Shore Health Improvement Coalition. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures are maintained beyond FY 2023 but shift 
from RHCP to the Mid Shore Health Improvement Coalition. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 420 of 2016, among other actions, established a workgroup on 
rural health care delivery to oversee a study of health care delivery in the mid-shore region 
and to develop a plan for meeting the health care needs of the area. The report of the 
workgroup recommended, among other things, establishing and supporting a rural health 
collaborative to oversee the development and establishment of a rural community health 
complex program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 497/ Page 2 
Rural Health Collaborative Pilot 
 
Chapter 606 of 2018 established RHCP within the mid-shore region (Caroline, Dorchester, 
Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot counties) as an independent unit within the Maryland 
Department of Health. The purposes of the collaborative are to:   
 
 
lead a regional partnership in building a rural health system that enhances access to 
and utilization of health care services designed to meet the triple aim of 
(1) providing health care; (2) alignment with the State’s Medicare waiver; and 
(3) improving population health; 
 
mediate disputes between stakeholders; 
 
assist in collaboration among health care service providers in the mid-shore region; 
 
increase the awareness among county officials and residents regarding the health 
status, health needs, and available resources in the mid-shore region; and 
 
enhance rural economic development in the mid-shore region. 
 
The collaborative must direct the establishment of rural health complexes by (1) assessing 
the needs of communities in the mid-shore region that lack access to essential 
community-based primary care, behavioral health, specialty care, or dental care services; 
(2) identifying care delivery models that have the potential to reduce deficits in care; and 
(3) convening health and hospital systems, community organizations, and local 
stakeholders to build consensus on the appropriate scale of a rural health complex. 
 
The Secretary of Health must approve a rural health complex (1) recommended by the 
collaborative; (2) that meets the standards and criteria established by the collaborative; and 
(3) if the rural health complex demonstrates that it meets established standards and criteria. 
 
The Rural Health Care Collaborative Executive Committee, consisting of specified 
individuals, must provide general direction to the collaborative and make operating 
decisions on projects approved by the collaborative. With the approval of the Secretary, 
the executive committee must appoint an executive director of the collaborative and 
determine the appropriate compensation for the executive director. The executive director 
must be the chief administrative officer of the collaborative; direct, administer, and manage 
the operations of the collaborative; and perform all duties necessary to comply with and 
carry out the collaborative. The executive director may employ staff in accordance with 
the State budget. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2019, the Governor must fully fund the operations of RHCP. 
 
The collaborative is authorized to adopt bylaws, rules, policies, and regulations; maintain 
an office; apply for and receive grants, contracts, or other funding; issue and award 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 497/ Page 3 
contracts and grants; and do all things necessary and convenient to carry out the powers 
granted to the collaborative. The collaborative may also create and consult with ad hoc 
advisory committees. RHCP issued an interim report in August 2019, and its initial 
required report in November 2020, on standards and criteria that a community must meet 
to establish a rural health complex. However, RHCP has not meet since 2020. 
 
Local Effect:  The Kent County Health Department is the current recipient of funding for 
RHCP. Since fiscal 2019, annual funding of $150,000 has been provided. It is assumed that 
this funding continues under the bill but is instead provided for the Mid Shore Health 
Improvement Coalition. 
 
Additional Comments:  While not established in statute, all jurisdictions in the State have 
a Local Health Improvement Coalition to address pressing health issues. In 2021, the 
five mid-shore counties (Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot) created 
the Mid Shore Health Improvement Coalition to share knowledge and leverage scarce 
resources within the region. The coalition is currently focused on diabetes/healthy living, 
health equity/social determinants of health, tobacco/cancer, telehealth, health literacy, and 
provider recruitment and retention. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 498 (Senators Hershey and Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline, Kent, and Queen Anne’s counties; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3