START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 444 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 444 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Prince George's County - Payment in Lieu of Taxes Agreements - Low-Income 
Housing  
PG 403-23 
 
 
This bill authorizes Prince George’s County to enter into a payment in lieu of taxes 
(PILOT) agreement with owners of specified low-income housing developments that are 
financed through the county’s Right of First Refusal Program or acquired, constructed, or 
rehabilitated for the purpose of operating rental housing for lower income persons. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
FY 2024 to the extent that certain low-income housing developments are exempt from real 
property taxes. The amount of any decrease depends on the number of low-income housing 
developments taking place in the county and the assessed value of each affected property. 
County property tax revenue decreases will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT agreements 
between the county and developers.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 248 of 2021 authorizes Prince George’s County to enter into a 
PILOT agreement with owners of specified low-income housing developments. 
Prince George’s County may exempt real property from the county real property tax if:  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 444/ Page 2 
 
the real property is owned by a person engaged in constructing or operating housing 
structures or projects; 
 
the real property is used for a housing structure or project that (1) is acquired, 
constructed, or rehabilitated under a specified federal, State, or local government 
program for lower income housing or (2) is acquired under the Right of First Refusal 
Program, as specified in the Prince George’s County Code; 
 
the owner and Prince George’s County agree to a negotiated PILOT agreement in 
place of the applicable county property tax; and 
 
the owner of the real property (1) agrees to commence or continue to maintain the 
real property as rental housing for lower income persons under the requirements of 
specified government programs and agrees to renew any annual contributions 
contract or other agreement for rental subsidy or supplement or (2) enters into an 
agreement with the county to allow the entire property or the portion of the property 
that was maintained for lower income persons to remain as housing for lower 
income persons for a term of at least five years. 
 
The real property may contain service facilities to serve its occupants and the surrounding 
neighborhood if the structure and facilities of the real property are predominantly used for 
residential purposes. 
 
Chapter 402 of 2012 authorized Prince George’s County to enter into a PILOT agreement 
for specified economic development projects located in designated focus areas. This 
authority was extended by Chapter 206 of 2020, which repealed the termination date for 
the existing authorization and broaden the authority to enable the county to enter into 
multiple PILOT agreements for different phases of an economic development project. 
 
Right of First Refusal Program and Preservation Fund 
 
The Prince George’s County Right of First Refusal Program is designed to expand the 
availability of affordable rental housing in Prince George’s County. The Right of First 
Refusal Preservation Fund provides flexible financing for the acquisition, rehabilitation, 
and stabilization of rental apartment complexes subject to the Prince George’s County 
Right of First Refusal Program authorized under the Prince George’s County Code. 
 
Prince George’s County advises that the program is funded up to a maximum of 
$1.5 million annually. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County advises that the bill expands the scope of 
the county’s authority to enter into PILOT agreements for specified low-income housing 
developments by authorizing the county to exempt properties from property taxation that 
are financed under the County’s Right of First Refusal Program. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 444/ Page 3 
The county reports that because the bill does not require the county to alter its current 
practices, the bill will not have a significant impact on county operations or finances unless 
the county opts to change its current program. 
 
To the extent that the county alters its current program, Prince George’s County 
property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2024 to the extent that certain 
low-income housing developments are exempt from real property taxes. The amount of 
any decrease depends on the number of low-income housing developments taking place in 
the county and the assessed value of each affected property. For fiscal 2023, the county 
real property tax rate is $1.374 per $100 of assessed value. Property tax revenue decreases 
will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT agreements between the county and developers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3