START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 436 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 436 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Licensing  
PG 305-23 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to 
approve the transfer of a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license to a premises located in a 
specified area of the county if there is no Class A beer, wine, and liquor license operating 
within one mile of the premises. The bill also updates provisions of law pertaining to the 
issuance of Class B-DD (Development District) 7-day beer, wine, and liquor licenses in 
the county, as specified, and establishes an annual license fee of $5,000 for a specified 
Class B-DD license with off-sale privilege. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent Class B-DD alcoholic beverages licenses are issued under the bill. 
Prince George’s County can handle any additional enforcement activity using existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful to a small business that 
obtains a transferred Class A beer, wine, and liquor license or a Class B-DD license under 
the bill. 
 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 436/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Class B-DD (Development District) Licenses 
 
The board may issue a Class B-DD (Development District) 7-day beer, wine, and liquor 
license with an off-sale privilege for each specified area located outside the 
Capital Beltway for use in one restaurant in the area if (1) the restaurant has at least 
100 permanent seats; (2) the combined area of the kitchen, bar, and dining area of the 
restaurant is greater than 3,500 square feet, as specified; (3) the restaurant is located at least 
one mile from any other Class A beer, wine, and liquor or Class B-Plus beer, wine, and 
liquor license exercising off-sale privileges; (4) the restaurant has at least $1,000,000 in 
capital investments, as specified; (5) the individual applicants holding a combined 
ownership interest of at least 75% in the restaurant have operated a restaurant in the county 
that has held an alcoholic beverages license for at least seven years before filing an 
application; (6) the restaurant is open at least five days per week and serves lunch and 
dinner at least five times per week; and (7) the restaurant does not hold an ownership 
interest in more than two restaurants with an off-sale privilege, as specified. 
 
A holder of the above Class B-DD (Development District) license with an off-sale privilege 
must maintain a designated “off-sale” beverage product area that is separate from onsite 
consumption areas. The designated area dedicated to the sale of alcoholic beverages for 
off-premises consumption must not be greater than 3,500 square feet, as specified, and 
must be contiguous to the primary restaurant. Off-sale privileges under the license 
authorize the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for off-premises consumption on 
Monday through Sunday, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
 
The bill clarifies that to be eligible for a Class B-DD license, an applicant must have 
average daily receipts from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages that exceed the 
average daily receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption 
only. 
 
The bill repeals the prohibition of the board issuing a Class B-DD license in a specified 
area where six restaurants are operating with a Class B-DD license. 
 
The bill authorizes the board to issue up to five Class B-DD licenses to restaurants located 
within the South Lake mixed-use development instead of the Karington mixed-use 
development. The bill also authorizes the board to issue up to 50 Class B-DD licenses to 
restaurants located on Central Avenue within the area from the Capital Beltway to the 
District of Columbia border. 


END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 436/ Page 3 
Current Law:  In Prince George’s County, a Class B-DD (Development District) 
7-day beer, wine, and liquor license may be issued to a restaurant in any single designated 
development district, as specified. The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, 
wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $3,025. 
 
Generally, the board may not issue a new license with an off-sale privilege or approve the 
transfer of a license with off-sale privilege into the 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 
or 47th alcoholic beverages district in the county unless the off-sale privilege of the license 
is waived or otherwise authorized, as specified. 
 
Local Revenues:  For each additional Class B-DD license that Prince George’s County 
issues under the bill, county license fee revenues increase by $3,025 or $5,000 if the license 
is a specified Class B-DD off-sale license. Prince George’s County was unable to provide 
an estimate of the number of additional Class B-DD licenses that may be issued under the 
bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3