START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 437 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 437 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Prince George's County Public Schools - Alterations to Title of Chief Executive 
Officer and Establishment of Office of Integrity and Compliance  
PG 501-23 
 
 
This bill establishes the Office of Integrity and Compliance (OIC) in the 
Prince George’s County Public School System (PGCPS). The bill specifies the functions, 
powers, and duties of the integrity and compliance officer and the procedures for 
appointment, including qualifications and the term of office. The bill also changes the name 
of the position of Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of PGCPS to the county superintendent 
and makes related conforming changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Assuming the Prince George’s County Board of Education elects to 
establish the OIC by repurposing existing auditing staff and resources, board expenditures 
increase by at least $741,000 annually beginning in FY 2024. The renaming of the school 
superintendent is procedural in nature and does not affect Prince George’s County finances. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 437/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Integrity and Compliance 
 
OIC is required to (1) assist the county council and the local school system by providing 
independent evaluation and recommendations regarding opportunities to preserve the local 
school system’s reputation and improve the effectiveness, productivity, or efficiency of 
school system programs, policies, practices, and operations; (2) ensure public 
accountability by preventing, investigating, and reporting instances of fraud, waste, and 
abuse of school system property or funds; (3) examine, evaluate, and report on the 
adequacy and effectiveness of the systems of internal controls and their related accounting, 
financial, technology, and operational policies; and (4) report noncompliance with and 
propose ways to improve employee compliance with applicable law, policy, and ethical 
standards of conduct. 
 
In developing recommendations, OIC is authorized to (1) conduct administrative 
investigations; budgetary analyses; and financial, management, or performance audits and 
similar reviews; (2) provide management advisories; and (3) utilize the assistance from any 
other government agency or private party to complete a project initiated by the office. 
 
OIC must also coordinate with the school system, taking into consideration requests from 
specified members of the community, to develop a written work plan and to establish 
periodic goals and priorities for OIC based on an assessment of relative risks. 
 
School Superintendent 
 
As part of the renaming of the county school superintendent position, the bill removes 
language specifying that the CEO has the authority to consolidate schools if considered 
practicable and arrange for the transportation of students to and from consolidated schools. 
Instead, the bill gives that authority to the Prince George’s County Board of Education. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Integrity and Compliance 
 
The functions, powers, and duties of the integrity and compliance officer established by 
the bill are similar to those of an Inspector General (IG). IGs differ from internal audit 
offices in that they are typically independent of the local school board and, therefore, have 
more authority to investigate without external pressures or influence. Generally, IGs 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 437/ Page 3 
perform financial and performance audits and investigations to improve operations and 
identify/deter fraud and waste. 
 
The Office of Internal Audit (OIA) within PGCPS reports directly to the county board of 
education. The responsibilities of the office are:   
 
 
to furnish the board of education with analysis, recommendations, advisory services, 
and information concerning school system activities; 
 
to evaluate school system control procedures for ensuring that assets are protected 
from waste, loss, and abuse; 
 
to facilitate and support any audit processes and assist external auditors to the extent 
required by the board and/or federal, State, or local authorities; and 
 
to conduct audits and investigations requested by the board and/or the chief 
executive officer of the school system, as authorized by the board. 
 
The office has a proposed fiscal 2024 budget of approximately $2.4 million with 
15 employees including a director, 3 administrative support technicians, 2 financial 
administrators, and 9 financial analysts. 
 
Several existing agencies have some level of oversight or investigative authority over 
PGCPS. As described above, PGCPS OIA performs some substantively similar functions 
to the proposed OIC. Although Prince George’s County also has a county-level Office of 
Audits and Investigations and Office of Ethics and Accountability, neither office has the 
authority to audit/investigate the school system and, therefore, neither office includes 
PGCPS within their reports. 
 
At the State level, the Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE), the Office of 
Legislative Audits (OLA), and the Blueprint Accountability and Implementation Board 
(AIB) all retain some authority to investigate or oversee PGCPS. As part of its authority to 
examine and investigate the management and affairs of county education boards, local 
school systems, public schools, and nonpublic schools that receive State funding, OIGE 
released an August 2022 report on the conduct of the Prince George’s County Board of 
Education’s Ethics Advisory Panel, and OIGE retains the authority to investigate similar 
complaints in the future. OLA maintains broad authority to investigate most agencies 
within the State, and AIB retains the authority relating to the implementation of the 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future. More generally, the State Prosecutor and the local State’s 
Attorney also retain authority to investigate any criminal activity within the school system. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 437/ Page 4 
School Superintendent 
 
The composition and authority of the Prince George’s County Board of Education have 
been affected several times in recent years due to legislation adopted by the 
General Assembly. Major legislation affecting the county board was enacted in 2002, 2008, 
2013, and 2022. 
 
Chapter 289 of 2002 eliminated the then-existing Prince George’s County Board of 
Education and established a new county board of education. The new board consisted of 
nine voting members jointly appointed by the county executive and the Governor from a 
list of nominees submitted by the State Board of Education (SBE). At least four voting 
members had to have management experience, at least three members had to possess a high 
level of knowledge concerning education, at least one member had to be a parent of a 
student in a PGCPS, and at least one member had to have knowledge or experience in the 
education of students with disabilities. In addition to the nine voting members, one student 
with limited voting privileges served on the new board. The new board members took 
office June 1, 2002, and their terms expired December 3, 2006. 
 
Chapter 289 also eliminated the existing Prince George’s County Superintendent of 
Schools position and replaced it with a CEO. The CEO acted as the executive officer, 
secretary, and treasurer of the new board and was responsible for the overall administration 
of the county public school system. The new board employed and established the salary of 
the CEO. The CEO’s contract, which could not exceed four years, provided that continued 
employment was contingent on demonstrable improvement in student performance and 
successful management of the school system. The provisions establishing the CEO and the 
CEO’s responsibilities expired on June 30, 2006. 
 
Chapter 289 also required the CEO to select and establish salaries for a chief academic 
officer (CAO), a chief financial officer (CFO), and a chief accountability officer for the 
PGCPS system. The selection of officers and establishment of officers’ salaries were 
subject to the approval of the new board. The CAO and the chief accountability officer 
positions expired on June 30, 2006, but the CFO position continued past that date. 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 289, on December 4, 2006, a newly elected board replaced the 
appointed board. The board consisted of nine elected members and one student member. 
Four were elected from the county at-large, and the remaining five were each elected from 
a different school board district. 
 
Chapters 348 and 349 of 2008 repealed the statutory position of CFO for the PGCPS system 
and established, following the 2010 general election, a board structure that eliminated the 
four at-large members and established nine school board districts. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 437/ Page 5 
Chapter 147 of 2013 altered the membership of the county board by adding four appointed 
members to the existing elected board. The county executive appoints three members with 
certain experience requirements, and the county council appoints one member who must 
be a parent of a student in the county school system. If a seat held by an elected member 
becomes vacant, the county executive must appoint a qualified individual for the remainder 
of the term, with the appointment subject to rejection by a two-thirds vote of the 
county council. Chapter 147 also enhanced the authority of the Prince George’s County 
superintendent of schools and designated the position as the CEO. Further, the legislation 
provided the county executive additional authority to select the CEO while reducing the 
authority of the county board of education. 
 
Under Chapter 147, the CEO is selected by the county executive from a list of 
three nominees recommended by a search committee and is appointed by the board after a 
contract (which determines the CEO’s compensation) is negotiated by the chair of the 
board. The search committee consists of one member of SBE appointed by the 
State Superintendent and two residents of Prince George’s County appointed by the 
Governor. 
 
The State Superintendent of Schools must approve the appointment of the CEO or give the 
reasons for disapproval to the county board and the county executive. The CEO serves for 
a four-year term beginning July 1; however, a new CEO may be appointed after 
July 1, 2013, to a four-year term ending June 30, 2017. The chapter also provides for either 
reappointment of the CEO, appointment of a new CEO, and in the case of a vacancy, 
appointment of an interim CEO. 
 
The CEO is the executive officer, secretary, and treasurer of the county board of education. 
The CEO is responsible for overall administration of the county school system and for the 
day-to-day management and oversight of the fiscal affairs of the school system. The CEO is 
also responsible for the development and implementation of curriculum and instruction and 
for hiring a chief operating officer, CFO, a CAO, a chief of staff, a board liaison, and other 
executive staff. The board of education generally may not implement a policy or take any 
action that contradicts the CEO’s day-to-day management and oversight of fiscal affairs. 
Except for specified personnel matters, the county board may only take an action contrary 
to the action of the CEO with a vote of two-thirds of all voting members. The CEO may 
consolidate schools if practicable. 
 
Prince George’s County Board of Education 
 
The Prince George’s County Board of Education currently consists of 14 members, 
including 9 members elected from the school board districts, 3 members appointed by the 
county executive, 1 member appointed by the county council, and 1 student member. 
However, Chapter 217 of 2022 alters the composition of the Prince George’s County Board 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 437/ Page 6 
of Education beginning July 1, 2024, by eliminating the four appointed positions from the 
board, leaving nine elected positions and the student member. The Appendix – Local 
Boards of Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and 
membership of the 24 local boards of education. 
 
Chapter 217 also requires the chair and vice chair of the board to be elected from among 
the members of the board beginning December 5, 2022, and requires that at the beginning 
of each term, each member must attend an orientation and be provided with materials that 
clarify the role of the member. Chapter 217 also established a Workgroup on the 
Membership and Operation of the Prince George’s County Board of Education staffed by 
PGCPS in conjunction with Bowie State University, which has since completed the final 
report required by Chapter 217.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Although not required by the bill, this estimate assumes that PGCPS 
will merge existing audit capabilities in OIA into the new OIC to reduce duplicative effort 
across the two offices. To create the new OIC by transferring existing OIA employees, 
PGCPS advises that there would be no costs associated with the transfer of existing 
employees to the new OIC. However, PGCPS also advises that the school system would 
still incur expenditures for the new integrity and compliance officer position required by 
the bill as well as two other positions related to the new responsibilities that would be 
established by the bill. The new positions would include (1) the integrity and compliance 
officer; (2) a financial administrator; and (3) a financial analyst. 
 
School system expenditures would increase by at least $741,041 beginning in fiscal 2024 
for expenses related to the new positions. This estimate includes $545,244 for salary costs 
of one Integrity and Compliance Officer, one financial administrator, and one financial 
analyst plus an estimated $195,797 (35.9% of salary costs) in fringe benefits including 
health insurance, life insurance, workers compensation, and retirement costs as shown in  
Exhibit 1. To the extent the duties of the OIC require additional staff beyond those 
transferred from the existing OIA and the three new employees included in this estimate, 
total costs to the county would increase. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 437/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Fiscal 2024 Salary Amount for Additional Positions 
 
Integrity and Compliance Officer 
$251,581 
Financial Administrator 
160,247 
Financial Analyst 
133,416 
Fringe Benefits at 35.9% of salaries 
  195,797 
Total Increase 
$741,041 
 
Source:  Prince George’s County 
 
 
To the extent PGCPS does not transfer existing OIA employees to the new OIC, total costs 
to establish the OIC could be significantly higher. In such a scenario, the new OIC would 
need to employ additional staff and expend additional resources to perform duties OIA 
employees otherwise would have performed. For context, OIA has a proposed fiscal 2024 
budget of approximately $2.4 million with 15 employees including a director, 
3 administrative support technicians, 2 financial administrators, and 9 financial analysts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7