START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 435 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 435 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prince George's County - Speed Monitoring Systems - Maryland Route 210 
(Indian Head Highway)  
PG 304-23 
 
   
This bill increases, from three to six, the number of speed monitoring systems (speed 
cameras) that Prince George’s County may use on Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head 
Highway). Under the bill, any such devices may be either mobile or stationary. The bill 
also extends the authorization for the county to use speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 
by five years, which otherwise terminates September 30, 2023. Finally, the bill alters a 
reporting requirement by requiring the State Highway Administration (SHA), in 
conjunction with the Prince George’s County Department of Public Works and 
Transportation, to report annually to the Governor and the General Assembly (beginning  
December 31, 2023) on (1) its findings and recommendations on the most effective 
solutions to address motor vehicle accidents, injuries, and fatalities on the highway and 
(2) the amount of funds distributed to SHA pursuant to current statutory requirements and 
the uses (or planned uses) of those funds. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures increase from 
FY 2024 through 2029, reflecting both the extension of the current authorization to use 
speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 and the assumed installation of additional cameras 
under the bill. Similarly, general fund revenues likely increase from FY 2024 through 2029 
due to additional contested cases in District Court. Although additional cameras may be 
installed as early as FY 2023, any effect on State revenues and expenditures that year is 
assumed to be minimal.  
  
Local Effect:  Although Prince George’s County expenditures and revenues increase from 
FY 2024 through 2029, assuming additional cameras are installed, there is no net effect on 
county finances. Pursuant to current requirements, any revenues retained by the county 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 435/ Page 2 
must be used only to cover implementation costs; any net revenues remaining after cost 
recovery must be distributed to SHA. To the extent additional cameras are installed once 
the bill takes effect, expenditures and revenues may increase as soon as FY 2023. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 806 of 2018 authorized Prince George’s County, for five years, to 
place one speed camera at the intersection of Old Fort Road and Maryland Route 210, 
subject to specified requirements. Chapter 586 of 2019 repealed the limitation on the 
specific location of that speed camera and increased, to three, the number of speed cameras 
that may be placed on Maryland Route 210 in the county until the existing authorization 
terminates September 30, 2023. Chapter 586 also required SHA to conduct an examination 
of the highway; that report was submitted in 2021. 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 147 of 2020, fines collected by Prince George’s County as a result of 
violations enforced by speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 must be remitted to SHA for 
specified activities after cost recovery. (This requirement replaced a provision of 
Chapter 806 that required the fine revenues to be deposited into the Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Fund.) 
 
SHA must solely use the fine revenues to assist in covering the costs of (1) examining the 
engineering, infrastructure, and other relevant factors that may contribute to safety issues 
on Maryland Route 210; (2) reporting its findings and recommendations on any solutions 
to these safety issues; and (3) implementing any solutions to these safety issues. 
 
State Revenues:  Because the current authorization to use speed cameras on 
Maryland Route 210 is scheduled to terminate September 30, 2023, revenues are assumed 
to be maintained through the new termination date in fiscal 2029. However, the bill also 
authorizes the placement of additional speed cameras (up to six total cameras) beginning  
June 1, 2023. Thus, the overall number of citations issued in Prince George’s County is 
expected to increase, to the extent the additional cameras are installed.  
 
Prince George’s County advises that, in fiscal 2022, approximately 9,100 citations were 
issued by speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 and subsequently satisfied with the 
county. This figure excludes any citations issued that were contested in District Court, 
voided for technical reasons, or otherwise not paid. 
 
Exhibits 1 and 2 show speed camera citation revenue data for Prince George’s County 
generally and Maryland Route 210 specifically. The amount of net revenues available after 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 435/ Page 3 
cost recovery has generally decreased each year, similar to other speed camera systems in 
the State. 
 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Revenues Collected by Prince George’s County from Speed Monitoring Systems 
Fiscal 2018-2022 
 
Fiscal Year 
Operational Systems Gross Revenues Net Revenues* Net per System 
2018 
72 
$6,894,036 
$2,817,536 
$39,132 
2019 
87 
6,050,877 
1,942,398 
22,326 
2020 
87 
4,455,368 
728,446 
8,373 
2021 
74 
4,300,086 
661,921 
8,945 
2022 
87 
3,599,308 
301,910 
3,470 
 
*Net revenues reflect amounts remaining after implementation costs.  
 
Source:  Comptroller’s Office 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Revenues Collected by Prince George’s County from Speed Monitoring Systems on 
Maryland Route 210 
Fiscal 2020-2022 
 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Revenues 
Net Revenues* 
2020 
$398,360 
$260,090 
2021 
539,000 
311,970 
2022 
385,597 
140,200 
 
*Net revenues reflect amounts remaining after implementation costs. 
  
Source:  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
District Court and General Fund 
 
Because additional cameras are likely to be installed under the bill, this analysis assumes 
that many more individuals will be issued speed camera citations on Maryland Route 210. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 435/ Page 4 
As a result, the number of individuals contesting citations in District Court also likely 
increases. If an individual is found guilty after a trial, the penalty is paid to the general 
fund, rather than the local government issuing the citation. However, the exact impact on 
general fund revenues depends on the number of guilty dispositions in court, which cannot 
be reliably determined at this time, and can only be determined with actual experience 
under the bill. 
 
Additional factors may also affect overall citation volume, such as changes in driving 
behavior as drivers become aware of new cameras established under the bill. Despite these 
factors, general fund revenues are still expected to increase – even assuming a relatively 
low conviction rate.  
 
Transportation Trust Fund 
 
As noted above, Prince George’s County is required to transfer net fine revenues 
(i.e., revenues remaining after cost recovery) from speed camera violations on  
Maryland Route 210 to SHA. Thus, under the bill, TTF revenues increase commensurately. 
Prince George’s County advises that approximately $140,200 was transferred to SHA as a 
result of paid citations in fiscal 2022. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
District Court  
 
The Judiciary advises that, despite an increase in the number of traffic court trials under 
the bill, the District Court can generally handle the increase with existing budgeted 
resources; nevertheless, the bill may have a more significant operational impact on the 
Prince George’s County District Court, depending on the portion of individuals cited who 
choose to request a trial. 
 
State Highway Administration 
 
To the extent SHA receives more revenues than under the existing revenue sharing 
requirement noted above, TTF expenditures increase for the required activities 
(e.g., implementing solutions to safety issues on Maryland Route 210). While the amount 
of available funds is assumed to increase under the bill, the exact increase cannot be 
determined at this time. However, the Department of Legislative Services notes that, based 
on the revenues received for the three existing speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 
(shown above in Exhibit 2), maintaining the authorization into fiscal 2029 and expanding 
it to allow up to six mobile or stationary cameras likely results in SHA receiving several 
hundred thousand dollars over the period covered by this fiscal and policy note. 
Accordingly, expenditures related to safety improvements are maintained and likely 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 435/ Page 5 
increase as the additional cameras are activated for five more years. SHA advises it can 
handle the ongoing reporting requirement with existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5