START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 642

Chapter 642

(House Bill 455)

AN ACT concerning

Video Lottery Terminal Proceeds – Purse Dedication Account – Ocean Downs
Race Course Operating Loss Assistance

FOR the purpose of altering the authority of the Ocean Downs Race Course to use certain
Purse Dedication Account funds generated from video lottery terminal proceeds for
operating loss assistance to support a certain minimum number of live racing days
at the racecourse; and generally relating to the use of Purse Dedication Account
funds by the Ocean Downs Race Course for operating loss assistance.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–1A–28(a) and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–1A–28(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

9–1A–28.

(a) There is a Purse Dedication Account under the authority of the State Racing
Commission.

(e) The amount of funds allocated to standardbred purses and the Standardbred
Race Fund shall be allocated as follows:

(1) 89% to standardbred purses at Rosecroft Raceway, Ocean Downs Race
Course, and the racecourse in Allegany County, allocated based on the number of live racing
days at each track location; and

(2) 11% to the Standardbred Race Fund.

(g) (1) Of the amount provided from the Purse Dedication Account under
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 642 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

subsection (e)(1) of this section:

(i) for Ocean Downs Race Course, [up to $1,200,000 each year for
calendar years 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024] AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO BUT
NOT EXCEEDING $30,000 MULTIPLIED BY THE TOTAL NUMBER OF LIVE RACING DAYS
HELD DURING THE CALENDAR YEAR may be used to provide financial assistance for
operating losses INCURRED DURING THAT CALENDAR YEAR, in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, to support a minimum of 40 annual live racing
days unless the racing licensee is prevented by weather, acts of God, or other circumstances
beyond the racing licensee’s control; and

(ii) for Rosecroft Raceway, up to $1,200,000 each year for calendar
years 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024 may be used to provide financial
assistance for operating losses, in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, to support a minimum of 40 annual live racing days unless the racing licensee
is prevented by weather, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the racing licensee’s
control.

(2) Funds received by Ocean Downs Race Course or Rosecroft Raceway
under paragraph (1) of this subsection may not be used to contribute to a campaign finance
entity under Title 13 of the Election Law Article or make an independent expenditure as
defined in § 1–101 of the Election Law Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2