START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 427 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 427 
(Delegate Cardin, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Medical Emergency - Immunity 
 
   
This bill alters provisions related to criminal immunity and sanctions for violations of 
pretrial release, probation, or parole for individuals who seek, provide, or assist with the 
provision of medical assistance for medical emergencies involving the ingestion or use of 
alcohol or drugs.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Pursuant to current law, the act of seeking, providing, or 
assisting with the provision of medical assistance for another person who is experiencing 
a medical emergency after ingesting or using alcohol or drugs may be used as a mitigating 
factor in a criminal prosecution of (1) the person who experienced the medical emergency 
or (2) any person who sought, provided, or assisted in the provision of medical assistance. 
 
A person who, in good faith, seeks, provides, or assists with the provision of medical 
assistance for a person reasonably believed to be experiencing a medical emergency after 
ingesting or using alcohol or drugs must be immune from criminal arrest, charge, or 
prosecution for specified violations if the related evidence was obtained solely as a result 
of the person’s seeking, providing, or assisting with the provision of medical assistance. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 427/ Page 2 
Currently, the same immunity applies to a person who reasonably believes that the person 
is experiencing a medical emergency after ingesting or using alcohol or drugs. The bill 
specifies that this immunity applies to a person who is experiencing a medical emergency, 
rather than a person who reasonably believes that the person is experiencing a 
medical emergency.  
 
The specified violations referenced above are §§ 5-601 (possessing or administering a 
controlled dangerous substance), 5-619 (drug paraphernalia), 5-620 (controlled paraphernalia), 
10-114 (underage possession and consumption of alcohol), 10-116 (obtaining alcohol for 
underage consumption), and 10-117 (furnishing or allowing underage consumption of alcohol) 
of the Criminal Law Article.  
 
Under current law, a person who seeks, provides, or assists with the provision of medical 
assistance in accordance with statute may not be sanctioned for a violation of a condition 
of pretrial release, probation, or parole if the evidence of the violation was obtained solely 
as a result of the person seeking, providing, or assisting with the provision of 
medical assistance. The bill extends application of this provision to a person who is 
experiencing a medical emergency after ingesting or using alcohol or drugs if the evidence 
of the violation was obtained solely as a result of the person receiving the provision of 
medical assistance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 190 of 2022; HB 212 of 2021; and HB 738 and SB 849 of 2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 546 (Senators Muse and Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore and Montgomery counties; Town of Bel Air; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2