START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 403

Chapter 403

(House Bill 440)

AN ACT concerning

Child Custody – Relocation of Child – Expedited Hearing
(Assurance of Child’s Safety Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring a court to schedule a hearing on a certain petition regarding
the proposed relocation of a child who is the subject of a custody or visitation order
on an expedited basis under certain circumstances; ~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~court~~ ~~from~~
~~considering~~ ~~a~~ ~~child’s~~ ~~time~~ ~~spent~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~party~~ ~~who~~ ~~relocated~~ ~~in~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~
~~notice~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~advantageous~~ ~~to~~ ~~that~~ ~~party~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~subsequent~~ ~~custody~~ ~~hearing;~~
and generally relating to child custody and visitation.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section ~~9–106~~ 9–106(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Family Law

9–106.

(a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, in any custody or
visitation proceeding the court may include as a condition of a custody or visitation order a
requirement that either party provide advance written notice of at least 90 days to the
court, the other party, or both, of the intent to relocate the permanent residence of the party
or the child either within or outside the State.

(2) The court may prescribe the form and content of the notice requirement.

(3) If the court orders that notice be given to the other party, a mailing of
the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the other
party shall be deemed sufficient to comply with the notice requirement.

(4) (I) If either party files a petition regarding a proposed relocation
within 20 days of the written notice of the relocation required by paragraph (1) of this
subsection, the court shall set a hearing on the petition on an expedited basis.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 403 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IF EITHER PARTY FILES A PETITION REGARDING A
PROPOSED RELOCATION OF 40 OR MORE MILES AWAY FROM THE CURRENT PRIMARY
RESIDENCE, THAT WOULD SIGNIFICANTLY INTERFERE WITH THE OTHER PARENT’S
ABILITY TO MAINTAIN THE PREDETERMINED PARENTING TIME SCHEDULE, THE
COURT SHALL SET A HEARING ON THE PETITION ON AN EXPEDITED BASIS.

~~(b)~~ ~~On~~ ~~a~~ ~~showing~~ ~~that~~ ~~notice~~ ~~would~~ ~~expose~~ ~~the~~ ~~child~~ ~~or~~ ~~either~~ ~~party~~ ~~to~~ ~~abuse~~ ~~as~~
~~defined~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~ ~~4–501~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~ ~~or~~ ~~for~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~good~~ ~~cause~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~shall~~ ~~waive~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~
~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~If~~ ~~either~~ ~~party~~ ~~is~~ ~~required~~ ~~to~~ ~~relocate~~ ~~in~~ ~~less~~ ~~than~~ ~~the~~ ~~90–day~~ ~~period~~ ~~specified~~
~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement,~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~may~~ ~~consider~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~defense~~ ~~to~~ ~~any~~ ~~action~~ ~~brought~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~
~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~that:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~relocation~~ ~~was~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~due~~ ~~to~~ ~~financial~~ ~~or~~ ~~other~~ ~~extenuating~~
~~circumstances;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~required~~ ~~notice~~ ~~was~~ ~~given~~ ~~within~~ ~~a~~ ~~reasonable~~ ~~time~~ ~~after~~ ~~learning~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~necessity~~ ~~to~~ ~~relocate.~~

(d) (1) The court may consider any violation of the notice requirement as a
~~factor~~ ~~in~~ ~~determining~~ ~~the~~ ~~merits~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~subsequent~~ ~~proceeding~~ ~~involving~~ ~~custody~~ ~~or~~
~~visitation.~~

(2) THE COURT MAY NOT CONSIDER A CHILD’S TIME SPENT WITH A
~~PARTY~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~RELOCATED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~ADVANTAGEOUS~~ ~~TO~~
THAT PARTY IN A SUBSEQUENT CUSTODY HEARING.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2