START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 373

Chapter 373

(House Bill 420)

AN ACT concerning

Health Services Cost Review Commission – Hospital Rates – All–Payer Model
Contract

FOR the purpose of requiring that the Health Services Cost Review Commission exercise
its authority to consider certain standards when determining the reasonableness of
certain rates in a manner that is consistent with the all–payer model contract; and
generally relating to the Health Services Cost Review Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–219
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–219.

(a) The Commission may review the costs, and rates, quality, and efficiency of
facility services, and make any investigation that the Commission considers necessary to
assure each purchaser of health care facility services that:

(1) The total costs of all hospital services offered by or through a facility
are reasonable;

(2) The aggregate rates of the facility are related reasonably to the
aggregate costs of the facility; and

(3) The rates are set equitably among all purchasers or classes of
purchasers without undue discrimination or preference.

(b) (1) To carry out its powers under subsection (a) of this section, the
Commission may review and approve or disapprove the reasonableness of any rate or
amount of revenue that a facility sets or requests.

(2) A facility shall:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 373 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) Charge for services only at a rate set in accordance with this
subtitle; and

(ii) Comply with the applicable terms and conditions of the all–payer
model contract.

(3) [In] CONSISTENT WITH THE ALL–PAYER MODEL CONTRACT, IN
determining the reasonableness of rates, the Commission may take into account objective
standards of efficiency and effectiveness.

(c) Consistent with the all–payer model contract, and notwithstanding any other
provision of this subtitle, the Commission may:

(1) Establish hospital rate levels and rate increases in the aggregate or on
a hospital–specific basis;

(2) Promote and approve alternative methods of rate determination and
payment of an experimental nature for the duration of the all–payer model contract; and

(3) On request of the Secretary, assist in the implementation of federally
approved model programs.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2