START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 287

Chapter 287

(House Bill 418)

AN ACT concerning

Mental Health – Workforce Development – Fund Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund as a
special, nonlapsing fund; requiring that the interest earnings of the Fund be credited
to the Fund; requiring the Maryland Health Care Commission to conduct a
comprehensive behavioral health workforce needs assessment on or before a certain
date; and generally relating to the Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 10–1601 through 10–1603 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 16.
Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 16. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH WORKFORCE INVESTMENT FUND.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 287 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

10–1601.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “FUND” MEANS THE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH WORKFORCE
INVESTMENT FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–1602 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

10–1602.

(A) THERE IS A BEHAVIORAL HEALTH WORKFORCE INVESTMENT FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE REIMBURSEMENT FOR
COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH EDUCATING, TRAINING, CERTIFYING, RECRUITING,
PLACING, AND RETAINING BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS AND
PARAPROFESSIONALS.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND SHALL CONSIST OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR CARRYING OUT THE PURPOSE OF
THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(H) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 287

(I) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR CARRYING OUT THE PURPOSE
OF THE FUND IS SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF
FUNDING THAT OTHERWISE WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR CARRYING OUT THE
PURPOSE OF THE FUND.

(J) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, NO PART OF THE
FUND MAY REVERT OR BE CREDITED TO:

(1) THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE; OR

(2) ANY OTHER SPECIAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(K) THE FUND IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE
AUDITS AS PROVIDED IN § 2–1220 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

10–1603.

ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE,
THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE
APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THAT INCLUDES:

(1) FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR, THE AMOUNT
OF FUNDS TRANSFERRED AND DISTRIBUTED FROM THE FUND IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 10–1602 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR, THE NUMBER
OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS AND PARAPROFESSIONALS EDUCATED,
TRAINED, RECRUITED, CERTIFIED, PLACED, OR RETAINED WITH MONEY FROM THE
FUND, AGGREGATED BY:

(I) THE TYPE OF PROFESSIONAL OR PARAPROFESSIONAL;

(II) GEOGRAPHIC REGION;

(III) RACE; AND

(IV) ETHNICITY;

(3) THE AMOUNT OF ANY UNSPENT FUNDS IN THE FUND AT THE END
OF THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 287 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) IF UNSPENT FUNDS ARE IDENTIFIED UNDER ITEM (3) OF THIS
SECTION, THE REASONS WHY THE FUNDS WERE NOT SPENT.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH WORKFORCE
INVESTMENT FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) On or before ~~December~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2023~~ October 1, 2024, the Maryland Health Care
Commission, in coordination with the Behavioral Health Administration, the Maryland
Higher Education Commission, the Maryland Department of Labor, the Career and
Technical Education Committee, and other interested stakeholders, shall conduct a
comprehensive behavioral health workforce needs assessment.

(b) The assessment shall:

(1) determine the immediate, intermediate, and long–term unmet need
and capacity of the behavioral health workforce in the State, including demographics and
gaps in specific professionals and paraprofessionals, accounting for retirements and other
turnover;

(2) calculate the total number of additional behavioral health professionals
and paraprofessionals needed over the next 5 years, 10 years, and 20 years;

(3) make findings and recommendations regarding the types of training,
education, and tuition assistance programs necessary to certify, recruit, place, supervise,
and retain the additional behavioral health professionals and paraprofessionals identified
in item (2) of this subsection; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 287

(4) recommend an initial allocation to the Behavioral Health Workforce
Investment Fund established under § 10–1602 of the Health – General Article, as enacted
by Section 1 of this Act, and identify specifically which programs the allocation will support
and the number of professionals and paraprofessionals the allocation will train, certify,
recruit, and place.

(c) On or before ~~December~~ ~~15,~~ ~~2023~~ October 15, 2024, the Maryland Health Care
Commission shall submit the assessment to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee,
the Senate Finance Committee, the House Appropriations Committee, and the House
Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5