START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 470 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 470 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Fire-Fighting Training - Oriented Strand Board - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from setting oriented strand board on fire or burning oriented 
strand board for fire-fighting training purposes. “Oriented strand board” is a multilayered 
board that is (1) made from strands of wood, together with a binder, by the application of 
heat and pressure, with the strands in the external layer primarily oriented along the 
strength axis of the panel, as specified, and (2) intended to be used as a covering material 
for roofs, subfloors, and walls when fastened to supports. A person who violates the bill’s 
prohibition is subject to an administrative penalty of up to $500 for a first violation and a 
civil penalty of up to $1,000 for a second or subsequent violation. The bill does not apply 
to the manufacture, sale, use, or distribution of products or materials that contain oriented 
strand board for purposes outside of fire-fighting training purposes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $57,100 in FY 2024; future years 
reflect annualization, inflation, and termination of contractual staff at the end of FY 2026. 
Potential minimal increase in State expenditures (all/multiple funds) to purchase alternative 
products and/or dispose of noncompliant oriented strand board (not reflected below). The 
bill’s penalty provisions are not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
57,100 
54,800 
55,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($57,100) 
($54,800) 
($55,000) 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in local expenditures to purchase alternative products 
and/or dispose of noncompliant oriented strand board. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 470/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law is silent with regard to oriented strand board. 
 
The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR 26.11.07) restricts a person from causing or 
permitting an open fire. 
According to the Maryland 
Department 
of the 
Environment (MDE), these regulations are part of the State Implementation Plan to achieve 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards and are federally enforceable. Public officers (the 
State Fire Marshal or designated local fire marshal or other fire official) are authorized to 
set an open fire and give permission to set an open fire (with the concurrence of the control 
officer, which is a local environmental health agency or MDE) if (1) all reasonable means 
are employed to minimize smoke and (2) the fire is necessary for one of several reasons or 
purposes, which includes for the instruction of public fire fighters or industrial employees 
under the supervision of the appropriate fire control officer. 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 138 and 139 of 2022, a person is generally prohibited, beginning 
January 1, 2024, from using, manufacturing, knowingly selling, offering for sale, or 
distributing for sale or use Class B fire-fighting foam that contains intentionally added 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) chemicals in the State. However, a person may 
use, manufacture, sell, offer for sale, or distribute for sale or use Class B fire-fighting foam 
that contains intentionally added PFAS chemicals in the State under specified, limited 
circumstances. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment Administrative Costs 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $57,050 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual 
environmental compliance specialist to (1) conduct outreach to local environmental health 
agencies, fire stations, and any other affected individuals to inform affected entities about 
the bill’s prohibition; (2) investigate any complaints; and (3) engage in any related 
enforcement actions. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including 
outreach), and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, there are 263 registered 
fire departments in Maryland, and this does not include several hundred fire stations 
associated with those fire departments; and 
 
MDE is not generally aware of planned fire-fighting training actions and needs to 
conduct outreach to inform the regulated community about the bill’s prohibitions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 470/ Page 3 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$39,761 
Outreach Costs 
10,105 
Other Operating Expenses 
    7,184 
Total FY 2024 MDE Administrative Costs 
$57,050 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) termination of the 
contractual employee after approximately two and a half years (at the end of fiscal 2026). 
This estimate assumes that as affected entities become aware of the bill’s prohibition and 
come into compliance, MDE can handle ongoing enforcement and implementation with 
existing staff. 
 
Potential Impact on State Agencies That Use Affected Oriented Strand Board for 
Fire-fighting Training Purposes 
 
To the extent that any State agencies must dispose of existing stock of oriented strand board 
and purchase alternative products for fire-fighting training purposes, State expenditures 
may increase minimally. However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) is not 
aware of any State agencies that use affected oriented strand board for fire-fighting training 
purposes. State agencies contacted for information, including the Department of State 
Police, the Maryland Aviation Administration, and the Maryland Forest Service, advise 
that they do not use oriented strand board for fire-fighting training purposes. Accordingly, 
any effect is speculative. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the State impact described above, to the extent that local 
governments must purchase alternative products for fire-fighting training purposes and 
potentially dispose of existing stock of oriented strand board, local expenditures may 
increase. For reference, Prince George’s County estimates that costs increase by 
approximately $15,000 each year to purchase alternative materials for fire-fighting training 
purpose. DLS does not know the extent to which other local jurisdictions use oriented 
strand board for fire-fighting training purposes. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Similar to the potential effects on government agencies described 
above, to the extent that a small business conducts fire-fighting training events and must 
purchase alternative products for fire-fighting training purposes, and potentially dispose of 
existing stock of oriented strand board, costs may increase. The bill may also result in a 
decrease in the demand for oriented strand board that meets the bill’s definition, which may 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 470/ Page 4 
affect small businesses that sell and/or manufacture affected oriented strand board. The 
overall impact on small businesses is unknown. 
 
Additional Comments:  A similar bill was passed by the General Assembly of Virginia 
and approved by the Governor on March 18, 2021. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last three years. See 
HB 1381 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 256 (Senator Hester, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4