START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 406 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 406 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Hunting - Snares, Traps, and Other Similar Devices - Identification Requirement 
 
   
This bill requires a person who is otherwise exempt from licensing or permitting 
requirements under Title 10 of the Natural Resources Article (Wildlife), before using a 
snare, trap, or another similar device to capture wildlife, to obtain a free Department of 
Natural Resources (DNR) identification number from DNR’s electronic licensing system. 
Further, a person who uses a snare, trap, or other similar device to capture wildlife must 
ensure that the person’s identification number is stamped on the device or on a metal tab 
affixed to the device. DNR may waive the identification number requirement if the device 
is only used on private property owned or rented by the person placing the device. Finally, 
a person who finds a snare, trap, or another similar device that does not meet the bill’s 
identification requirements may report the device to DNR or the Natural Resources Police 
(NRP) Force. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
DNR can issue any additional identification numbers using its existing online COMPASS 
licensing system with existing budgeted resources. The application of existing penalties to 
violations of the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local governments.       
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 406/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:       
 
General Hunting Restrictions Related to Hunting Fur-bearing Mammals  
 
A furbearer means any coyote, raccoon, bobcat, opossum, beaver, mink, muskrat, otter, 
fox, skunk, fisher, and long-tailed weasel. With certain exceptions, a Maryland resident or 
nonresident must have a furbearer permit to hunt, chase, or trap any furbearer in the State 
or participate in the unarmed chasing of foxes and raccoons in the State. Generally, any 
person who traps or attempts to trap furbearers in the State under the authority of a furbearer 
permit must first obtain a certificate of trapper education. 
 
An individual furbearer permit enables the purchaser to hunt, chase, or trap any furbearer 
in the State or participate in the unarmed chasing of foxes and raccoons. An individual 
furbearer permit is valid from the date of issuance through July 31 the following year, and 
the annual fee is $5.00. Nonresidents must also obtain a nonresident trapping license to 
trap furbearers in Maryland. The fee for a nonresident trapping license is the higher of 
$25.50 or the fee charged by the nonresident’s home state for a similar license. 
 
A furbearer permit is not required to hunt or trap a furbearing animal if (1) a person 
possesses a valid wildlife control cooperator permit and is engaging in the control of 
furbearing mammals in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit; (2) a 
landowner possesses a landowner wildlife damage control permit; (3) a landowner is 
destroying a muskrat that is damaging an embankment or impoundment; (4) a landowner 
is hunting or trapping a coyote, fox, or skunk that is damaging or destroying the personal 
or real property of the landowner on their land; (5) an owner of a marsh or the owner’s 
employees are hunting a raccoon that destroys a muskrat or its home in a marsh area of the 
State; or (6) a landowner or the landowner’s agent is setting or using traps or similar devices 
at any time to trap raccoons or opossums that are damaging property. A furbearer permit 
is also not required for a person hunting under an apprentice hunting license. 
 
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Traps Near Residences  
 
A person, while trapping or attempting to trap animals, may not place, set, maintain, or 
operate any snares, body-gripping, or leghold traps within 150 yards of a permanent human 
residence. However, this restriction does not apply to (1) State and federal wetlands;  
(2) private wetlands as designated by DNR; (3) land that qualifies for agricultural 
assessments, and timberlands and lands used for reforestation; (4) except in Harford and 
Howard counties, owners and lessees of any privately owned land; and (5) owners and 
lessees of any privately owned land in Harford and Howard counties as long as the trap is 
not within 150 yards of the permanent residence of another person. The restrictions 
regarding placing certain traps near residences do not apply to the use of (1) body-gripping 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 406/ Page 3 
traps with a jaw spread of less than six inches that are placed, maintained, and operated 
completely in submerged water or (2) snap-type traps used to catch rats and mice.  
 
Relevant Penalties  
 
Under current law, a person who violates any provision of Title 10 of the Natural Resources 
Article (Wildlife) is guilty of a misdemeanor. Various penalties apply for first and 
subsequent offenses. Fines collected for such violations are credited to the State Wildlife 
Management and Protection Fund. Additionally, an NRP officer, or any law enforcement 
officer who arrests a person for violating Title 10 of the Natural Resources Article may 
seize every bird, mammal, reptile, and amphibian unlawfully caught, sold, offered for sale, 
transported, or possessed. DNR may dispose of any seized species of wildlife at the 
department’s discretion. In addition, an NRP officer or any law enforcement officer, upon 
arresting any person for violating Title 10 of the Natural Resources Article, may seize any 
device, equipment, conveyance, or property unlawfully used and, upon conviction, may be 
forfeited, as specified.  
 
COMPASS Licensing System 
 
DNR’s COMPASS online licensing and registration system was designed so that an 
individual can access or create a personal DNR licensing account via the Internet, 
telephone, or U.S. mail or by visiting a DNR service center. Individuals may also establish 
an account at various sports license agent locations in retail stores throughout the State. 
Once an individual creates an account, the individual is issued a DNR identification card 
that contains a unique identification number to use for future licensing purchases.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 275 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 406/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4