START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 480 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 480 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Veterans Affairs - Burial in State Veterans' Cemeteries - Spouses 
and Dependents 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) to bury the 
“eligible spouse” or “eligible dependent” (including a child or parent) of a veteran in a 
State veterans cemetery without charge. MDVA must provide a grave liner at no cost for 
the veteran or eligible spouse or dependent. An “eligible spouse” or “eligible dependent” 
must meet requirements established under federal regulations regarding eligibility for 
burial in a national veterans’ cemetery. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDVA special fund revenues decrease, likely by a significant amount, 
beginning in FY 2024 from the requirement to bury an eligible spouse or dependent without 
charge and to provide a grave liner at no cost. General fund expenditures increase 
accordingly to maintain the MDVA Cemetery Program, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDVA is authorized to establish one or more cemeteries in the State for 
the burial of veterans and their eligible spouse or dependents as authorized by the Secretary 
of Veterans Affairs. MDVA’s Cemetery Program operates and maintains five veterans’ 
cemeteries to provide for their internment.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 480/ Page 2 
To qualify for a plot in the State veterans’ cemetery, the applicant must be a veteran who 
meets the requirements for burial at a national veterans’ cemetery or an eligible spouse or 
dependent of a veteran who meets specified requirements. In addition, if the applicant is a 
veteran, the veteran must also have been a resident of the State (1) when the veteran entered 
the U.S. Armed Forces; (2) when the veteran died; or (3) for two years, unless, for a reason 
that MDVA finds compelling, MDVA waives the time period. In a plot that is allotted to a 
veteran, MDVA must bury the veteran and any member of the immediate member who is 
an eligible spouse or dependent of the veteran if the family member can be buried in a 
space above or below the veteran or in the next available plot.  
 
MDVA must bury the veteran without charge. For the burial of a member of the immediate 
family who is an eligible spouse or dependent, MDVA may set a fee that does not exceed 
the cost of burial. For an eligible spouse or dependent, the grave liner must be paid for by 
the family or estate. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  An eligible veteran receives a burial plot, grave liner, headstone, and 
internment services at no expense. Effective November 2022, the burial cost for a veteran’s 
spouse or dependent is $893 (inclusive of casketed and cremated interments and liner 
costs). MDVA advises that, in fiscal 2022, the department provided interment services for 
1,388 spouses and dependents. Fees collected for the interment of veterans’ spouses and 
dependents maintains the Cemetery Program. As special fee revenues are collected at an 
amount to cover expenditures, there is no special fund balance. Any loss of fee revenue 
will result in an increase in general fund expenditures to ensure the viability of the program. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, if the number of interments for veterans’ spouses and 
dependents remains constant (1,388), special fund revenues decrease by $1.24 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2024. General fund expenditures increase accordingly to offset 
the decrease in special fund revenues otherwise used for the Cemetery Program. To the 
extent that the number of interments of veterans’ spouses and dependents is less than 
1,388 annually, the impact is reduced. Conversely, to the extent that a greater number of 
veterans’ spouses and dependents seek burial in a State veterans’ cemetery under the bill, 
the resulting revenue loss (and the amount of general funds required to backfill funding for 
the Cemetery Program) increases.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1251 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 286 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 480/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3