START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 477 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 477 
(Delegates Kelly and Smith) 
Appropriations and Health and 
Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Senior Higher Education Institutions - Reproductive Health Services 
Plans - Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a “public senior higher education institution,” in consultation with 
students, to develop and implement a reproductive health services plan, as specified, to 
provide at the institution or to refer students to a comprehensive range of reproductive 
health services. Plans must be developed by August 1, 2024, and updated annually. The 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), on request, must provide assistance to a public 
senior higher education institution in developing a reproductive health services plan. In 
lieu of developing and implementing a plan, the University of Baltimore must provide 
students with access to over-the-counter (OTC) contraception through on-campus retail 
establishments or vending machines. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Some institutions can develop and implement a reproductive health services 
plan using existing budgeted resources; however, higher education expenditures for other 
institutions increase, particularly in FY 2024, as discussed below. To the extent that higher 
education expenditures increase, higher education revenues may increase due to fees 
charged to offset costs. MDH can likely provide assistance using existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 477/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Public senior higher education institution” means (1) the constituent 
institutions of the University System of Maryland (USM); (2) Morgan State University 
(MSU); and (3) St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM). “Public senior higher education 
institution” does not include the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Studies 
or the University of Maryland Global Campus. 
 
Each plan must include the provision of or referral to off-campus services for obtaining 
(1) all methods of federal Food and Drug Administration-approved contraception, 
including prescription emergency contraception; (2) prevention and treatment services for 
sexually transmitted infections, including HIV prevention; and (3) abortion care services. 
 
Each plan must also include:   
 
 
24-hour access to OTC contraception through the student health center, retail 
establishments on campus, or vending machines; 
 
the availability of evidence-based reproductive health education services provided 
by the student health center, peer educators, or other health education programs; and 
 
development of a referral network of off-campus reproductive health services 
providers, including pharmacies, located within a reasonable proximity to the 
campus. 
 
Current Law:  Under § 10-101 of the Education Article, “public senior higher education 
institution” means (1) the constituent institutions of USM and the University of Maryland 
Center for Environmental Science; (2) MSU; and (3) SMCM. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As the bill largely codifies currently available reproductive health 
services at some USM institutions, MSU, and SMCM, it is assumed that many institutions 
can develop and, for the most part, implement the required reproductive health services 
plans using existing budgeted resources. For example, Towson University (TU) advises it 
currently has on-campus locations where students can purchase reproductive health 
products, including OTC emergency contraception. Further, TU Auxiliary Services already 
has plans to acquire and place up to five vending machines across the campus to stock 
reproductive health products. 
 
However, higher education expenditures for some institutions increase, depending on the 
contents of their plan. Certain requirements for institutions could have material impacts, 
particularly one-time set-up costs in fiscal 2024. For example, some institutions may 
choose to purchase vending machines. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 477/ Page 3 
To the extent that higher education expenditures increase, it is assumed that higher 
education revenues from fees charged students increase accordingly. Any such increase is 
generally assumed to be minimal. 
 
This estimate assumes that the USM regional higher education centers (RHECs), which are 
not residential and do not provide 24-hour coverage, are not included in the definition of 
USM constituent institutions. The USM RHECs are the Universities at Shady Grove, the 
USM at Hagerstown, and the USM at Southern Maryland. 
 
MDH advises that a part-time (50%) contractual physician clinical specialist is required to 
provide assistance to institutions in developing their plans. However, the Department of 
Legislative Services advises that, as the bill generally codifies existing practices, extensive 
consultation by MDH is likely not required and minimal consultation can be handled with 
existing budgeted resources. To the extent that extensive consultation services are required, 
MDH general fund expenditures increase. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 341 (Senator Feldman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) – March 27, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3