START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 458 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 458 
(Delegate J. Lewis, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Public School Construction - Programs, Approvals, and Administration - 
Alterations 
 
This bill makes the Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) an independent 
unit of State government. It also repeals the School Safety Grant Program (SSGP) and the 
Aging Schools Program (ASP) beginning in fiscal 2027. Beginning in fiscal 2025, payment 
from the Education Trust Fund (ETF) increases, from $25.0 million to $27.0 million, to 
support a public-private partnership (P3) entered into by the Prince George’s County Board 
to construct public schools; the bill makes clarifying and conforming changes related to 
that funding. Local school systems must conduct life-cycle assessments of building 
systems for school construction projects, as specified. The bill raises cost thresholds for 
specified actions related to school construction that must be approved by the State 
Superintendent and makes other technical and procedural changes related to the approval 
and funding of school construction projects in the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $123,300 in FY 2024 for staffing. 
Out-year expenditures reflect inflation and termination of one-time costs. Expenditures for 
ASP and SSGP are assumed to be redirected to the Nancy K. Kopp Public School Facilities 
Priority Fund beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below and, therefore, repeal has no net 
effect on State finances. Beginning in FY 2025, $2.0 million from ETF is redirected to 
support the Prince George’s County P3 agreement instead of other education-related 
expenditures authorized for the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future; general funds are 
assumed to be needed to backfill lost revenues from ETF for public education. This bill 
increases a mandated distribution beginning in FY 2025 and repeals a mandated 
appropriation in FY 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$16,109,000 
$16,109,000 
GF Expenditure 
$123,300 
$2,113,600 
$2,118,600 
$2,123,800 
$2,130,300 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$16,109,000 
$16,109,000 
Net Effect 
($123,300) 
($2,113,600) 
($2,118,600) 
($2,123,800) 
($2,130,300) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 458/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Revenues for Prince George’s County Public Schools to support a P3 
agreement to construct public schools increase by $2.0 million annually, beginning in 
FY 2025. Local school systems can generally conduct the required life-cycle assessments 
with existing resources, but expenditures may increase minimally for smaller school 
systems. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The State Superintendent, or the Superintendent’s designee, must approve 
or disapprove (1) each plan or specification for the remodeling of a school building if the 
remodeling costs more than $1.0 million (up from $350,000) and (2) a change order that 
costs more than $50,000 (up from $25,000) for the remodeling, restoration, or construction 
of a school building. The bill authorizes the State Superintendent’s designee (in addition 
to the Superintendent) to approve various school construction activities in current law, 
including contracts for school construction projects. 
 
The bill allows appointed members of IAC to be removed by their appointing authorities 
for incompetence, misconduct, or failure to perform their duties. 
 
The bill includes a technical correction that clarifies that the Board of Public Works does 
not approve grants awarded by IAC. 
 
Built to Learn Act and Prince George’s County Public-private Partnership 
 
With respect to the Built to Learn Program, the bill increases, from $125.0 million to 
$127.0 million, the amount transferred from ETF to the Supplemental Public School 
Construction Financing Fund (Financing Fund) managed by the Maryland Stadium 
Authority (MSA), beginning in fiscal 2025. In turn, it increases, from $25.0 million to 
$27.0 million, the amount that MSA must transfer annually from the Financing Fund to the 
Prince George’s County P3 Fund, also beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Accordingly, the bill repeals a provision limiting total payments to Prince George’s County 
for a P3 to the maximum total amount allocated to any other county under the Built to 
Learn Act (as the increased payments cause it to exceed that amount). It further specifies 
that P3s for the construction of public schools in Prince George’s County that are eligible 
for State funding are (1) between the Prince George’s County Board of Education and a 
private entity and (2) for a minimum of eight schools, instead of six schools, including 
one that must be replaced because of faulty steel. The bill also clarifies procedures for State 
funds that are authorized to be paid to be transferred to the Prince George’s County Board 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 458/ Page 3 
of Education, and it specifies that State funds are for any payment under a P3 agreement 
(instead of just for availability payments). 
 
Life-cycle Assessments 
 
The bill repeals a requirement that IAC evaluate, by October 1, 2023, the life-cycle costs 
of public school buildings and their major mechanical systems over a 50-year period. 
 
During the design development phase of a public school construction project or a major 
renovation of a public school, a local school board must complete an evaluation of:   
 
 
the cost and efficiency, based on a 50-year period, of using available alternative 
energy systems (including geothermal, solar, wind, and energy storage) compared 
to traditional energy systems; 
 
an energy consumption and systems replacement, based on a 50-year period, of each 
major piece of equipment in specified systems; and 
 
the impact of innovative building designs and materials on energy consumption, 
including white roofs and green roofs. 
 
If a local school board determines that no alternative energy systems are appropriate for a 
project, it must submit a report to IAC that explains why the alternative energy systems are 
not appropriate. By December 31 of each year, IAC must report to the General Assembly 
on the number of projects in each jurisdiction that use alternative energy systems. 
 
Current Law:  IAC is an independent commission that functions within the Maryland 
State Department of Education (MSDE). It has nine members, including three ex officio 
members and six public members, with two each appointed by the Governor, the Speaker 
of the House, and the President of the Senate. There are no provisions for the removal of 
appointed IAC members. 
 
The State Superintendent must approve or disapprove (1) each plan or specification for the 
remodeling of a school building if the remodeling costs more than $350,000 and 
(2) a change order that costs more than $25,000 for the remodeling, restoration, or 
construction of a school building. 
 
Aging Schools Program and School Safety Grant Program 
 
Eligible ASP expenditures include asbestos and lead paint abatement; upgrade of fire 
protection systems and equipment; painting; plumbing; roofing; upgrade of heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning systems; site redevelopment; wiring schools for 
technology; and renovation projects related to education programs and services. Projects 
must cost at least $10,000 to be funded through the program. MSDE and IAC review 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 458/ Page 4 
ASP requests submitted by local school systems, approve eligible projects, and determine 
if additional review of any construction documents will be required. Chapter 20 of 2020 
(the Built to Learn Act) inadvertently repealed funding allocations for the program, but 
program allocations remained in the fiscal 2022 and 2023 capital budget absent the 
authorization; the funding allocations were restored by Chapter 32 of 2022. 
 
Chapter 14 of 2018 created SSGP to provide grants to local school systems for security 
improvements, including:   
 
 
secure and lockable doors for every classroom; 
 
an area of safe refuge in every classroom; and 
 
surveillance and other security technology for school monitoring purposes. 
 
The Governor is required to include $10.0 million in the annual operating or capital budget 
that may be used only to make grant awards. As with ASP, Chapter 20 inadvertently 
repealed authorization for the program and the mandated appropriation, but full funding 
was nevertheless included in the fiscal 2023 budget as enacted. Authorization for the 
program and the mandated appropriation were restored by Chapter 32. 
 
Chapter 20 expressed legislative intent that funding for ASP and SSGP be consolidated 
into the Public School Facilities Priority Fund (since renamed in honor of former Treasurer 
Nancy K. Kopp) beginning in fiscal 2027. By repealing the two programs beginning in 
fiscal 2027, the bill facilitates the implementation of the legislative intent expressed in 
Chapter 20. 
 
Education Trust Fund 
 
ETF is funded primarily from the proceeds of video lottery terminals and gaming. 
Beginning in fiscal 2023, the Governor’s annual budget submission must include 100% of 
ETF funds as supplemental funding for public education. Supplemental funding is defined 
as funding that:   
 
 
ensures access to public education that allows students to compete in the global 
economy of the future; 
 
provides high-quality early childhood education programs; 
 
provides opportunities for public school students to participate in career and 
technical education programs that lead to an identified job skill or certificate; 
 
allows students to obtain college credit and degrees while in high school at no cost 
to the students; 
 
supports the advancement and professionalization of public educators; and 
 
maintains, renovates, or constructs public schools (emphasis added). 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 458/ Page 5 
Built to Learn Act and Prince George’s County Public-private Partnership 
 
The Built to Learn Act (Chapter 20 of 2020) authorizes MSA to issue up to $2.2 billion in 
revenue bonds, backed by annual payments from ETF to the Supplemental Public School 
Construction Financing Fund (Financing Fund) that began in fiscal 2022, for public school 
construction projects in the State, including to support a possible P3 agreement for  
Prince George’s County. Annual disbursements for debt service from ETF continue until 
the 30-year MSA bonds are no longer outstanding. Beginning in fiscal 2024, total debt 
service for all bond issuances may not exceed $125.0 million annually thereafter; debt 
service may not exceed $100.0 million annually if Prince George’s County enters into a P3 
agreement. 
 
The Built to Learn Act defined a P3 agreement as one in which a county government and 
county board of education contract with a private entity for the acquisition, design, 
construction, improvement, renovation, expansion, equipping, or financing of a public 
school. It may include provisions for the operation and maintenance of a school, for 
cooperative use of a school or an adjacent property, and for the generation of revenue to 
offset the cost of construction or use of the school. 
 
If Prince George’s County enters into a specified P3 agreement by July 1, 2024, MSA must 
deposit $25.0 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2024 and not after 2053, from the 
Financing Fund into the Prince George’s County P3 Fund. Before Prince George’s County 
enters into a P3 agreement that is financed in part with State funds for an availability 
payment, it must be reviewed by MSA and approved by IAC. However, in order for 
Prince George’s County to receive these annual payments, the P3 agreement must include:   
 
 
a minimum of six schools that will be improved, constructed, or renovated and 
operated and maintained under the P3 agreement; and 
 
a commitment by the Prince George’s County Government and the 
Prince George’s County School Board to provide the local share of the availability 
payment. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Interagency Commission on School Construction Staff 
 
IAC advises that becoming an independent agency involves an increase in operational roles 
formerly carried out by MSDE, including human resource and financial operations. By 
reorganizing existing personnel and positions and also working with other agencies for 
information technology and procurement support, IAC can absorb most of the additional 
responsibilities with existing staff. The one exception is human resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 458/ Page 6 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $123,256 in fiscal 2024, which assumes 
that new human resources staff is needed and hired on the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date. 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one human resources administrator to absorb 
personnel-related tasks currently carried out by MSDE. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$115,582 
Operating Expenses 
      7,674 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$123,256 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Repealing the requirement that IAC evaluate the life-cycle costs of public school buildings 
by October 1, 2023, creates administrative efficiencies for IAC; it is assumed that staffing 
resources that would have been devoted to that evaluation are instead directed to other 
ongoing IAC responsibilities. 
 
Terminated Programs 
 
With the termination of ASP and SSGP, State expenditures could decrease by $10.0 million 
in general funds (for SSGP) and $6.1 million in general obligation bond funds (for ASP) 
beginning in fiscal 2027. However, this analysis assumes that those funds are instead 
redirected to the Nancy K. Kopp Public School Facilities Priority Fund and used to fund 
high-priority school construction projects, consistent with the legislative intent expressed 
in Chapter 20. Therefore, there is no net effect on State finances. 
 
Education Trust Fund and Prince George’s County Public-private Partnership 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2025, the bill increases the contribution from ETF to the Financing 
Fund by $2.0 million, and in turn requires MSA to increase the payment from the Financing 
Fund to the Prince George’s County P3 Fund by $2.0 million annually. Currently, 100% 
of ETF funds must be used for supplemental funding for public education, including school 
construction. However, any funds not currently used for debt service or availability 
payments under the Built to Learn Act are dedicated to the implementation of the Blueprint 
for Maryland’s Future. Therefore, increasing funding for school construction (and 
specifically to support Prince George’s County’s P3 agreement) reduces available funds 
for the Blueprint, which must be backfilled with general funds. Accordingly, general fund 
expenditures increase by $2.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 458/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 360 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public School Construction Program; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7