START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 448 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 448 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Nonpublic Education - Placements of Children With Disabilities - Teacher 
Salaries (Teacher Pay Parity Act) 
 
   
This bill requires a nonpublic school in which a child receiving special education services 
is placed to provide its teachers a salary that is equivalent to the local school salaries, 
phased in over three years beginning in fiscal 2024. The additional funding is to be paid 
for by the State and county governments in the same proportion as other costs paid for 
nonpublic placements. Funding provided by county governments under the bill is in 
addition to required local effort under current law and is also excluded from calculations 
of local effort and local effort relief, Guaranteed Tax Base (GTB) State aid, and Education 
Effort Index State aid. Funding for other components of special education placements may 
not be reduced to provide the required teacher salaries. The Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE) must adopt regulations related to nonpublic placements. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $3.5 million in FY 2024 and increase 
annually, reaching $11.4 million in FY 2028 due to the State share of required nonpublic 
school teacher salary increases under the bill. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $3.0 million for this purpose. This bill increases a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2025.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
3.5 
7.2 
10.9 
11.2 
11.4 
Net Effect 
($3.5) 
($7.2) 
($10.9) 
($11.2) 
($11.4)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 448/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  County government expenditures increase by $5.0 million in FY 2024 and 
by $16.3 million in FY 2028 due to the local share of increased salary costs under the bill. 
This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Nonpublic Placement Costs 
 
The State and local school systems share in the costs of nonpublic placements for special 
education children who cannot receive an appropriate education in a public school. For 
those children in nonpublic placements approved by MSDE, the local school system 
contributes an amount equal to the local share of the basic cost of educating a child without 
disabilities plus two times the total basic cost. Any costs above this base amount are split 
on a 70% State/30% local basis.  
 
The fiscal 2024 State budget includes $148.6 million in State aid for nonpublic placements, 
including $3.0 million for the State’s share of increasing salaries of nonpublic school 
special education teachers.  
 
Career Ladder for Educators  
 
Under Chapter 36 of 2021, a four-level career ladder must be implemented by each county 
board of education by July 1, 2023. Level one is a State-certified teacher. Level two is a 
teacher pursuing a master’s degree, 30 credits of a State board-approved program of study, 
or National Board Certification (NBC). Level three is a teacher who has an NBC, if NBC 
or a comparable assessment is not available in the teacher’s content area, a master’s degree 
in that area; level three includes an assistant principal. Level four is a teacher on the teacher 
leadership track or administrative track of the career ladder, each of which are further 
divided into tiers. If a teacher achieves level three or four on the career ladder by being an 
NBC teacher, the teacher must retain NBC status in order to remain at that level.  
 
Minimum salary increases are required as specified beginning in fiscal 2023 for certain 
accomplishments associated with movement up the career ladder. Teachers with NBC may 
receive salary increases (of $10,000) beginning in fiscal 2023 and an additional amount 
($7,000) if they teach in a low performing school. To receive additional increases 
associated with moving up the career ladder, the county board must have established a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 448/ Page 3 
career ladder that has been approved by the Accountability and Implementation Board 
(AIB). Salary increases associated with each recertification of NBC are subject to 
collective bargaining, with the State share of those increases capped as specified. The costs 
associated with these salary increases are shared between the State and county government 
through a new wealth-equalized formula. The State must provide the cost of fees for 
initially attaining and renewing NBC to each teacher who pursues NBC, including 
one retake of each NBC assessment. County boards must pay one-third of the cost of the 
NBC fees to the State for each teacher pursuing an NBC. 
 
County boards must also demonstrate to AIB by July 1, 2024, that teachers in the county 
received at least a 10% salary increase over the preceding five-year period. By fiscal 2027, 
all teachers must receive a salary of at least $60,000. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The GTB program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions to maintain or 
increase local education tax effort, i.e., local education appropriation as a percent of local 
tax base. The program provides additional State education aid to counties that have less 
than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and provide local education funding 
above the minimum local share required by the Foundation Program. The program uses 
local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for each eligible 
school system. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of the maintenance of 
effort (MOE) requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The 
per pupil MOE amount is based upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent 
(FTE) enrollment and (2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. (There is a 
certain adjustment for fiscal 2024 MOE for specified counties.) The local share amount 
equals the local share of the foundation formula, compensatory education, English 
language learner, special education, comparable wage index (CWI), full-day 
prekindergarten, college and career ready, transitional supplemental instruction (through 
fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from the 
compensatory education State funding floor are required to fund the local share of the 
concentration of poverty grant programs. However, for some counties, the combined local 
share across these several programs is subject to adjustments described below. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 448/ Page 4 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several existing and new funding formula programs. The law also 
includes a mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund each 
year. This involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by 
dividing the county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An 
“education effort index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average 
education effort” is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for each 
county, which is the county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid) is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or 
(3) at least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased up 
from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. State 
relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education effort 
adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per pupil MOE is met each year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the GTB program, the 
local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except that for Baltimore City 
only the amount above $10 million may be reduced from the local share; (2) if a county 
receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% for the foundation and 
40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at least 0.13, the local 
share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, the local share may 
not be reduced below the required per pupil MOE amount. 
 
State Expenditures:  Current law defines the local share of the cost of nonpublic 
placements, and then requires the State to pay any remaining costs. As the local shares of 
the costs of nonpublic placements vary by county, based on the calculations required under 
current law, the State share of the cost also varies by county. Therefore, a calculation of 
the bill’s effect on expenditures due to the salary parity provision in the bill depends on 
multiple decisions at the local level, including (1) collective bargaining agreements; (2) the 
degree to which public school teachers pursue salary increases via the career ladder 
program; and (3) the degree to which local boards of education meet or exceed the required 
10% salary increases over five years by fiscal 2025 and the minimum salary of $60,000 for 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 448/ Page 5 
all teachers by fiscal 2027, and the annual rates of change for each local school system to 
reach or exceed these targets. It also varies based on the distribution of nonpublic 
placements among the counties. The following estimate is based on data from fiscal 2019, 
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic’s effects on enrollment.  
 
In accordance with the 2020 Joint Chairmen’s Report, MSDE provided a report to the 
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Appropriations Committee 
regarding wage and compensation disparities in special education and recommendations 
for remediation. The report focuses on salaries and benefits for special education teachers 
in public schools compared to counterparts in nonpublic special education schools. For the 
2018 to 2020 period, the report indicates that statewide, for all experience levels (from a 
starting teacher with a bachelor’s degree to a teacher with a doctoral degree at maximum 
pay), public school special education teachers receive a higher salary than do nonpublic 
school special education teachers. The report also indicates that: 
 
 
average teacher salaries in public schools exceeded those in nonpublic special 
education schools by between 7.3% and 25.8%, depending on teacher education and 
experience; 
 
after accounting for differences in teachers’ total paid hours, teachers’ wages in 
public schools and nonpublic special education schools differed by between 
23.3% and 40.7%; and  
 
salary disparities largely remain, to varying degrees, when disaggregated by county. 
 
According to MSDE, 25%, or $68.5 million, of the fiscal 2019 total State and local 
appropriations for nonpublic special education schools are attributable to teacher salary at 
these schools. Based upon findings in the study cited above, a 32% increase in salary, or 
$21.9 million State and local increase would have been required in fiscal 2019. Additional 
adjustments are necessary to account for changes in funding levels and salaries since then.  
 
State funding for nonpublic placements has increased by 14% from fiscal 2019 to the 
fiscal 2024 allowance, resulting in an adjusted total fiscal 2024 expenditure increase of 
$25.6 million. MSDE has previously advised that, after factoring in the variation in local 
shares of the costs of nonpublic placements, approximately 41% of cost sharing is covered 
by the State. This amounts to $10.5 million, which is phased in over three years under the 
bill, resulting in an increase of $3.5 million in general fund expenditures in fiscal 2024. 
Assuming 2.0% annual increases, accounting for salary increases among public school 
special education teachers as well as full phase-in by fiscal 2026, and assuming similar pay 
disparities persist under current law, the increase in State general fund expenditures 
amounts to $11.4 million by fiscal 2028. MSDE administrative costs are not affected.   
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 448/ Page 6 
Exhibit 1 shows the State and local shares associated with the requirement to pay special 
education placement teachers the equivalent of local school system salaries, as adjusted by 
the phase-in from fiscal 2024 to 2026. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
State General Fund and Local Expenditure Increases under the Bill 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
State Expenditures 
$3.5 
$7.2 
$10.9 
$11.2 
$11.4 
Local Expenditures  
5.0 
10.3 
15.7 
16.0 
16.3 
Total 
$8.5 
$17.4 
$26.6 
$27.2 
$27.7 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Based upon the assumptions discussed above, county government 
expenditures increase by $5.0 million in fiscal 2024 and by $16.3 million by fiscal 2028. 
The bill assures that these expenditures are in addition to current law required effort, yet 
do not affect local share or MOE, nor related local effort relief provisions. Further, the bill 
assures the State GTB and Education Effort Index funding for public schools is not 
affected.   
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1301 and SB 706 of 2022.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 311 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany and Harford counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 448/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7