START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 471 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 471 
(Delegate Attar) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Economic Development – Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone 
Program – Alterations and Financing 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date of the Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise 
(RISE) Zone Program by two years to January 1, 2030. The bill also extends the duration 
of a RISE zone designation from 5 to 10 years and allows the Secretary of Commerce to 
approve up to four, instead of up to three, RISE zones in Baltimore City. The bill alters a 
related definition pertaining to the Maryland Economic Development Corporation 
(MEDCO) by explicitly including RISE zones. The Department of Commerce, in 
consultation with specified stakeholders, must study the effectiveness of the RISE Zone 
Program and must report recommendations to improve the effectiveness of the program to 
the General Assembly by December 15, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Changes to the RISE Zone Program do not materially affect State finances 
or operations through FY 2028, as discussed below. Provisions related to MEDCO may 
increase nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for the corporation beginning in FY 2024. 
Commerce can conduct the study and otherwise implement the bill with existing resources; 
the bill does not otherwise materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues may decrease due to additional property tax credits 
beginning in FY 2025. Other changes to the RISE Zone Program do not materially affect 
local government finances or operations. Provisions related to MEDCO may increase local 
government revenues and expenditures beginning in FY 2024.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 471/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program – Generally 
 
The purposes of the RISE Zone Program are to (1) access institutional assets that have a 
strong and demonstrated history of commitment to economic development and 
revitalization in the communities in which they are located and (2) incentivize the location 
of innovative start-up businesses based on technology developed, licensed, or poised for 
commercialization at or in collaboration with qualified Maryland institutions. 
 
Qualified institutions include institutions of higher education (public and private four-year 
institutions and community colleges), nonprofit organizations affiliated with federal 
agencies, and regional higher education centers. Businesses that are located within a zone 
and meet program requirements qualify for program benefits and priority consideration for 
specified State financial assistance programs. 
 
Generally, a RISE zone is a geographic area in immediate proximity to a qualified 
institution and is targeted for increased economic and community development, although 
there are exceptions. The Secretary of Commerce designates RISE zones, subject to 
specified requirements, for a period of five years with an optional five-year renewal. Zones 
may not exceed 500 acres. No more than three RISE zones may be designated in a single 
county or municipality. 
 
Chapters 206 and 207 of 2021 made significant modifications to the RISE Zone Program, 
most notably to the incentives offered. More specifically, a rental assistance grant program 
and enhanced investment incentive tax credits were established, while property tax credits 
were limited to businesses that located in a RISE zone before January 1, 2023, and income 
tax credits were ended after tax year 2022. Generally, the now-grandfathered property tax 
credit is a five-year credit on a portion of the eligible assessment:  50% in year 1 and 10% in 
years 2 through 5. If a RISE zone is renewed, the credit continues at 10% in years 6 through 
10. Enhanced credits are available in enterprise zones and focus areas. The Acts also 
established a program special fund and terminated program tax credits and benefits 
effective January 1, 2028. 
 
Rental Assistance Program 
 
A qualified institution, county, and municipality, or the economic development agency of 
the local government may establish a program to provide rental assistance to a business 
that (1) moves into or locates in a RISE zone on or after the date of the zone designation;  
(2) has nexus with the qualified institution; and (3) has been in active business for a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 471/ Page 3 
maximum of seven years. A business may receive funds under a program for a maximum 
of three years. 
 
The RISE zone entity that establishes the rental assistance program (1) may submit an 
application to receive funds from Commerce and (2) must submit an annual report to 
Commerce reporting specified information. Subject to available funding, Commerce must 
provide three times the amount of funding provided by the RISE zone entity’s rental 
assistance program. A maximum of 25% of program funds may generally be distributed to 
businesses within a single RISE zone. 
 
Enhanced Investment Incentive Tax Credits 
 
Enhanced biotechnology and innovation investment incentive tax credits can be claimed 
by an investor who invests in a company (1) located within a RISE zone; (2) that has been 
in active business for a maximum of seven years; and (3) based on technology that has 
been developed at the qualified institution of the zone. The enhanced credit is 50% of the 
investment, up to $500,000. The standard credits are 33% of the investment, up to 
$250,000. Credits are refundable. 
 
Pledging of Revenues to Maryland Economic Development Corporation Obligations 
 
Under the Tax Increment Financing Act, a local government that has created a special fund 
for a development district, a RISE zone, or a sustainable community may pledge under an 
agreement that amounts deposited to the special fund must be paid over to secure payment 
on MEDCO obligations. Likewise, the governing body of a political subdivision may 
pledge by or under a resolution that alternative local tax revenues generated within, or that 
are otherwise determined to be attributable to, a development district that is a 
transit-oriented development, a RISE zone, a sustainable community, or a State hospital 
redevelopment be paid, as provided in the resolution, into the special fund to (1) secure the 
payment of debt service on bonds or MEDCO obligations or (2) be applied to the other 
authorized purposes. 
 
Under the Act, “MEDCO obligation” means a bond, note, or other similar instrument that 
MEDCO issues under authority other than the Act to finance the cost of infrastructure 
improvements located in or supporting a transit-oriented development, a sustainable 
community, or a State hospital redevelopment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 471/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program – Rental Assistance and Enhanced 
Tax Credits 
 
Interest and activity in the updated RISE Zone Program have been slight. Through  
mid-April 2023, no funds had been expended for rental assistance, and no enhanced 
investment tax credits had been provided. Still, allowing for an additional RISE zone in 
Baltimore City, extending the duration of RISE zones, and extending the program by 
two years may increase general fund expenditures for Commerce to provide rental 
assistance matching funds beginning in fiscal 2024 to the extent that Commerce would not 
have otherwise designated a fourth zone in Baltimore City or renewed existing RISE zones. 
There are currently two RISE zones designated in Baltimore City.   
 
Likewise, higher education expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2024 to the extent 
public four-year institutions provide additional rental assistance grants. Incremental 
amounts, if any, are likely minimal through fiscal 2028. Extending the program for 
two additional years increases expenditures for Commerce in fiscal 2029 and 2030. For 
context, the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $750,000 in 
general funds for the rental assistance grant program. 
 
The total amount of tax credits awarded under the biotechnology investment incentive and 
innovation investment incentive tax credits in each year is generally limited to the amount 
appropriated to the program. Providing enhanced tax credits for qualifying RISE zone 
businesses – in a new RISE zone, continued RISE zones, or for an additional two years 
under the bill – is not expected to materially impact State finances. 
 
Commerce can conduct the required study and otherwise implement the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation 
 
It is unclear whether the bill authorizes a local government to pledge revenues to secure 
the payment on MEDCO obligations for infrastructure improvements in a RISE zone. 
Statute allows the pledging of revenues for MEDCO obligations, but the defined term 
“MEDCO obligation” does not mention RISE zones. However, to the extent that the bill 
causes local governments to pledge revenues to secure payment of MEDCO obligations, 
nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for MEDCO increase, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 471/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program – Rental Assistance and Enhanced 
Tax Credits 
 
Local governments had not participated in the rental assistance program through  
mid-April 2023. Still, allowing for an additional RISE zone in Baltimore City, extending 
the duration of RISE zones, and extending the program by two years may increase program 
activity. Therefore, local government expenditures may increase to provide rental 
assistance to qualified businesses beginning in fiscal 2024; subject to available funding, 
local government revenues increase by three times that amount from State matching funds. 
 
Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program – Legacy Property Tax Credits 
 
This estimate assumes that the extension of RISE zone designations from 5 to 10 years 
allows some qualified businesses that located in a RISE zone before January 1, 2023, to 
claim an additional property tax credit in years 6 through 10 (statute specifies that the 
additional credit is available in years 6 through 10 if a RISE zone designation is renewed, 
and the bill does not modify that provision). Therefore, local revenues decrease, likely 
beginning in fiscal 2025, to the extent that Commerce would not have otherwise renewed 
existing RISE zones. The effect, if any, is limited to Baltimore City and Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, and Wicomico counties – those with existing zones. In any case, the 
extension does not affect existing credit entitlements. Under current law, if the designation 
of a RISE zone expires, the property tax credit continues to be available to a qualified 
property. 
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation 
 
As discussed above, it is unclear whether the bill authorizes a local government to pledge 
revenues to secure the payment on MEDCO obligations for infrastructure improvements 
in a RISE zone under the Tax Increment Financing Act. However, to the extent that the bill 
causes local governments to pledge revenues to secure payment of MEDCO obligations, 
local government revenues and expenditures increase, beginning as early as fiscal 2024. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small qualified businesses that located in RISE zones prior to 
January 1, 2023, are assumed to be able to continue claiming property tax credits for an 
additional five years to the extent that Commerce would not have otherwise renewed 
existing RISE zones. Additional small businesses may become eligible for rental assistance 
beginning in fiscal 2024, and assistance continues in fiscal 2029 and 2030. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 471/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 333 (Senators Hayes and Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
Economic Development Corporation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 27, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6