START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 401 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 401 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Audiology, Hearing Aid Dispensing, Speech-Language Pathology, and 
Music Therapy Act - Definitions and Application 
 
 
This bill specifies that “practice audiology” includes the prescribing, ordering, selling, 
dispensing, or fitting of a hearing aid to an individual for the correction or relief of a 
condition for which such devices are worn. The bill clarifies that “hearing aid dispensing” 
includes ordering and any act related to ordering suitable hearing instruments, including 
prescription hearing aids. The bill also specifies that Title 2 of the Health Occupations 
Article does not apply to the servicing, marketing, sale, dispensing, use, customer support, 
or distribution of over-the-counter (OTC) hearing aids, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, 
Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists can update related regulations with 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by the State 
Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language 
Pathologists, and Music Therapists to provide hearing aid services, practice audiology, 
practice speech-language pathology, or practice music therapy in Maryland. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 401/ Page 2 
Under current law, “practice audiology” means to apply the principals, methods, and 
procedures of measurement, prediction, evaluation, testing, counseling, consultation, and 
instruction that relate to the development and disorders of hearing, vestibular functions, 
and related language and speech disorders to prevent or modify the disorders or assist 
individuals in hearing and auditory and related skills for communication. “Practice 
audiology” includes the fitting or selling of hearing aids. 
 
The bill expands this definition to include prescribing, ordering, selling, dispensing, or 
fitting hearing aids to an individual for the correction or relief of a condition for which 
hearing aids are worn. 
 
Under current law, “hearing aid dispensing” means performing, conducting, and 
interpreting hearing assessment procedures to determine the type and extent of hearing loss 
for the purpose of fitting suitable hearing instruments, selecting suitable hearing 
instruments, programming a hearing aid, making ear molds or impressions, and providing 
appropriate counseling. “Hearing aid dispensing” includes an act pertaining to the selling, 
renting, leasing, or delivering of a hearing instrument and providing maintenance or repair 
services for a hearing aid. 
 
The bill clarifies that “hearing aid dispensing” includes ordering and any act related to 
ordering suitable hearing instruments, including prescription hearing aids. The bill also 
clarifies that “hearing instrument” includes a prescription hearing aid. 
 
Generally, current law relating to audiologists, hearing aid dispensers, speech-language 
pathologists, and music therapists does not limit the right of an individual to practice a 
health occupation that the individual is authorized to practice, prohibit an individual from 
practicing any other profession that the individual is authorized to practice, or limit the 
rights of a physician who is authorized to practice medicine under the laws of the State to 
treat the human ear or fit hearing aids. 
 
The bill further specifies that Title 2 of the Health Occupations Article (the Maryland 
Audiology, Hearing Aid Dispensing, Speech-Language Pathology, and Music Therapy 
Act) does not apply to the servicing, marketing, sale, dispensing, use, customer support, or 
distribution of OTC hearing aids through in-person transactions, by mail, or online as 
authorizes by federal law and regulations. 
 
Additional Information:  Recent changes to federal Food and Drug Administration 
regulations governing hearing aids established a category of OTC hearing aids and defined 
non-OTC hearing aids as prescription devices, rather than restricted devices. Generally, the 
bill conforms Maryland statute to the language in the federal regulations by authorizing 
audiologists to prescribe hearing aids rather than only fit and sell hearing aids. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 401/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 449 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3