START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 440 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 440 
(Delegate Charles, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child Custody - Relocation of Child - Expedited Hearing (Assurance of Child's 
Safety Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a court to set a hearing on a petition regarding a proposed relocation of a 
child that would significantly interfere with the other parent’s ability to maintain the 
predetermined parenting time schedule on an expedited basis.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is assumed that the bill’s requirements, including any potential minimal 
expenditures associated with expedited hearings, do not materially affect State finances or 
operations.  
  
Local Effect:  It is assumed that the bill’s requirements, including any potential minimal 
expenditures associated with expedited hearings, do not materially affect circuit court 
finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Subject to limited exception, in any custody or visitation proceeding, the 
court may include as a condition of a custody or visitation order a requirement that either 
party provide advance written notice of at least 90 days to the court and/or the other party 
of the intent to relocate the permanent residence of the party or the child either within or 
outside the State. The court may specify the form and content of the notice requirement. If 
the court orders that notice be given to the other party, a mailing of the notice by certified 
mail (return receipt requested) to the last known address of the other party must be deemed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 440/ Page 2 
sufficient to comply with the notice requirement. If either party files a petition regarding a 
proposed relocation within 20 days of the written notice, the court must set a hearing on an 
expedited basis. 
 
The court must waive the notice requirement on a showing that notice would expose the 
child or either party to abuse, as specified, or for any other good cause. If either party is 
required to relocate in less than the 90-day period specified in the notice requirement, the 
court may consider as a defense to any action brought for a violation of the notice 
requirement that (1) relocation was necessary due to financial or other extenuating 
circumstances and (2) the required notice was given within a reasonable time after learning 
of the necessity to relocate. The court may consider any violation of the notice requirements 
as a factor in determining the merits of any subsequent proceeding involving custody or 
visitation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1036 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 42 (Senator Carter) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer K. Botts 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2