START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 438 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 438 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B-Stadium (Baseball 
Stadium) Beer, Wine, and Liquor License  
PG 306-23 
 
 
This bill authorizes, in Prince George’s County, Class B-Stadium (baseball stadium) 
license holders to sell liquor in addition to beer and wine for on-premises consumption. 
The bill also renames the previous Class B beer, wine, and liquor stadium license as the 
Class 
B-Stadium 
(football 
stadium) 
license. 
The 
bill 
specifies 
that 
the 
Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to issue 
one Class B-Stadium 
(baseball 
stadium) 
license 
and 
one 
Class 
B-Stadium 
(football stadium) license. Profits from the sale of beer, wine, or liquor may accrue to the 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission (M-NCPPC) or the 
concessionaire. The bill takes effect April 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current 
Law: 
 
Class 
B-Stadium 
(baseball 
stadium) 
license 
holders 
in 
Prince George’s County are authorized to sell beer and light wine, as specified. The board 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 438/ Page 2 
may issue the license to M-NCPPC or a private concessionaire under contract with 
M-NCPPC. The annual license fee is $2,420. 
 
In Prince George’s County, a Class B beer, wine, and liquor stadium license authorizes the 
licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor by the drink or bottle, from one or more outlets, for 
on-premises consumption. The license can only be exercised at a National Football League 
stadium located in Landover, Maryland (the current home stadium location of the 
Washington Commanders). The annual license fee is $21,780. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2