START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 147

Chapter 147

(House Bill 498)

AN ACT concerning

Board of Public Works Public Comment Act

FOR the purpose of requiring the Board of Public Works, for meetings held on or after a
certain date, to allow members of the public to submit certain public comments
electronically except under certain circumstances; requiring public comments to be
included in certain meeting materials and posted and retained online; requiring an
additional staff position at the Board to carry out certain requirements; and
generally relating to public comments and the Board of Public Works.

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 10–207
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

10–207.

(A) FOR EACH MEETING OF THE BOARD HELD ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1,
2024, BEGINNING ON THE DATE THE BOARD MAKES THE MEETING AGENDA
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC, INCLUDING ANY UPDATES TO THE AGENDA, THE BOARD
SHALL ALLOW MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO ELECTRONICALLY SUBMIT PUBLIC
COMMENTS ON AGENDA ITEMS.

(B) PUBLIC COMMENTS SUBMITTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION OR THAT ARE OTHERWISE RECEIVED BY THE BOARD BY ELECTRONIC OR
REGULAR MAIL AND RELATE TO A BOARD AGENDA ITEM SHALL:

(1) BE INCLUDED IN EACH MEETING PACKET PREPARED FOR
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD;

(2) BE POSTED ONLINE AT LEAST 24 HOURS IN ADVANCE OF THE
MEETING, OR AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE AFTER THE PUBLIC COMMENT IS RECEIVED;
AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 147 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) BE RETAINED ONLINE THROUGH THE BOARD’S PUBLIC WEBSITE.

(C) ANY BOARD DISCUSSION ITEMS THAT ARE NOT SUBJECT TO INCLUSION
IN A PUBLIC AGENDA UNDER § 3–302.1 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE ARE
NOT SUBJECT TO PUBLIC COMMENT UNDER THIS SECTION.

(D) TO CARRY OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION, THE BOARD
SHALL EMPLOY AT LEAST ONE MORE STAFF POSITION THAN THE NUMBER OF
POSITIONS AUTHORIZED IN FISCAL YEAR 2023.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2