START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 424 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 424 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Nonvested Accounts - Regular Interest 
 
 
This bill requires the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) to pay regular interest 
in the account of a nonvested former member who (1) has not withdrawn the accumulated 
contributions and (2) becomes an active member in any SRPS plan. Interest remains 
payable as long as the former member remains an active member in an SRPS plan. The bill 
applies to the accounts of nonvested former members of the Teachers’ and Employees’ 
Retirement Systems (TRS/ERS), Teachers’ and Employees’ Pension Systems (TPS/EPS), 
State Police Retirement System (SPRS), Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
(CORS), Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS), or Judges’ Retirement 
System (JRS). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies retroactively to accounts 
held by individuals who are members of SRPS on that date, as discussed below. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in State pension liabilities due to the retroactive payment 
of interest, which results in only a negligible increase in State pension contributions. No 
effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in pension liabilities for participating governmental units 
(PGUs), which results in only a negligible increase in PGU pension contributions.  No 
effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 424/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Vesting 
 
Except for members of JRS, SRPS members hired before July 1, 2011, vest after 5 years 
of eligibility service; members hired on or after that date vest after 10 years of eligibility 
service. Members of JRS hired before July 1, 2012, vest immediately; members of JRS 
hired on or after that date vest after 5 years. 
 
Regular Interest 
 
SRPS pays regular interest on member contributions at the rate of 4% compounded 
annually for members of TRS/ERS, SPRS, CORS, and JRS. Regular interest is also 4% for 
members of LEOPS hired before January 1, 2005. SRPS pays regular interest on member 
contributions at the rate of 5% compounded annually for members of TPS/EPS and for 
members of LEOPS hired on or after January 1, 2005. 
 
Payment of Regular Interest for Former Members 
 
For the purposes of this bill, membership in any of the SRPS plans ends four years after 
separation from employment. If a former member is vested (and, therefore, eligible for a 
vested benefit upon reaching normal retirement age), interest is paid until retirement or 
withdrawal of a member’s accumulated contributions. However, except as described 
below, if a former member is not vested and has not withdrawn his or her accumulated 
contributions, no further interest is paid after membership ends. 
 
Chapter 509 of 2018 applies to an active member of EPS and TPS who was previously 
subject to the Alternate Contributory Pension Selection (ACPS) but (after a break in 
service) becomes subject to the Reformed Contributory Pension Benefit. If the member did 
not vest under ACPS prior to the break in service and has not withdrawn accumulated 
member contributions made during his or her tenure in ACPS, the member may continue 
to receive regular interest on the member contributions made during the tenure in ACPS. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  The bill applies retroactively, requiring SRPS to pay interest 
on contributions made by a former member as of the date the former member rejoined 
SRPS as a member of a different plan, if the individual remains an active member on the 
bill’s effective date.  
 
The State Retirement Agency has identified approximately 1,600 accounts, including for 
members of PGUs, on which interest is payable under the bill. The total interest due is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 424/ Page 3 
approximately $514,000. These payments reduce system assets by that amount, thereby 
increasing unfunded liabilities for the State and PGUs. However, the increase in liabilities 
is minimal and has only a negligible effect on State and PGU pension contributions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 481 (Senators Lewis Young and Benson) - Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3