START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 466 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 466 
(Delegate Otto) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Worcester County - Natural Resources - Hunting 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to allow a person in 
Worcester County to hunt on each Sunday of the game bird and mammal season on private 
property and public land designated for Sunday hunting by DNR. Except as specified, DNR 
may only allow such hunting from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. The time 
restrictions do not apply on (1) each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) the last 
three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in November of the deer bow hunting 
season. The bill also decreases the archery hunting “safety zone” in Worcester County from  
150 yards to 50 yards from a dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or 
camp occupied by human beings. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for certain businesses 
in Worcester County, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Sunday Hunting 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited in the State, with 
specified exceptions. For an overview of Sunday hunting laws in the State, please see the 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 466/ Page 2 
Archery Hunting Safety Zones 
 
Generally, a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not shoot or discharge any 
firearm or other deadly weapon within a specified area within 150 yards, known as the 
“safety zone,” of a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied 
by human beings without the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant. Also, 
a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not shoot at any animal while it is within 
the safety zone without the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant. 
 
For archery hunters in Allegany, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, 
Montgomery, St. Mary’s, and Washington counties, the safety zone extends for 50 yards 
from a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied by human 
beings. For archery hunters in Anne Arundel County, the safety zone extends for 100 yards 
from a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied by human 
beings. An archery hunter in Harford County must use a tree stand when hunting within  
50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or camp 
occupied by human beings. An archery hunter in Montgomery and Washington counties 
must be in an elevated position that allows the hunter to shoot in a downward trajectory 
when hunting within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence, church, school, or 
other building or camp occupied by human beings. 
 
A person, while hunting for any wild bird or mammal, may not shoot or discharge any 
firearm within 300 yards of a school during school hours or when a school-approved 
activity is taking place. 
 
During any open hunting season, a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not hunt 
or chase willfully any wild bird or mammal within the safety zone without the specific 
advance permission of the owner or occupant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Authorizing additional hunting in Worcester County may have a 
meaningful economic impact on certain types of businesses. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service reports that, in 2011, the average hunter in Maryland spent $49 per hunting day on 
trip-related expenditures. In 2011, the National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife 
Associated Recreation estimated that hunters in Maryland spend more than $260 million 
annually on food, lodging, equipment, and transportation. 
 
In addition to businesses directly affected by hunting, to the extent the bill results in a 
decrease in the deer population in Worcester County, the bill may also affect several other 
types of businesses, such as farms (due to a reduction in crop damage) and businesses that 
own or repair vehicles (due to a reduction in deer-vehicle collisions). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 466/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 824 (Senator Carozza) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Worcester County; Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 466/ Page 4 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland 
 
 
Sunday Hunting, Generally 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited, with specified 
exceptions. Chapter 95 of 2020 reorganized and clarified statutory provisions related to 
Sunday hunting in the State. Chapter 95 also (1) explicitly stated that a person may not 
hunt on public lands within the State park system on a Sunday and (2) authorized the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to set all of the seasons for Sunday hunting. 
 
Game Birds and Mammals on Private Property and Public Land 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Allegany, Cecil, Garrett, St. Mary’s, and Washington counties during the open 
season for these animals on private property and public land designated for Sunday hunting 
by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting in Frederick County from the first Sunday in October 
through the second Sunday in January of the following year on private property and public 
land designated for Sunday hunting by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Dorchester County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR during the turkey hunting season. DNR 
also may allow Sunday turkey hunting in Dorchester County during the spring turkey 
hunting season on private property and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In 
general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. 
However, the time restriction does not apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons 
from the first Sunday in October through the second Sunday in January, inclusive; or (2) on 
each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Calvert, Caroline, Charles, and Queen Anne’s counties during the open season for 
these animals on private property. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season; (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season; and (3) on 
each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 466/ Page 5 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Somerset County during the open season for these animals on private property and 
public land leased to a hunt club. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
Deer on Private Property 
 
All Seasons:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in 
Carroll County in all deer hunting seasons from the first Sunday in October through the 
second Sunday in January of the following year; (2) in Kent County on each Sunday in all 
deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer 
firearms season as designated by DNR, and on each Sunday during the deer bow hunting 
season and the deer muzzle loader season); (3) in Montgomery County on each Sunday in 
all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, and on one Sunday in the 
deer firearms season and the deer bow hunting season as designated by DNR); and (4) in 
Talbot County on each Sunday in all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior 
deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer firearms season as designated by DNR, and on the 
last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow 
hunting season). 
 
Firearms Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in Harford 
and Worcester counties on each Sunday of the deer firearms season; (2) in Anne Arundel 
County on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season; and (3) in Wicomico County on 
the first Sunday of deer firearms season, and from 30 minutes before sunrise until 
10:30 a.m. on the second Sunday of the deer firearms season. 
 
Bow Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in Harford, 
Wicomico, and Worcester counties on the last three Sundays in October and the 
first two Sundays in November of the deer bow season and (2) in Anne Arundel County on 
the first Sunday in November of the deer bow season. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 466/ Page 6 
Turkey on Private Property 
 
DNR may allow Sunday turkey hunting on private property on Sundays during the spring 
turkey hunting season in Carroll and Kent counties and from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. in Talbot County. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Junior Hunt:  DNR may allow a person who is age 16 or younger and is participating in a 
junior hunt to hunt on a Sunday. 
 
Traditional Sunday Hunting:  DNR may allow the following persons to hunt game birds 
and mammals on a Sunday:  (1) a person using State-certified raptors to hunt game birds 
or mammals during open season for these animals; (2) an unarmed person participating in 
an organized fox chase; and (3) a person using a regulated shooting ground to hunt 
pen-reared game birds or tower-released flighted mallard ducks. 
 
Deer Management Permit Holders:  DNR may allow a person with a deer management 
permit to shoot deer on any Sunday throughout the year in accordance with the terms of 
the permit. 
 
Express Prohibitions 
 
In general, a person may not hunt on a Sunday in Baltimore City or Baltimore, Howard, or  
Prince George’s counties. This prohibition in these counties does not apply to the 
above-described acts of traditional Sunday hunting. In addition, a person with a deer 
management permit may shoot deer under the permit on a Sunday in these counties. 
Further, a person may not hunt migratory game birds on a Sunday, and a person may not 
hunt on public land within the State park system on a Sunday. 
 
Background on Deer Hunting in Maryland 
 
Because white-tailed deer thrive in habitat that is composed of woods and openings and 
because hunter access in those areas is limited, suburban development has provided 
excellent deer habitat in the State. This has resulted in growing deer populations in 
suburban areas. Higher populations of deer can lead to a greater number of negative 
interactions with suburban residents, such as deer-vehicle collisions and vegetation 
damage. Deer also cause agricultural damage. 

END OF PAGE 6