START OF PAGE 1
  HB 483 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 483 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Grossly Negligent or Drunk or Drugged Operation of Vehicle or Vessel - Prior 
Convictions 
 
 
This bill establishes that a conviction for specified drunk and drugged driving offenses 
constitutes a prior conviction for purposes of determining subsequent offender penalties 
for a person unlawfully operating or attempting to operate a vessel while under the 
influence of alcohol, impaired by alcohol and/or drugs, or impaired by a controlled 
dangerous substance (CDS). Vice versa, a conviction for unlawfully operating or 
attempting to operate a vessel while under the influence of alcohol, impaired by alcohol 
and/or drugs, or impaired by a CDS constitutes a prior conviction for purposes of 
determining increased subsequent offender penalties for specified drunk and drugged 
driving offenses. The bill also establishes that a person convicted of specified drunk and 
drugged driving offenses is subject to increased subsequent offender penalties if the person 
has previously been convicted of manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in revenues and potential minimal decrease in 
local incarceration expenditures, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 483/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Operating a Vessel While Under the Influence or Impaired 
 
Under the State Boat Act, a person may not operate or attempt to operate a vessel while 
(1) under the influence of alcohol; (2) impaired by alcohol; (3) so far impaired by any drug, 
combination of drugs, or combination of one or more drugs and alcohol that the person 
cannot operate a vessel safely; or (4) impaired by any CDS, unless the person is entitled to 
use the CDS under State law. 
 
Any person who operates or attempts to operate a vessel on the waters of the State is 
deemed to have consented to take a test of blood or breath for alcohol or drug content if 
the person is detained by a police officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that the 
person has been operating or attempting to operate a vessel while under the influence of 
alcohol, while impaired by alcohol and/or drugs, or while impaired by a CDS. Evidentiary 
presumptions applicable to drunk and drugged driving offenses also apply to the operation 
of a vessel while under the influence of alcohol or impaired by alcohol and/or drugs. 
 
Operating a vessel while under the influence of alcohol is a misdemeanor punishable by 
(1) for a first offense, a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year; (2) for 
a second offense, a fine of up to $2,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years; and 
(3) for a third or subsequent offense, a fine of up to $3,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
three years. Under the bill, a conviction for specified drunk and drugged driving offenses 
constitutes a prior conviction for purposes of determining subsequent offender penalties. 
The court may prohibit a person convicted of a violation from operating a vessel on the 
waters of the State for up to one year if the person refused to take a test or was tested and 
the result indicated an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more. 
 
Operating a vessel while impaired by alcohol and/or drugs or while impaired by a CDS is 
a misdemeanor punishable by (1) for a first offense, a fine of up to $500 and/or 
imprisonment for up to two months and (2) for a second or subsequent offense, a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. Under the bill, a conviction for 
specified drunk and drugged driving offenses constitutes a prior conviction for purposes of 
determining subsequent offender penalties. 
 
“Vessel,” as it applies to the State Boat Act, means any description of watercraft, including 
an ice boat but not including a seaplane, that is used or capable of being used as a means 
of transportation on water or ice. It includes the motors, spars, sails, and accessories of a 
vessel. The above provisions apply only to (1) vessels required to be registered with the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR); (2) vessels required to have a valid number 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 483/ Page 3 
awarded in accordance with federal law or a federally approved numbering system in 
another state; and (3) vessels from a foreign country using the waters of the State. Vessels 
without any propulsion machinery of any type, such as nonpowered sailboats, canoes, and 
kayaks, are not required to be registered with DNR. 
 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol or While Impaired by Alcohol, Drugs, or a 
Controlled Dangerous Substance 
 
Under the Transportation Article, a person may not drive or attempt to drive any vehicle 
while (1) under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; 
(2) impaired by alcohol; (3) impaired by a drug, any combination of drugs, or any 
combination of drugs and alcohol; or (4) impaired by a CDS. Additionally, a person may 
not commit any of these offenses while transporting a minor. 
 
A person convicted of one of the above offenses is subject to higher maximum penalties 
when that person has specified prior convictions. Chapter 20 of 2019 increased maximum 
penalties for subsequent drunk and drugged driving violations. Exhibit 1 displays the 
maximum penalties for alcohol and drug-related driving offenses. Under the bill, a 
conviction for operating a vessel while under the influence of alcohol or while impaired by 
alcohol and/or drugs constitutes a prior conviction for purposes of determining subsequent 
offender penalties. 
 
A person convicted of a general drunk or drugged driving violation who has previously 
been convicted of homicide by motor vehicle or vessel while under the influence of alcohol, 
under the influence of alcohol per se, or impaired by alcohol, drugs, or a CDS is subject to 
a fine of up to $10,000 and/or up to 10 years imprisonment, consistent with the maximum 
penalties that apply to a fourth or subsequent general drunk or drugged driving violation. 
Under the bill, a person who has previously been convicted of manslaughter by vehicle or 
vessel (gross negligence) is also subject to these increased maximum penalties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 483/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Current Maximum Penalties for Alcohol and/or Drug-related Driving Offenses  
 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Under the Influence Per Se, or 
While Impaired by a CDS 
First Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $1,000 
Second Offense 
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Under the Influence Per Se, or 
While Impaired by a CDS While Transporting a Minor 
First Offense  
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Second Offense 
3 years imprisonment and/or fine of $3,000 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol or While Impaired by a Drug, a Combination of 
Drugs, or a Combination of One or More Drugs and Alcohol 
First Offense 
2 months imprisonment and/or fine of $500 
Second Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $500 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol or While Impaired by a Drug, a Combination of 
Drugs, or a Combination of One or More Drugs and Alcohol While 
Transporting a Minor 
First Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $1,000 
Second Offense 
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
 
CDS:  controlled dangerous substance 
 
Notes:  All listed offenses are misdemeanors. Additionally, for the offense of driving under the influence 
of alcohol, under the influence per se, or while impaired by a CDS, a repeat conviction or convictions within 
five years requires a mandatory minimum penalty of imprisonment from 5 to 10 days. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 483/ Page 5 
Subsequent Offenders  
 
Under Maryland Rule 4-245, a court may not sentence a defendant as a subsequent offender 
unless the State’s Attorney serves notice of the alleged prior conviction on the defendant 
or defendant’s counsel. The notice must be served before the acceptance of a guilty plea or 
plea of nolo contendere, or at least 15 days before trial in circuit court or 5 days before trial 
in the District Court, whichever is earlier. Before sentencing and after giving the defendant 
a chance to be heard, the court must determine whether the defendant is a subsequent 
offender. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may increase minimally from cases heard in the 
District Court if individuals receive increased monetary penalties as a result of the bill. 
 
State Expenditures:  To the extent that judges impose longer sentences as a result of the 
bill, general fund expenditures may increase minimally from people shifting from local 
facilities to State facilities or being committed to State correctional facilities for longer 
periods of time. The number of individuals subject to more stringent penalties under the 
bill is expected to be minimal. 
 
According to the Judiciary, during fiscal 2021 and 2022, there were (1) six charges and 
one guilty disposition (conviction) for operating or attempting to operate a vessel while 
under the influence of alcohol and (2) eight charges and no guilty dispositions for operating 
or attempting to operate a vessel while impaired by alcohol and/or drugs, or while impaired 
by a CDS. 
 
Convictions for manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence) are more frequent, 
but still limited overall in the State. The Maryland State Commission on Criminal 
Sentencing Policy advises that it received information for 33 individuals sentenced to 
35 total counts of manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence) in the State’s 
circuit courts during fiscal 2022. Four of these individuals and 4 of these counts were 
associated with subsequent offenses, as defined under that statute. The District Court has 
concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit court over manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross 
negligence). Information is not readily available on convictions in the District Court for 
this offense. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local revenues may increase minimally if the bill results in higher fines 
in circuit court cases.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Local incarceration expenditures may decrease minimally if overall, 
the bill shifts individuals from local detention facilities to State correctional facilities.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 483/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 914 and HB 967 of 2022 and HB 675 of 2021.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 74 (Senator Bailey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - February 24, 2023 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6