START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 591 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 591 
(Delegate Buckel) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Restitution Orders - Recording Fees 
 
 
This bill prohibits a court from assessing costs on a person or governmental unit for 
recording and indexing as a money judgment an order of restitution issued by any court in 
the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any potential decrease in fee revenues is anticipated to be minimal and not 
materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  A court may enter a judgment of restitution ordering a 
defendant, child respondent, or liable parent to make restitution in addition to any other 
penalty for the commission of a crime or a delinquent act, as specified. A judgment of 
restitution is a money judgment in favor of the person, governmental unit, or third-party 
payor to whom the restitution obligor has been ordered to pay restitution. The judgment of 
restitution may be enforced by the person, governmental unit, or third‐party payor to whom 
the restitution obligor has been ordered to pay restitution in the same manner as a money 
judgment in a civil action. Generally, a person or entity to whom a restitution obligor has 
been ordered to pay restitution has all the rights and obligations of a money judgment 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 591/ Page 2 
creditor under the Maryland Rules, including the obligation on receiving all amounts due 
under the judgement to file a statement that the judgment has been satisfied. 
 
Under current law, a court may not assess costs on a person or governmental unit (to whom 
a restitution obligor has been ordered to pay restitution) for recording and indexing an order 
of restitution as a money judgment in the court in which the judgment of restitution was 
issued. The bill expands the prohibition against assessing costs to be applicable regardless 
of the court in which the judgment of restitution was issued. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 385 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2