START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 508 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 508 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax Credit - Disabled Law Enforcement Officers and Rescue Workers - 
Definition and Eligibility 
 
 
This bill requires a local government to determine the definition of a disabled law 
enforcement officer or rescue worker for purposes of receiving a local property tax credit. 
In addition, the bill expands eligibility for the property tax credit to include a disabled law 
enforcement officer or rescue worker or surviving spouse or cohabitant who was domiciled 
in the State any time within five years prior to the disabled law enforcement officer or 
rescue worker becoming disabled or dying. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies 
to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent the property tax credit is authorized and additional taxpayers become eligible for the 
property tax credit. The amount of the decrease depends on the number of eligible 
taxpayers and the assessed value of each residential property that is eligible for the property 
tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit for a 
dwelling owned by (1) a disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker; (2) a surviving 
spouse of a fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker; or (3) a cohabitant, provided 
specified conditions are met. To be eligible for the property tax credit, the dwelling must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 508/ Page 2 
have been acquired by the disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker within 
10 years of the date the disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker was adjudged 
to be permanently and totally disabled or by the surviving spouse or cohabitant within 
10 years of the fallen law enforcement officer’s or rescue worker’s death. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease to the extent the property 
tax credit is authorized and additional taxpayers become eligible for the property tax credit. 
The amount of the decrease depends on the number of eligible taxpayers and the assessed 
value of each residential property that is eligible for the property tax credit, neither of which 
can be reliably estimated at this time. Information on the extent to which the property tax 
credit has been granted in certain counties is provided below. 
 
 
Frederick County advises that three surviving spouses currently receive the property 
tax credit, and; 
 
Prince George’s County provides a property tax credit to the surviving spouses or 
partners of law enforcement officers who have fallen in the line of duty. In 
fiscal 2021, the county provided 6 credits totaling $15,200 (average credit was 
$2,500). In fiscal 2022, the county provided 5 credits totaling $13,800 (average 
credit $2,750). 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the 
County Revenue Outlook report. A copy of the report is available on the Department of 
Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 983 and HB 285 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 435 (Senator Klausmeier) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; 
City of Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2