START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 554 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 554 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification for Military Retirement Income (Keep 
Our Heroes Home Act) 
 
 
This Administration bill enhances the existing military retirement income tax subtraction 
modification by increasing the maximum amount of military retirement income received 
by an individual that may be exempted from Maryland income tax. Specifically, the bill 
increases the maximum value of the subtraction modification from $5,000 to $12,500 for 
individuals younger than age 55 and from $15,000 to $20,000 for individuals age 55 and 
older. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $11.2 million in FY 2024. The FY 2024 
general fund revenue reduction is assumed in the FY 2024 budget. Future years reflect 
projected growth in eligible retirement income. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($11.2) 
($11.7) 
($12.1) 
($12.6) 
($13.1) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($11.2) 
($11.7) 
($12.1) 
($12.6) 
($13.1)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by $7.3 million in FY 2024 and similar amounts 
annually thereafter. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
disagrees with this assessment as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 554/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Military Retirement Income Tax Subtraction 
 
An individual may exclude from Maryland adjusted gross income certain military 
retirement income, including death benefits, received as a result of (1) induction into the 
U.S. Armed Forces for training and service under the Selective Training and Service Act 
of 1940 or a similar subsequent act; (2) membership in an active or reserve component of 
the U.S. Armed Forces; (3) membership in the Maryland National Guard; or (4) active duty 
with the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, or the Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
 
The maximum value of the subtraction modification is $15,000 for an individual age 55 or 
older and $5,000 for an individual younger than age 55. 
 
As discussed below, an individual who is at least age 65, is totally disabled, or whose 
spouse is totally disabled may qualify for and claim the standard State pension exclusion 
for retirement income that is not excluded under the military retirement income subtraction. 
 
Maryland Pension Exclusion 
 
Under the Maryland pension exclusion, an individual who is at least age 65, who is totally 
disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may subtract certain taxable pension and 
retirement annuity income from federal adjusted gross income for purposes of determining 
Maryland adjusted gross income. The maximum value of the subtraction is indexed to the 
maximum annual benefit payable under the Social Security Act ($34,300 for 2022) and is 
reduced by the amount of any benefit payments received under the Social Security Act or 
Railroad Retirement Act (“Social Security offset”). 
 
Senior Tax Credit 
 
Chapters 3 and 4 of 2022 establish a nonrefundable tax credit against the State income tax 
for a resident who is age 65 or older and whose federal adjusted gross income does not 
exceed $100,000 ($150,000 if filing jointly or as a surviving spouse or head of household). 
The amount of the tax credit is equal to (1) $1,000 or (2) $1,750 for surviving spouses, 
heads of household, and joint filers if both spouses are at least age 65. The credit is 
available beginning tax year 2022. For a tax year in which the September general fund 
estimate issued by the Board of Revenue Estimates for the current fiscal year is more than 
7.5% below the March general fund estimate issued in the same year, the value of the tax 
credit is reduced for specified taxpayers. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 554/ Page 3 
Other Tax Relief for Seniors 
 
Social Security benefits and benefits received under the federal Railroad Retirement Act 
are totally exempt from the Maryland income tax, though they may be partly taxable for 
federal income tax purposes. Other income tax relief is provided to senior citizens 
regardless of the source of their income; in addition to the regular personal exemption 
available to all taxpayers, individuals age 65 and older may claim an additional exemption 
of $1,000. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease beginning in fiscal 2024 due to increases in the value of subtraction modifications 
claimed against Maryland income tax. Exhibit 1 displays the bill’s estimated effect on 
State and local revenues in fiscal 2024 through 2028. As shown in the exhibit, in 
fiscal 2024, State general fund revenues decrease by an estimated $11.2 million, and local 
income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $7.3 million. As noted above, the estimated 
fiscal 2024 general fund revenue reduction is assumed in the fiscal 2024 budget. Future 
years reflect projected growth in eligible retirement income. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on State and Local Revenues 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
State Effect 
($11.2) 
($11.7) 
($12.1) 
($12.6) 
($13.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Effect 
(7.3) 
(7.6) 
(7.9) 
(8.2) 
(8.6) 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Effect 
($18.5) 
($19.3) 
($20.0) 
($20.8) 
($21.7) 
 
Source:   Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
This estimate is based on analysis by the Comptroller’s Office of tax year 2020 State and 
federal income tax data, adjusted for provisions of the bill. The Comptroller’s Office 
estimates that approximately 33,000 military retirees will be eligible to subtract additional 
retirement income as a result of the bill. 
 
Small Business Impact:  DLS notes that the primary beneficiaries of the bill are 
individuals, not small businesses. While a portion of the proposed income tax reduction 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 554/ Page 4 
may be used by individuals for additional spending at Maryland small businesses, the bill’s 
overall effect on small businesses in the State is anticipated to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 553 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; U.S. Department of Defense; Department 
of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 554/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification for Military Retirement Income 
(Keep Our Heroes Home Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0553/HB0554 
 
PREPARED BY: Brad Fallon 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Maryland is one of 14 states that do not completely exempt military retirement income from 
taxation. Included in the 36 states that do exempt this income from taxation are West Virginia and 
Pennsylvania. Both Delaware and Virginia’s exemptions, while not full, outcompete Maryland’s. 
As a result, the highly trained and sought-after veteran workforce is incentivized to move to other 
states in our region. This has a negative economic impact on Maryland as companies assess where 
to locate and employees determine where to live.  
 
This legislation would increase the military retirement income tax exemption to $40,000 for 
recipients of any age beginning in tax year 2024. This will increase Maryland’s economic 
competitiveness by exempting a significant portion of or all of military retirement income received 
by recipients. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5