START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 559 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 559 
(Delegate Rose) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Carroll County - Alcoholic Beverages - Modification of Seating Requirements 
 
 
This bill modifies the seating requirements for Class B, Class BR, and Class C beer, wine, 
and liquor licenses in Carroll County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Carroll County operations or 
finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  
  
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor License  
 
Generally, a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license may be issued by the board for use by 
a hotel or a restaurant in Carroll County. A hotel must have at least 25 rooms, a lobby with 
a registration and mail desk, and a dining room that serves full-course meals at least 
twice daily and has regular seating not including seats at bars or counters for at least 
50 individuals. It must also be valued at not less than $50,000 for assessment and taxation. 
A restaurant must be open at least five days a week, serve two full-course meals a day from 
Monday to Friday, one full-course meal a day on Saturday and Sunday, have seating for at 
least 50 individuals, and be valued at not less than $50,000 for assessment and taxation. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 559/ Page 2 
The bill specifies that up to 15 seats at bars and counters may be included in the calculation 
for the seating requirement. 
 
Class BR Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
Generally, a Class BR beer, wine, and liquor license may be issued by the board to a 
restaurant in Carroll County that serves at least one full-course evening dinner meal at least 
five days a week and has regular seating not including seats at bars or counters for at least 
50 individuals. It must also be valued at not less than $50,000 for assessment and taxation.  
 
The bill specifies that up to 15 seats at bars and counters may be included in the calculation 
for the seating requirement. 
 
Class C Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
Generally, a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license may be used by the Board to a club in 
Carroll County that has a dining room with regular seating not including seats at bars or 
counters for at least 50 individuals. It must also be valued at not less than $20,000 for 
assessment and taxation.  
 
The bill specifies that up to 15 seats at bars and counters may be included in the calculation 
for the seating requirement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 304 (Carroll County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2