START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 505 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 505 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Elevator Safety - Privately Owned Single-Family Residential Elevators - 
Inspection and Registration Requirements 
 
 
This bill expands the applicability of specified registration and final inspection 
requirements for elevators to include those newly installed in privately owned 
single-family residences. Generally, the owner or lessee of each privately owned 
single-family residential elevator installed on or after October 1, 2023, must register the 
elevator with the Commissioner of Labor and Industry 60 days prior to its planned 
completion and before it is placed in service. The commissioner must conduct a final 
acceptance inspection on completion of the installation, modification, or alteration of such 
an elevator unit before it is placed in service. Owners of elevators in privately owned 
single-family residences do not need to reregister their elevators following initial 
certification, as otherwise required in current law. The commissioner may not disclose to 
the public any information regarding a registered elevator installed in a privately owned 
single-family residential dwelling and must delete the registration of such an elevator unit 
on completion of a final acceptance inspection. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
    
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) 
increase by $171,900 in FY 2024. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
Special fund revenues for MDL increase by $109,700 in FY 2024 and by about 
$146,300 annually thereafter. 
    
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$109,700 
$146,300 
$146,300 
$146,300 
$146,300 
SF Expenditure 
$171,900 
$206,900 
$215,500 
$224,400 
$235,500 
Net Effect 
($62,200) 
($60,600) 
($69,200) 
($78,200) 
($89,200)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 505/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, each elevator owned or operated in the State must be registered 
with the Commissioner of Labor and Industry and is subject to initial and periodic 
inspections. An elevator unit installed in a privately owned single-family residential 
dwelling (except for cliffside elevators) or installed in a building or structure under federal 
control is exempt from the State’s registration and inspection requirements for commercial 
elevators. 
 
Inspections are required for new elevators and after any modifications to existing elevators. 
State inspectors must make a final acceptance inspection of all new elevators prior to their 
being placed in service and issuance of a first certificate. Generally, operational elevators 
must undergo periodic annual inspections and more comprehensive five-year inspections. 
The State has recently completed the process of phasing in a requirement that annual and 
five-year tests performed on elevators in both privately and publicly owned buildings be 
conducted in the physical presence of a third-party qualified elevator inspector. By law, the 
process was fully phased in beginning October 1, 2022. 
 
Generally, the commissioner may assess and collect a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for each 
elevator unit in violation of the elevator safety code or a regulation adopted by the 
commissioner under Part II of the elevator safety law. A willful or repeated violation is 
subject to a civil penalty of up to $10,000. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, residential elevators are subject to registration 
requirements and must undergo a final acceptance inspection upon installation. Final 
acceptance inspections are performed by State inspectors. MDL estimates that the number 
of residential elevators (which include elevators, lifts, and chairlifts under current defined 
terms) subject to registration and final acceptance inspection under the bill is about 
450 annually. Thus, MDL must annually process approximately 450 new registration and 
inspection forms, enter information into an existing database, and answer inquiries related 
to the bill. Generally, except for additional inspectors to conduct the inspections, MDL can 
handle these requirements with existing resources. 
 
The Elevator Safety Inspection Unit is funded through an appropriation from the 
Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC). Therefore, special fund expenditures 
increase by $171,928 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the October 1, 2023 start date for 
residential final acceptance inspections. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 505/ Page 3 
two inspectors to conduct additional inspections. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, travel, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$143,916 
Operating Expenses 
28,012 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$171,928 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Although State inspectors are funded by a WCC appropriation, the fees collected from their 
inspections accrue to the Elevator Safety Review Board Fund, which covers the cost of the 
licensing and regulation of elevator mechanics and contractors. MDL charges $62.50 per 
hour of inspection time. Assuming an average of four hours are billed for each inspection 
or reinspection (expected to be needed following about 30% of initial inspections), special 
fund revenues for the Elevator Safety Review Board Fund increase by about $109,700 in 
fiscal 2024 and by about $146,300 annually thereafter. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that own single-family residences must pay for 
final acceptance inspections and any required modifications stemming from those 
inspections of newly regulated elevators upon installation beginning in fiscal 2024. 
MDL advises that such costs are typically included in the cost of an elevator installation 
for commercial properties – so costs could be passed on in the same way for residential 
installations. 
 
The total cost of inspections has risen significantly due to a shortage of elevator mechanics 
and inspectors. As noted above, the State fee for the inspection is about $250 ($62.50 per 
hour for four hours); however, according to MDL, there are additional costs for elevator 
mechanics to be present to perform the tests. MDL estimates the total cost of an inspection 
to be $1,000 to $2,000 for a chairlift and $3,000 to $4,000 for an elevator. 
 
Small businesses that offer elevator mechanic services may also see an increase in business 
due to the new demand from owners of residential elevator units to have the required 
inspection and testing be completed during the acceptance inspection. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not explicitly make owners of residential elevators 
subject to existing penalty provisions under Part II of the elevator safety law and, as such, 
enforcement of the bill’s provisions is unclear. Further, as MDL must, by law, delete the 
registrations of residential elevators after completion of final acceptance inspections, there 
will be no record against which to check for compliance with the initial registration and 
inspection requirement. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 505/ Page 4 
To the extent that current revenues for WCC are insufficient to cover the administrative 
costs described above, WCC may need to increase employer assessments to cover the costs, 
resulting in a minimal special fund revenue increase for WCC and negligible additional 
expenditures for the State, local governments, and small businesses as employers. As it is 
unclear whether additional assessments are needed, this analysis does not include any such 
potential revenue or expenditure increases. If needed, those increases would approximate 
the cost of MDL implementing the bill and would not have a material effect on 
WCC employer assessments or special fund revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 34 and HB 257 of 2022 and SB 546 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 198 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4