START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

Chapter 124

(House Bill 561)

AN ACT concerning

Town of Mount Airy (Carroll County and Frederick County) – Urban Renewal
Authority

FOR the purpose of granting the Town of Mount Airy in Carroll County and Frederick
County the authority to exercise urban renewal powers within an urban renewal
area under Article III, Section 61 of the Maryland Constitution; authorizing the
municipality to levy certain taxes and issue general obligation bonds and revenue
bonds to carry out urban renewal powers; and generally relating to urban renewal
authority for slum and blight clearance for the Town of Mount Airy in Carroll County
and Frederick County.

BY adding to
Chapter 99 – Charter of the Town of Mount Airy
Section A1–101 through A1–114 to be under the new heading “Appendix I – Urban
Renewal Authority for Slum Clearance”
Public Local Laws of Maryland – Compilation of Municipal Charters
(2014 Replacement Edition, Revisions Current as of November 2021)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Chapter 99 – Charter of the Town of Mount Airy

APPENDIX I – URBAN RENEWAL AUTHORITY FOR SLUM CLEARANCE

A1–101. DEFINITIONS.

(A) IN THIS APPENDIX THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BLIGHTED AREA” MEANS AN AREA OR SINGLE PROPERTY IN WHICH
THE BUILDING OR BUILDINGS HAVE DECLINED IN PRODUCTIVITY BY REASON OF
OBSOLESCENCE, DEPRECIATION, OR OTHER CAUSES TO AN EXTENT THEY NO
LONGER JUSTIFY FUNDAMENTAL REPAIRS AND ADEQUATE MAINTENANCE.

(C) “BONDS” MEANS ANY BONDS (INCLUDING REFUNDING BONDS), NOTES,
INTERIM CERTIFICATES, CERTIFICATES OF INDEBTEDNESS, DEBENTURES, OR
OTHER OBLIGATIONS.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) “FEDERAL GOVERNMENT” MEANS THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA OR
ANY AGENCY OR INSTRUMENTALITY, CORPORATE OR OTHERWISE, OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

(E) “MUNICIPALITY” MEANS THE TOWN OF MOUNT AIRY, MARYLAND.

(F) “PERSON” MEANS ANY INDIVIDUAL, FIRM, PARTNERSHIP,
CORPORATION, COMPANY, ASSOCIATION, JOINT STOCK ASSOCIATION, OR BODY
POLITIC. IT INCLUDES ANY TRUSTEE, RECEIVER, ASSIGNEE, OR OTHER PERSON
ACTING IN SIMILAR REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.

(G) “SLUM AREA” MEANS ANY AREA OR SINGLE PROPERTY WHERE
DWELLINGS PREDOMINATE WHICH, BY REASON OF DEPRECIATION,
OVERCROWDING, FAULTY ARRANGEMENT OR DESIGN, LACK OF VENTILATION,
LIGHT, OR SANITARY FACILITIES, OR ANY COMBINATION OF THESE FACTORS, ARE
DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY, HEALTH, OR MORALS.

(H) “URBAN RENEWAL AREA” MEANS A SLUM AREA OR A BLIGHTED AREA OR
A COMBINATION OF THEM WHICH THE MUNICIPALITY DESIGNATES AS APPROPRIATE
FOR AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT.

(I) “URBAN RENEWAL PLAN” MEANS A PLAN, AS IT EXISTS FROM TIME TO
TIME, FOR AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT. THE PLAN SHALL BE SUFFICIENTLY
COMPLETE TO INDICATE ANY LAND ACQUISITION, DEMOLITION, AND REMOVAL OF
STRUCTURES, REDEVELOPMENT, IMPROVEMENTS, AND REHABILITATION AS MAY BE
PROPOSED TO BE CARRIED OUT IN THE URBAN RENEWAL AREA, ZONING AND
PLANNING CHANGES, IF ANY, LAND USES, MAXIMUM DENSITY, AND BUILDING
REQUIREMENTS.

(J) “URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT” MEANS UNDERTAKINGS AND ACTIVITIES
OF A MUNICIPALITY IN AN URBAN RENEWAL AREA FOR THE ELIMINATION AND FOR
THE PREVENTION OF THE DEVELOPMENT OR SPREAD OF SLUMS AND BLIGHT, AND
MAY INVOLVE SLUM CLEARANCE AND REDEVELOPMENT IN AN URBAN RENEWAL
AREA, OR REHABILITATION OR CONSERVATION IN AN URBAN RENEWAL AREA, OR
ANY COMBINATION OR PART OF THEM IN ACCORDANCE WITH AN URBAN RENEWAL
PLAN. THESE UNDERTAKINGS AND ACTIVITIES MAY INCLUDE:

(1) ACQUISITION OF A SLUM AREA OR A BLIGHTED AREA OR PORTION
OF THEM;

(2) DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

(3) INSTALLATION, CONSTRUCTION OR RECONSTRUCTION OF
STREETS, UTILITIES, PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
NECESSARY FOR CARRYING OUT THE URBAN RENEWAL OBJECTIVES OF THIS
APPENDIX IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN;

(4) DISPOSITION OF ANY PROPERTY ACQUIRED IN THE URBAN
RENEWAL AREA, INCLUDING SALE, INITIAL LEASING, OR RETENTION BY THE
MUNICIPALITY ITSELF, AT ITS FAIR VALUE FOR USES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
URBAN RENEWAL PLAN;

(5) CARRYING OUT PLANS FOR A PROGRAM OF VOLUNTARY OR
COMPULSORY REPAIR AND REHABILITATION OF BUILDINGS OR OTHER
IMPROVEMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN;

(6) ACQUISITION OF ANY OTHER REAL PROPERTY IN THE URBAN
RENEWAL AREA WHERE NECESSARY TO ELIMINATE UNHEALTHFUL, UNSANITARY,
OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS, LESSEN DENSITY, ELIMINATE OBSOLETE OR OTHER USES
DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC WELFARE, OR OTHERWISE TO REMOVE OR PREVENT
THE SPREAD OF BLIGHT OR DETERIORATION, OR TO PROVIDE LAND FOR NEEDED
PUBLIC FACILITIES; AND

(7) THE PRESERVATION, IMPROVEMENT, OR EMBELLISHMENT OF
HISTORIC STRUCTURES OR MONUMENTS.

A1–102. POWERS.

(A) THE MUNICIPALITY MAY UNDERTAKE AND CARRY OUT URBAN RENEWAL
PROJECTS.

(B) THESE PROJECTS SHALL BE LIMITED:

(1) TO SLUM CLEARANCE IN SLUM OR BLIGHTED AREAS AND
REDEVELOPMENT OR THE REHABILITATION OF SLUM OR BLIGHTED AREAS;

(2) TO ACQUIRE IN CONNECTION WITH THOSE PROJECTS, WITHIN
THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE MUNICIPALITY, LAND AND PROPERTY OF EVERY
KIND AND ANY RIGHT, INTEREST, FRANCHISE, EASEMENT, OR PRIVILEGE,
INCLUDING LAND OR PROPERTY AND ANY RIGHT OR INTEREST ALREADY DEVOTED
TO PUBLIC USE, BY PURCHASE, LEASE, GIFT, CONDEMNATION, OR ANY OTHER LEGAL
MEANS; AND

(3) TO SELL, LEASE, CONVEY, TRANSFER, OR OTHERWISE DISPOSE OF
ANY OF THE LAND OR PROPERTY, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER OR NOT IT HAS BEEN
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DEVELOPED, REDEVELOPED, ALTERED, OR IMPROVED AND IRRESPECTIVE OF THE
MANNER OR MEANS IN OR BY WHICH IT MAY HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED, TO ANY PRIVATE,
PUBLIC, OR QUASI–PUBLIC CORPORATION, PARTNERSHIP, ASSOCIATION, PERSON,
OR OTHER LEGAL ENTITY.

(C) LAND OR PROPERTY TAKEN BY THE MUNICIPALITY FOR ANY OF THESE
PURPOSES OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE EXERCISE OF ANY OF THE POWERS WHICH
ARE GRANTED BY THIS APPENDIX TO THE MUNICIPALITY BY EXERCISING THE
POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN MAY NOT BE TAKEN WITHOUT JUST COMPENSATION,
AS AGREED ON BETWEEN THE PARTIES, OR AWARDED BY A JURY, BEING FIRST PAID
OR TENDERED TO THE PARTY ENTITLED TO THE COMPENSATION.

(D) ALL LAND OR PROPERTY NEEDED OR TAKEN BY THE EXERCISE OF THE
POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN BY THE MUNICIPALITY FOR ANY OF THESE PURPOSES
OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE EXERCISE OF ANY OF THE POWERS GRANTED BY THIS
APPENDIX IS DECLARED TO BE NEEDED OR TAKEN FOR PUBLIC USES AND
PURPOSES.

(E) ANY OR ALL OF THE ACTIVITIES AUTHORIZED PURSUANT TO THIS
APPENDIX CONSTITUTE GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS UNDERTAKEN FOR PUBLIC
USES AND PURPOSES AND THE POWER OF TAXATION MAY BE EXERCISED, PUBLIC
FUNDS EXPENDED, AND PUBLIC CREDIT EXTENDED IN FURTHERANCE OF THEM.

A1–103. ADDITIONAL POWERS.

THE MUNICIPALITY HAS THE FOLLOWING ADDITIONAL POWERS. THESE
POWERS ARE DECLARED TO BE NECESSARY AND PROPER TO CARRY INTO FULL
FORCE AND EFFECT THE SPECIFIC POWERS GRANTED IN THIS APPENDIX AND TO
FULLY ACCOMPLISH THE PURPOSES AND OBJECTS CONTEMPLATED BY THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION:

(1) TO MAKE OR HAVE MADE ALL SURVEYS AND PLANS NECESSARY TO
THE CARRYING OUT OF THE PURPOSES OF THIS APPENDIX AND TO ADOPT OR
APPROVE, MODIFY, AND AMEND THOSE PLANS. THESE PLANS MAY INCLUDE, BUT
ARE NOT LIMITED TO:

(I) PLANS FOR CARRYING OUT A PROGRAM OF VOLUNTARY OR
COMPULSORY REPAIR AND REHABILITATION OF BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS;

(II) PLANS FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF CODES AND
REGULATIONS RELATING TO THE USE OF LAND AND THE USE AND OCCUPANCY OF
BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS AND TO THE COMPULSORY REPAIR,

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

REHABILITATION, DEMOLITION, OR REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS;
AND

(III) APPRAISALS, TITLE SEARCHES, SURVEYS, STUDIES, AND
OTHER PLANS AND WORK NECESSARY TO PREPARE FOR THE UNDERTAKING OF
URBAN RENEWAL PROJECTS AND RELATED ACTIVITIES; AND TO APPLY FOR,
ACCEPT, AND UTILIZE GRANTS OF FUNDS FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR
OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY FOR THOSE PURPOSES;

(2) TO PREPARE PLANS FOR THE RELOCATION OF PERSONS
(INCLUDING FAMILIES, BUSINESS CONCERNS, AND OTHERS) DISPLACED FROM AN
URBAN RENEWAL AREA, AND TO MAKE RELOCATION PAYMENTS TO OR WITH
RESPECT TO THOSE PERSONS FOR MOVING EXPENSES AND LOSSES OF PROPERTY
FOR WHICH REIMBURSEMENT OR COMPENSATION IS NOT OTHERWISE MADE,
INCLUDING THE MAKING OF PAYMENTS FINANCED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT;

(3) TO APPROPRIATE WHATEVER FUNDS AND MAKE WHATEVER
EXPENDITURES AS MAY BE NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS
APPENDIX, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED:

(I) TO THE PAYMENT OF ANY AND ALL COSTS AND EXPENSES
INCURRED IN CONNECTION WITH, OR INCIDENTAL TO, THE ACQUISITION OF LAND
OR PROPERTY, AND FOR THE DEMOLITION, REMOVAL, RELOCATION, RENOVATION,
OR ALTERATION OF LAND, BUILDINGS, STREETS, HIGHWAYS, ALLEYS, UTILITIES, OR
SERVICES, AND OTHER STRUCTURES OR IMPROVEMENTS, AND FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, RELOCATION, OR REPAIR OF
STREETS, HIGHWAYS, ALLEYS, UTILITIES, OR SERVICES, IN CONNECTION WITH
URBAN RENEWAL PROJECTS;

(II) TO LEVY TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS FOR THOSE PURPOSES;

(III) TO BORROW MONEY AND TO APPLY FOR AND ACCEPT
ADVANCES, LOANS, GRANTS, CONTRIBUTIONS, AND ANY OTHER FORM OF FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, THE STATE, COUNTY, OR OTHER
PUBLIC BODIES, OR FROM ANY SOURCES, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE, FOR THE PURPOSES
OF THIS APPENDIX, AND TO GIVE WHATEVER SECURITY AS MAY BE REQUIRED FOR
THIS FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; AND

(IV) TO INVEST ANY URBAN RENEWAL FUNDS HELD IN RESERVES
OR SINKING FUNDS OR ANY OF THESE FUNDS NOT REQUIRED FOR IMMEDIATE
DISBURSEMENT IN PROPERTY OR SECURITIES WHICH ARE LEGAL INVESTMENTS FOR
OTHER MUNICIPAL FUNDS;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) (I) TO HOLD, IMPROVE, CLEAR, OR PREPARE FOR
REDEVELOPMENT ANY PROPERTY ACQUIRED IN CONNECTION WITH URBAN
RENEWAL PROJECTS;

(II) TO MORTGAGE, PLEDGE, HYPOTHECATE, OR OTHERWISE
ENCUMBER THAT PROPERTY; AND

(III) TO INSURE OR PROVIDE FOR THE INSURANCE OF THE
PROPERTY OR OPERATIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITY AGAINST ANY RISKS OR
HAZARDS, INCLUDING THE POWER TO PAY PREMIUMS ON ANY INSURANCE;

(5) TO MAKE AND EXECUTE ALL CONTRACTS AND OTHER
INSTRUMENTS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO THE EXERCISE OF ITS POWERS
UNDER THIS APPENDIX, INCLUDING THE POWER TO ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS WITH
OTHER PUBLIC BODIES OR AGENCIES (THESE AGREEMENTS MAY EXTEND OVER ANY
PERIOD, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OR RULE OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY),
AND TO INCLUDE IN ANY CONTRACT FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WITH THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FOR OR WITH RESPECT TO AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT
AND RELATED ACTIVITIES ANY CONDITIONS IMPOSED PURSUANT TO FEDERAL LAWS
AS THE MUNICIPALITY CONSIDERS REASONABLE AND APPROPRIATE;

(6) TO ENTER INTO ANY BUILDING OR PROPERTY IN ANY URBAN
RENEWAL AREA IN ORDER TO MAKE INSPECTIONS, SURVEYS, APPRAISALS,
SOUNDINGS, OR TEST BORINGS, AND TO OBTAIN AN ORDER FOR THIS PURPOSE FROM
THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE MUNICIPALITY IS SITUATED IN
THE EVENT ENTRY IS DENIED OR RESISTED;

(7) TO PLAN, REPLAN, INSTALL, CONSTRUCT, RECONSTRUCT,
REPAIR, CLOSE, OR VACATE STREETS, ROADS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC UTILITIES,
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND OTHER PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN CONNECTION WITH
AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT; AND TO MAKE EXCEPTIONS FROM BUILDING
REGULATIONS;

(8) TO GENERALLY ORGANIZE, COORDINATE, AND DIRECT THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS APPENDIX AS THEY APPLY TO THE
MUNICIPALITY IN ORDER THAT THE OBJECTIVE OF REMEDYING SLUM AND
BLIGHTED AREAS AND PREVENTING ITS CAUSES WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY MAY BE
PROMOTED AND ACHIEVED MOST EFFECTIVELY; AND

(9) TO EXERCISE ALL OR ANY PART OR COMBINATION OF THE
POWERS GRANTED IN THIS APPENDIX.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

A1–104. ESTABLISHMENT OF URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY.

(A) A MUNICIPALITY MAY ITSELF EXERCISE ALL THE POWERS GRANTED BY
THIS APPENDIX, OR MAY, IF ITS LEGISLATIVE BODY BY ORDINANCE DETERMINES
THE ACTION TO BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST, ELECT TO HAVE THE POWERS
EXERCISED BY A SEPARATE PUBLIC BODY OR AGENCY.

(B) IN THE EVENT THE LEGISLATIVE BODY MAKES THAT DETERMINATION,
IT SHALL PROCEED BY ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A PUBLIC BODY OR AGENCY TO
UNDERTAKE IN THE MUNICIPALITY THE ACTIVITIES AUTHORIZED BY THIS
APPENDIX.

(C) THE ORDINANCE SHALL INCLUDE PROVISIONS ESTABLISHING THE
NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC BODY OR AGENCY, THE MANNER OF THEIR
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL, AND THE TERMS OF THE MEMBERS AND THEIR
COMPENSATION.

(D) THE ORDINANCE MAY INCLUDE WHATEVER ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
RELATING TO THE ORGANIZATION OF THE PUBLIC BODY OR AGENCY AS MAY BE
NECESSARY.

(E) IN THE EVENT THE LEGISLATIVE BODY ENACTS THIS ORDINANCE, ALL
OF THE POWERS BY THIS APPENDIX GRANTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY, FROM THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE ORDINANCE, ARE VESTED IN THE PUBLIC BODY OR AGENCY
ESTABLISHED BY THE ORDINANCE.

A1–105. POWERS WITHHELD FROM THE AGENCY.

THE AGENCY MAY NOT:

(1) PASS A RESOLUTION TO INITIATE AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT
PURSUANT TO SECTIONS A1–102 AND A1–103 OF THIS APPENDIX;

(2) ISSUE GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS PURSUANT TO SECTION
A1–111 OF THIS APPENDIX; OR

(3) APPROPRIATE FUNDS OR LEVY TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
PURSUANT TO SECTION A1–103(3) OF THIS APPENDIX.

A1–106. INITIATION OF PROJECT.

IN ORDER TO INITIATE AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT, THE LEGISLATIVE
BODY OF THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL ADOPT A RESOLUTION WHICH:
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) FINDS THAT ONE OR MORE SLUM OR BLIGHTED AREAS EXIST IN
THE MUNICIPALITY;

(2) LOCATES AND DEFINES THE SLUM OR BLIGHTED AREA; AND

(3) FINDS THAT THE REHABILITATION, REDEVELOPMENT, OR A
COMBINATION OF THEM, OF THE AREA OR AREAS, IS NECESSARY AND IN THE
INTEREST OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, MORALS, OR WELFARE OF THE
RESIDENTS OF THE MUNICIPALITY.

A1–107. PREPARATION AND APPROVAL OF PLAN FOR URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT.

(A) IN ORDER TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS APPENDIX, THE
MUNICIPALITY SHALL HAVE PREPARED AN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN FOR SLUM OR
BLIGHTED AREAS IN THE MUNICIPALITY, AND SHALL APPROVE THE PLAN
FORMALLY. THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL HOLD A PUBLIC HEARING ON AN URBAN
RENEWAL PROJECT AFTER PUBLIC NOTICE OF IT BY PUBLICATION IN A NEWSPAPER
HAVING A GENERAL CIRCULATION WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE
MUNICIPALITY. THE NOTICE SHALL DESCRIBE THE TIME, DATE, PLACE, AND
PURPOSE OF THE HEARING, SHALL GENERALLY IDENTIFY THE URBAN RENEWAL
AREA COVERED BY THE PLAN, AND SHALL OUTLINE THE GENERAL SCOPE OF THE
URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT UNDER CONSIDERATION. FOLLOWING THE HEARING,
THE MUNICIPALITY MAY APPROVE AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AND THE PLAN
THEREFOR IF IT FINDS THAT:

(1) A FEASIBLE METHOD EXISTS FOR THE LOCATION OF ANY
FAMILIES OR NATURAL PERSONS WHO WILL BE DISPLACED FROM THE URBAN
RENEWAL AREA IN DECENT, SAFE, AND SANITARY DWELLING ACCOMMODATIONS
WITHIN THEIR MEANS AND WITHOUT UNDUE HARDSHIP TO THE FAMILIES OR
NATURAL PERSONS;

(2) THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN CONFORMS SUBSTANTIALLY TO THE
MASTER PLAN OF THE MUNICIPALITY AS A WHOLE; AND

(3) THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN WILL AFFORD MAXIMUM
OPPORTUNITY, CONSISTENT WITH THE SOUND NEEDS OF THE MUNICIPALITY AS A
WHOLE, FOR THE REHABILITATION OR REDEVELOPMENT OF THE URBAN RENEWAL
AREA BY PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.

(B) AN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN MAY BE MODIFIED AT ANY TIME. IF
MODIFIED AFTER THE LEASE OR SALE OF REAL PROPERTY IN THE URBAN RENEWAL

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

PROJECT AREA, THE MODIFICATION MAY BE CONDITIONED ON WHATEVER
APPROVAL OF THE OWNER, LESSEE, OR SUCCESSOR IN INTEREST AS THE
MUNICIPALITY CONSIDERS ADVISABLE. IN ANY EVENT, IT SHALL BE SUBJECT TO
WHATEVER RIGHTS AT LAW OR IN EQUITY AS A LESSEE OR PURCHASER, OR THE
SUCCESSOR OR SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST, MAY BE ENTITLED TO ASSERT. WHERE
THE PROPOSED MODIFICATION WILL CHANGE SUBSTANTIALLY THE URBAN
RENEWAL PLAN AS APPROVED PREVIOUSLY BY THE MUNICIPALITY, THE
MODIFICATION SHALL BE APPROVED FORMALLY BY THE MUNICIPALITY, AS IN THE
CASE OF AN ORIGINAL PLAN.

(C) ON THE APPROVAL BY THE MUNICIPALITY OF AN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
OR OF ANY MODIFICATION OF IT, THE PLAN OR MODIFICATION SHALL BE
CONSIDERED TO BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT FOR THE RESPECTIVE URBAN
RENEWAL AREA. THE MUNICIPALITY MAY HAVE THE PLAN OR MODIFICATION
CARRIED OUT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS TERMS.

A1–108. DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY IN URBAN RENEWAL AREA.

(A) THE MUNICIPALITY, BY ORDINANCE, MAY SELL, LEASE, OR OTHERWISE
TRANSFER REAL PROPERTY OR ANY INTEREST IN IT ACQUIRED BY IT FOR AN URBAN
RENEWAL PROJECT TO ANY PERSON FOR RESIDENTIAL, RECREATIONAL,
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, EDUCATIONAL, OR OTHER USES OR FOR PUBLIC USE, OR
IT MAY RETAIN THE PROPERTY OR INTEREST FOR PUBLIC USE, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN AND SUBJECT TO WHATEVER COVENANTS,
CONDITIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS, INCLUDING COVENANTS RUNNING WITH THE
LAND, AS IT CONSIDERS NECESSARY OR DESIRABLE TO ASSIST IN PREVENTING THE
DEVELOPMENT OR SPREAD OF FUTURE SLUMS OR BLIGHTED AREAS OR TO
OTHERWISE CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS APPENDIX. THE PURCHASERS OR
LESSEES AND THEIR SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS SHALL BE OBLIGATED TO DEVOTE
THE REAL PROPERTY ONLY TO THE USES SPECIFIED IN THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN,
AND MAY BE OBLIGATED TO COMPLY WITH WHATEVER OTHER REQUIREMENTS THE
MUNICIPALITY DETERMINES TO BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST, INCLUDING THE
OBLIGATION TO BEGIN WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME ANY IMPROVEMENTS ON THE
REAL PROPERTY REQUIRED BY THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN. THE REAL PROPERTY
OR INTEREST MAY NOT BE SOLD, LEASED, OTHERWISE TRANSFERRED, OR RETAINED
AT LESS THAN ITS FAIR VALUE FOR USES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE URBAN
RENEWAL PLAN. IN DETERMINING THE FAIR VALUE OF REAL PROPERTY FOR USES
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN, THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL TAKE
INTO ACCOUNT AND GIVE CONSIDERATION TO THE USES PROVIDED IN THE PLAN,
THE RESTRICTIONS ON, AND THE COVENANTS, CONDITIONS, AND OBLIGATIONS
ASSUMED BY THE PURCHASER OR LESSEE OR BY THE MUNICIPALITY RETAINING THE
PROPERTY, AND THE OBJECTIVES OF THE PLAN FOR THE PREVENTION OF THE
RECURRENCE OF SLUM OR BLIGHTED AREAS. IN ANY INSTRUMENT OR CONVEYANCE
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

TO A PRIVATE PURCHASER OR LESSEE, THE MUNICIPALITY MAY PROVIDE THAT THE
PURCHASER OR LESSEE MAY NOT SELL, LEASE, OR OTHERWISE TRANSFER THE REAL
PROPERTY WITHOUT THE PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE MUNICIPALITY UNTIL
THE PURCHASER OR LESSEE HAS COMPLETED THE CONSTRUCTION OF ANY OR ALL
IMPROVEMENTS WHICH THE PURCHASER OR LESSEE HAS BEEN OBLIGATED TO
CONSTRUCT ON THE PROPERTY. REAL PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY THE MUNICIPALITY
WHICH, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN, IS
TO BE TRANSFERRED, SHALL BE TRANSFERRED AS RAPIDLY AS FEASIBLE IN THE
PUBLIC INTEREST CONSISTENT WITH THE CARRYING OUT OF THE PROVISIONS OF
THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN. ANY CONTRACT FOR THE TRANSFER AND THE URBAN
RENEWAL PLAN (OR ANY PART OR PARTS OF THE CONTRACT OR PLAN AS THE
MUNICIPALITY DETERMINES) MAY BE RECORDED IN THE LAND RECORDS OF THE
COUNTY IN WHICH THE MUNICIPALITY IS SITUATED IN A MANNER SO AS TO AFFORD
ACTUAL OR CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF IT.

(B) THE MUNICIPALITY, BY ORDINANCE, MAY DISPOSE OF REAL PROPERTY
IN AN URBAN RENEWAL AREA TO PRIVATE PERSONS. THE MUNICIPALITY MAY, BY
PUBLIC NOTICE BY PUBLICATION IN A NEWSPAPER HAVING A GENERAL
CIRCULATION IN THE COMMUNITY, INVITE PROPOSALS FROM AND MAKE AVAILABLE
ALL PERTINENT INFORMATION TO PRIVATE REDEVELOPERS OR ANY PERSONS
INTERESTED IN UNDERTAKING TO REDEVELOP OR REHABILITATE AN URBAN
RENEWAL AREA, OR ANY PART THEREOF. THE NOTICE SHALL IDENTIFY THE AREA,
OR PORTION THEREOF, AND SHALL STATE THAT PROPOSALS SHALL BE MADE BY
THOSE INTERESTED WITHIN A SPECIFIED PERIOD. THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL
CONSIDER ALL REDEVELOPMENT OR REHABILITATION PROPOSALS AND THE
FINANCIAL AND LEGAL ABILITY OF THE PERSONS MAKING PROPOSALS TO CARRY
THEM OUT, AND MAY NEGOTIATE WITH ANY PERSONS FOR PROPOSALS FOR THE
PURCHASE, LEASE, OR OTHER TRANSFER OF ANY REAL PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY
THE MUNICIPALITY IN THE URBAN RENEWAL AREA. THE MUNICIPALITY MAY ACCEPT
ANY PROPOSAL AS IT DEEMS TO BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST AND IN FURTHERANCE
OF THE PURPOSES OF THIS APPENDIX. THEREAFTER, THE MUNICIPALITY MAY
EXECUTE AND DELIVER CONTRACTS, DEEDS, LEASES, AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS
AND TAKE ALL STEPS NECESSARY TO EFFECTUATE THE TRANSFERS.

(C) THE MUNICIPALITY MAY OPERATE TEMPORARILY AND MAINTAIN REAL
PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY IT IN AN URBAN RENEWAL AREA FOR OR IN CONNECTION
WITH AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT PENDING THE DISPOSITION OF THE PROPERTY
AS AUTHORIZED IN THIS APPENDIX, WITHOUT REGARD TO THE PROVISIONS OF
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, FOR USES AND PURPOSES CONSIDERED
DESIRABLE EVEN THOUGH NOT IN CONFORMITY WITH THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN.

(D) ANY INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY THE MUNICIPALITY AND PURPORTING

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

TO CONVEY ANY RIGHT, TITLE, OR INTEREST IN ANY PROPERTY UNDER THIS
APPENDIX SHALL BE PRESUMED CONCLUSIVELY TO HAVE BEEN EXECUTED IN
COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS APPENDIX INSOFAR AS TITLE OR
OTHER INTEREST OF ANY BONA FIDE PURCHASERS, LESSEES, OR TRANSFEREES OF
THE PROPERTY IS CONCERNED.

A1–109. EMINENT DOMAIN.

CONDEMNATION OF LAND OR PROPERTY UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
APPENDIX SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROCEDURE PROVIDED IN THE
REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE OF THE ANNOTATED CODE OF MARYLAND.

A1–110. ENCOURAGEMENT OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.

THE MUNICIPALITY, TO THE EXTENT IT DETERMINES TO BE FEASIBLE IN
CARRYING OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS APPENDIX, SHALL AFFORD MAXIMUM
OPPORTUNITY TO THE REHABILITATION OR REDEVELOPMENT OF ANY URBAN
RENEWAL AREA BY PRIVATE ENTERPRISE CONSISTENT WITH THE SOUND NEEDS OF
THE MUNICIPALITY AS A WHOLE. THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL GIVE CONSIDERATION
TO THIS OBJECTIVE IN EXERCISING ITS POWERS UNDER THIS APPENDIX.

A1–111. GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS.

FOR THE PURPOSE OF FINANCING AND CARRYING OUT AN URBAN RENEWAL
PROJECT AND RELATED ACTIVITIES, THE MUNICIPALITY MAY ISSUE AND SELL ITS
GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS. ANY BONDS ISSUED BY THE MUNICIPALITY
PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION SHALL BE ISSUED IN THE MANNER AND WITHIN THE
LIMITATIONS PRESCRIBED BY APPLICABLE LAW FOR THE ISSUANCE AND
AUTHORIZATION OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS BY THE MUNICIPALITY, AND
ALSO WITHIN LIMITATIONS DETERMINED BY THE MUNICIPALITY.

A1–112. REVENUE BONDS.

(A) IN ADDITION TO THE AUTHORITY CONFERRED BY SECTION A1–111 OF
THIS APPENDIX, THE MUNICIPALITY MAY ISSUE REVENUE BONDS TO FINANCE THE
UNDERTAKING OF ANY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AND RELATED ACTIVITIES. ALSO,
IT MAY ISSUE REFUNDING BONDS FOR THE PAYMENT OR RETIREMENT OF THE
BONDS ISSUED PREVIOUSLY BY IT. THE BONDS SHALL BE MADE PAYABLE, AS TO
BOTH PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST, SOLELY FROM THE INCOME, PROCEEDS,
REVENUES, AND FUNDS OF THE MUNICIPALITY DERIVED FROM OR HELD IN
CONNECTION WITH THE UNDERTAKING AND CARRYING OUT OF URBAN RENEWAL
PROJECTS UNDER THIS APPENDIX. HOWEVER, PAYMENT OF THE BONDS, BOTH AS
TO PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST, MAY BE FURTHER SECURED BY A PLEDGE OF ANY
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

LOAN, GRANT, OR CONTRIBUTION FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR OTHER
SOURCE, IN AID OF ANY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECTS OF THE MUNICIPALITY UNDER
THIS APPENDIX, AND BY A MORTGAGE OF ANY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT, OR ANY
PART OF A PROJECT, TITLE TO WHICH IS IN THE MUNICIPALITY. IN ADDITION, THE
MUNICIPALITY MAY ENTER INTO AN INDENTURE OF TRUST WITH ANY PRIVATE
BANKING INSTITUTION OF THIS STATE HAVING TRUST POWERS AND MAY MAKE IN
THE INDENTURE OF TRUST COVENANTS AND COMMITMENTS REQUIRED BY ANY
PURCHASER FOR THE ADEQUATE SECURITY OF THE BONDS.

(B) BONDS ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION DO NOT CONSTITUTE AN
INDEBTEDNESS WITHIN THE MEANING OF ANY CONSTITUTIONAL OR STATUTORY
DEBT LIMITATION OR RESTRICTION, ARE NOT SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF ANY
OTHER LAW OR CHARTER RELATING TO THE AUTHORIZATION, ISSUANCE, OR SALE
OF BONDS, AND ARE EXEMPTED SPECIFICALLY FROM THE RESTRICTIONS
CONTAINED IN §§ 19–205 AND 19–206 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ARTICLE OF
THE ANNOTATED CODE OF MARYLAND. BONDS ISSUED UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF
THIS APPENDIX ARE DECLARED TO BE ISSUED FOR AN ESSENTIAL PUBLIC AND
GOVERNMENTAL PURPOSE AND, TOGETHER WITH INTEREST ON THEM AND INCOME
FROM THEM, ARE EXEMPT FROM ALL TAXES.

(C) BONDS ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE AUTHORIZED BY
RESOLUTION OR ORDINANCE OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY OF THE MUNICIPALITY.
THEY MAY BE ISSUED IN ONE OR MORE SERIES AND SHALL:

(1) BEAR A DATE OR DATES;

(2) MATURE AT A TIME OR TIMES;

(3) BEAR INTEREST AT A RATE OR RATES;

(4) BE IN A DENOMINATION OR DENOMINATIONS;

(5) BE IN A FORM EITHER WITH OR WITHOUT COUPON OR
REGISTERED;

(6) CARRY A CONVERSION OR REGISTRATION PRIVILEGE;

(7) HAVE A RANK OR PRIORITY;

(8) BE EXECUTED IN A MANNER;

(9) BE PAYABLE IN A MEDIUM OF PAYMENT, AT A PLACE OR PLACES,

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 124

AND BE SUBJECT TO TERMS OF REDEMPTION (WITH OR WITHOUT PREMIUM);

(10) BE SECURED IN A MANNER; AND

(11) HAVE OTHER CHARACTERISTICS, AS ARE PROVIDED BY THE
RESOLUTION, TRUST INDENTURE, OR MORTGAGE ISSUED PURSUANT TO IT.

(D) THESE BONDS MAY NOT BE SOLD AT LESS THAN PAR VALUE AT PUBLIC
SALES WHICH ARE HELD AFTER NOTICE IS PUBLISHED PRIOR TO THE SALE IN A
NEWSPAPER HAVING A GENERAL CIRCULATION IN THE AREA IN WHICH THE
MUNICIPALITY IS LOCATED AND IN WHATEVER OTHER MEDIUM OF PUBLICATION AS
THE MUNICIPALITY MAY DETERMINE. THE BONDS MAY BE EXCHANGED ALSO FOR
OTHER BONDS ON THE BASIS OF PAR. HOWEVER, THE BONDS MAY NOT BE SOLD TO
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AT PRIVATE SALE AT LESS THAN PAR, AND, IN THE
EVENT LESS THAN ALL OF THE AUTHORIZED PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF THE BONDS IS
SOLD TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, THE BALANCE MAY NOT BE SOLD AT PRIVATE
SALE AT LESS THAN PAR AT AN INTEREST COST TO THE MUNICIPALITY WHICH DOES
NOT EXCEED THE INTEREST COST TO THE MUNICIPALITY OF THE PORTION OF THE
BONDS SOLD TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.

(E) IN CASE ANY OF THE PUBLIC OFFICIALS OF THE MUNICIPALITY WHOSE
SIGNATURES APPEAR ON ANY BONDS OR COUPONS ISSUED UNDER THIS APPENDIX
CEASE TO BE OFFICIALS OF THE MUNICIPALITY BEFORE THE DELIVERY OF THE
BONDS OR IN THE EVENT ANY OF THE OFFICIALS HAVE BECOME SUCH AFTER THE
DATE OF ISSUE OF THEM, THE BONDS ARE VALID AND BINDING OBLIGATIONS OF THE
MUNICIPALITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR TERMS. ANY PROVISION OF ANY LAW
TO THE CONTRARY NOTWITHSTANDING, ANY BONDS ISSUED PURSUANT TO THIS
APPENDIX ARE FULLY NEGOTIABLE.

(F) IN ANY SUIT, ACTION, OR PROCEEDING INVOLVING THE VALIDITY OR
ENFORCEABILITY OF ANY BOND ISSUED UNDER THIS APPENDIX, OR THE SECURITY
FOR IT, ANY BOND WHICH RECITES IN SUBSTANCE THAT IT HAS BEEN ISSUED BY THE
MUNICIPALITY IN CONNECTION WITH AN URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT SHALL BE
CONSIDERED CONCLUSIVELY TO HAVE BEEN ISSUED FOR THAT PURPOSE, AND THE
PROJECT SHALL BE CONSIDERED CONCLUSIVELY TO HAVE BEEN PLANNED,
LOCATED, AND CARRIED OUT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
APPENDIX.

(G) ALL BANKS, TRUST COMPANIES, BANKERS, SAVINGS BANKS, AND
INSTITUTIONS, BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS, SAVINGS AND LOAN
ASSOCIATIONS, INVESTMENT COMPANIES, AND OTHER PERSONS CARRYING ON A
BANKING OR INVESTMENT BUSINESS; ALL INSURANCE COMPANIES, INSURANCE
ASSOCIATIONS, AND OTHER PERSONS CARRYING ON AN INSURANCE BUSINESS; AND
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 124 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ALL EXECUTORS, ADMINISTRATORS, CURATORS, TRUSTEES, AND OTHER
FIDUCIARIES, MAY LEGALLY INVEST ANY SINKING FUNDS, MONEYS, OR OTHER
FUNDS BELONGING TO THEM OR WITHIN THEIR CONTROL IN ANY BONDS OR OTHER
OBLIGATIONS ISSUED BY THE MUNICIPALITY PURSUANT TO THIS APPENDIX.
HOWEVER, THE BONDS AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS SHALL BE SECURED BY AN
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE ISSUER AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IN WHICH THE
ISSUER AGREES TO BORROW FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AGREES TO LEND TO THE ISSUER, PRIOR TO THE MATURITY OF THE
BONDS OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS, MONEYS IN AN AMOUNT WHICH (TOGETHER WITH
ANY OTHER MONEYS COMMITTED IRREVOCABLY TO THE PAYMENT OF PRINCIPAL
AND INTEREST ON THE BONDS OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS) WILL SUFFICE TO PAY THE
PRINCIPAL OF THE BONDS OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS WITH INTEREST TO MATURITY
ON THEM. THE MONEYS UNDER THE TERMS OF THE AGREEMENT SHALL BE
REQUIRED TO BE USED FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE PRINCIPAL OF AND THE
INTEREST ON THE BONDS OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS AT THEIR MATURITY. THE BONDS
AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS SHALL BE AUTHORIZED SECURITY FOR ALL PUBLIC
DEPOSITS. THIS SECTION AUTHORIZES ANY PERSONS OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS AND OFFICERS TO USE ANY FUNDS OWNED OR
CONTROLLED BY THEM FOR THE PURCHASE OF ANY BONDS OR OTHER
OBLIGATIONS. WITH REGARD TO LEGAL INVESTMENTS, THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE
CONSTRUED TO RELIEVE ANY PERSON OF ANY DUTY OF EXERCISING REASONABLE
CARE IN SELECTING SECURITIES.

A1–113. SHORT TITLE.

THIS APPENDIX SHALL BE KNOWN AND MAY BE CITED AS THE MOUNT AIRY
URBAN RENEWAL AUTHORITY FOR SLUM CLEARANCE ACT.

A1–114. AUTHORITY TO AMEND OR REPEAL.

THIS APPENDIX, ENACTED PURSUANT TO ARTICLE III, SECTION 61 OF THE
MARYLAND CONSTITUTION, MAY BE AMENDED OR REPEALED ONLY BY THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14