START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 555 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 555 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Maryland Judiciary) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore County - Circuit Court Judgeships 
 
 
This bill alters the number of resident judges of the circuit court by adding one additional 
judgeship in Baltimore County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $365,900 in FY 2024 
for one additional judge and associated staff; the FY 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes funding for this purpose. Future year expenditures reflect 
annualization. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
365,900 
486,000 
508,700 
515,800 
530,200 
Net Effect 
($365,900) 
($486,000) 
($508,700) 
($515,800) 
($530,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County expenditures increase beginning in FY 2024. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There are 174 circuit court judges in the State, including 20 in 
Baltimore County. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 555/ Page 2 
Background:  Additional judgeships were last created by Chapter 749 of 2019, which 
added one circuit court judge in Washington County and six District Court judges 
(throughout the State). To support the General Assembly’s role in establishing new 
judgeships, the Chief Judge of the Supreme Court of Maryland annually certifies to the 
General Assembly the need for additional judges in the State. The Judiciary uses best 
practices developed by the National Center for State Courts (NCSC) to calculate judicial 
need, which take into account the amount of judicial work generated on average per case 
filing within each distinct case type. Using the model developed by NCSC, judicial need 
for fiscal 2024 was primarily based on the average number and type of cases filed in the 
most recent three years least affected by the COVID pandemic (from fiscal 2018 through 
2020). Although certification of judicial workloads indicates a projected need of 
seven additional judges throughout the State (three in circuit courts/four in the 
District Court), the Judiciary is requesting one judge position for Baltimore County, as it 
is deemed to be in most critical need of additional judicial resources. The Judiciary is also 
requesting one additional magistrate in Baltimore County, however, the number of 
magistrates authorized in each jurisdiction is not established in statute and is therefore not 
addressed in the bill.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $365,916 in fiscal 2024, 
which assumes a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of creating 
one circuit court judgeship in Baltimore County and the associated positions of 
one courtroom clerk and one law clerk with the judgeship (a total of three positions). It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, and one‐time start-up costs.   
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$355,416 
Start‐up Costs   
10,500 
FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$365,916 
 
Future year expenditures generally reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover.  However, pursuant to Joint Resolutions 2 and 3 of 2022, judicial salaries have 
been set in statute through fiscal 2026. Because future increases in judicial salaries depend 
on any recommendations proposed by the Judicial Compensation Commission and 
subsequent action by the General Assembly, judicial salaries beyond fiscal 2026 do not 
account for additional increases.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The counties are responsible for funding certain operating expenses 
of the circuit courts, including the salaries and operating expenses of administrative 
assistants for circuit court judges. Therefore, Baltimore County expenditures increase 
beginning in fiscal 2024 to reflect the addition of the new judgeship, including costs 
associated with an administrative assistant for the judge. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 555/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 342 (The President)(By Request - Maryland Judiciary) - 
Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - July 20, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3