START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 509 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 509 
(Delegate Tomlinson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Elections - Municipal Elections - Publication of Results on 
Website 
 
 
This bill requires a municipality to submit an electronic copy of its election results to the 
State Board of Elections (SBE) within 30 days after the results are certified, and SBE must 
publish the results on its website immediately after a municipality submits them. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires a municipality to, within 30 days after the results of a 
municipal election are certified, submit to SBE an electronic copy of the election results 
for each office or question voted on at the election, including:   
 
 
vote totals for each office or question, reported separately by each of the following 
voting methods, if applicable:  (1) in-person early voting; (2) mail-in voting or 
vote-by-mail; (3) provisional voting; and (4) in-person election day voting; and 
 
the party affiliation of each candidate if the municipality conducts partisan elections. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 509/ Page 2 
The bill requires SBE to, immediately after a municipality submits its election results, 
publish the election results on the SBE website. The election results published by SBE 
must be organized by election year and the name of the municipality. 
 
Current Law:  Under State election law, which generally governs all elections except 
municipal elections (other than in Baltimore City), each local board of elections must 
prepare a statement of election results by precinct for each candidate or question voted on 
at an election and declare:   
 
 
who is elected or nominated for office (1) in county government or (2) for any other 
office voted for only within that county, if the certificate of candidacy for that office 
was issued by the local board; and 
 
whether or not a question is adopted or approved. 
 
The statement prepared by the local board of elections may not report the absentee vote 
separately by precinct. Each local board must publish a sufficient number of copies of the 
complete election results, tabulated by precinct, and must make the copies available to the 
public at cost. 
 
In addition to the statement of election results prepared by each local board of elections, 
SBE must make available in an electronic format a report of election results for each 
candidate or question voted on at an election (1) by precinct; (2) by State legislative district, 
including any subdistrict; (3) by county legislative district; and (4) for each county as a 
whole. SBE may make the report of election results available to the public at cost. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 287 (Senators Gallion and Carozza) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal 
League; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 509/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3