START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 527 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 527 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System – Transfer of Membership – 
Modifications 
 
 
This bill requires the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) 
to transfer service credit earned in the Employees’ Retirement System or Employees’ 
Pension System (ERS/EPS) to the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) for 
specified individuals whose membership was transferred by statute from ERS/EPS to 
CORS. Affected members may opt out of the transfer of service credit. The bill also 
requires the SRPS board to include any credit for unused sick leave accrued during 
membership in ERS/EPS in its calculation of unused sick leave credit for specified 
individuals whose membership was transferred by statute from ERS/EPS to CORS. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and the transfer provisions terminate June 30, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities and contributions (all funds) increase minimally 
beginning in FY 2025, but a more precise estimate is not feasible. No effect on revenues.     
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Transfer of Service Credit 
 
The mandatory transfer of service credit applies to current members of CORS whose 
membership was transferred from ERS/EPS to CORS by: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 527/ Page 2 
 
Chapters 218 and 219 of 2016 – case management specialists, managers, and 
supervisors employed by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS); 
 
Chapters 688, 689, and 690 of 2017 – parole and probation agents, supervisors, and 
regional administrators and specified counselors, psychologists, social workers, and 
recreational officers employed by DPSCS; 
 
Chapters 579 and 580 of 2018 – specified community detention officers, resident 
advisors, transportation officers, recreation specialists employed by the Department 
of Juvenile Services (DJS), and correctional maintenance officers and other 
individuals employed by DPSCS; and 
 
Chapter 147 of 2022 – specified case management specialists and group life 
managers employed by DJS. 
 
By June 1, 2024, an individual included in the Acts listed above may elect not to transfer 
service credit from ERS/EPS to CORS on a form provided by the State Retirement Agency 
(SRA). 
 
Unused Sick Leave 
 
The requirement to combine unused sick leave credit applies to specified case management 
specialists and group life managers employed by DJS whose membership was transferred 
from ERS/EPS to CORS by Chapter 147.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Transfers of Membership from the Employees’ Retirement System/Employees’ Pension 
System to the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
 
The Acts specified above each transferred membership from ERS/EPS to CORS for the 
individuals described. At the time of enactment, affected members had the option to 
transfer service credit earned in ERS/EPS to CORS, but they had to make an affirmative 
decision to do so within one year. SRA did not have the time to assess whether it was to 
each member’s benefit to transfer service credit or leave it in ERS/EPS before each piece 
of legislation passed. Therefore, the Acts gave each member the option to transfer credit 
following enactment, after consulting with SRA to determine whether it was in their best 
interest. Some affected members in each cohort elected not to transfer service credit.  
 
Unused Sick Leave Credit 
 
In general, an individual who is retiring from SRPS is entitled to one month of creditable 
service for every 22 days of unused sick leave, or fractional days totaling at least 11 days 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 527/ Page 3 
of unused sick leave. A member may not accumulate more than 15 days of sick leave 
per year. Credit for unused sick leave may only be claimed within 30 days of separating 
from service. 
 
In the absence of a statutory remedy, individuals whose membership was transferred from 
ERS/EPS to CORS by the Acts listed above generally cannot claim unused sick leave credit 
earned while members of ERS/EPS because they are not retiring within 30 days of ending 
service in ERS/EPS (they are retiring as members of CORS). However, Chapter 347 of 
2019 allowed those who were transferred before July 1, 2019, to combine their unused 
sick leave credit from ERS/EPS and CORS. However, a similar statutory remedy has not 
been enacted for those individuals whose membership was transferred by Chapter 147. 
 
State Expenditures:  SRA advises that in every instance in which it was asked to 
determine whether a transfer of service credit from ERS/EPS to CORS was in the 
member’s best interest, it determined that it was. However, some members have still opted 
not to transfer service credit from ERS/EPS to CORS. Based on its records, SRA estimates 
that about 300 individuals have not transferred service credit (more than half of them are 
in the 2022 cohort that is still within the one-year window to elect to transfer credit without 
the bill). 
 
As SRA advises that, for all remaining affected CORS members, the transfer in service 
credit is to their benefit, it follows that the bill increases State pension liabilities by 
requiring their service credit to be transferred. However, information is not available on 
those members who have not transferred service credit that would allow an estimate of the 
increase in liabilities to be calculated. Therefore, a precise estimate is not available. 
 
Nevertheless, the Department of Legislative Services notes that the actuarial analyses that 
accompanied the enacted transfer legislation assumed that virtually all affected members 
would elect to transfer their service credit (except those who were nearing retirement 
eligibility). Therefore, any increase in State pension liabilities has largely already been 
reflected in earlier analyses, even if it has not been accounted for by the system.  
 
Similarly, a calculation of the actuarial effect of adding credit for unused sick leave cannot 
be completed because unused sick leave credit is only communicated to SRA at the time 
of retirement. Therefore, SRA has no information about how much unused sick leave may 
be claimed by the 2022 cohort of CORS transfers affected by the bill.            
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 527/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 369 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; State 
Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4