START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 332

Chapter 332

(House Bill 596)

AN ACT concerning

Health and Human Services Transportation Improvement Act of 2023

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Rural~~ ~~Nonemergency~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Transportation~~
~~Program;~~ repealing a certain cap on the amount of grants that may be awarded by
the Maryland Transit Administration under the Maryland Senior Rides Program;
repealing a certain cap on funding for the Job Access and Reverse Commute Program
~~and~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~funding~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Rural~~ ~~Nonemergency~~ ~~Medical~~
~~Transportation~~ ~~Program~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~budget;~~ establishing the State Coordinating
Committee for Health and Human Services Transportation; and generally relating
to transportation for health and human services in the State.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~13–4801~~ ~~through~~ ~~13–4805~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~48.~~ ~~Rural~~
~~Nonemergency~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Transportation~~ ~~Program”~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 7–1002
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 7–1102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Transportation
Section 7–1107
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 7–1107 and 7–1109
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 332 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~

~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~48.~~ ~~RURAL~~ ~~NONEMERGENCY~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

~~13–4801.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) DOES NOT QUALIFY TO RECEIVE STATE OR FEDERAL FUNDING
~~FOR~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RECEIVING~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~BECAUSE~~ ~~THE~~
~~INDIVIDUAL:~~

(I) RESIDES IN A LOCATION THAT DISQUALIFIES THE
INDIVIDUAL FROM QUALIFYING FOR THE FUNDING;

(II) OWNS A CAR;

(III) RECEIVED TRANSPORTATION FROM A VOLUNTEER, BUT
THE INDIVIDUAL NO LONGER HAS ACCESS TO THAT TRANSPORTATION;

(IV) HAD A MEDICAL PROCEDURE THAT DOES NOT QUALIFY THE
INDIVIDUAL FOR THE FUNDING;

(V) HAS A TEMPORARY DISABILITY THAT DOES NOT QUALIFY
THE INDIVIDUAL FOR THE FUNDING; OR

(VI) DOES NOT LIVE WITHIN THE REQUIRED DISTANCE OF A
PUBLIC BUS STOP TO QUALIFY THE INDIVIDUAL FOR THE FUNDING;

(2) NEEDS TRANSPORTATION TO OR FROM MEDICAL SERVICES
WHERE EACH TRIP EITHER BEGINS OR ENDS IN A RURAL COUNTY; AND

(3) A HOSPITAL CARE COORDINATOR DETERMINES HAS A MEDICAL
~~NEED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~REQUIRES~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~SERVICES~~
THROUGH THE PROGRAM.

(C) “HOSPITAL” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 19–301 OF THIS ARTICLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 332

(D) “HOSPITAL CARE COORDINATOR” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE OF A HOSPITAL
~~WHO~~ ~~COORDINATES~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~FOR~~
ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) “NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ORGANIZATION THAT:

~~(1)~~ ~~IS:~~

(I) DESCRIBED IN § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE
CODE; AND

(II) EXEMPT FROM INCOME TAX UNDER § 501(A) OF THE
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE; AND

(2) PROVIDES TRANSPORTATION SERVICES TO ELIGIBLE
INDIVIDUALS THROUGH A PROGRAM ADOPTED BY A HOSPITAL.

(F) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE RURAL NONEMERGENCY MEDICAL
~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

~~(G)~~ ~~“RURAL~~ ~~COUNTY”~~ ~~MEANS:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~ALLEGANY~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~CALVERT~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~CAROLINE~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~CARROLL~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~CECIL~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(6)~~ ~~CHARLES~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(7)~~ ~~DORCHESTER~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(8)~~ ~~FREDERICK~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(9)~~ ~~GARRETT~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(10)~~ ~~HARFORD~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(11)~~ ~~KENT~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 332 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(12)~~ ~~QUEEN~~ ~~ANNE’S~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(13)~~ ~~SOMERSET~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(14)~~ ~~ST.~~ ~~MARY’S~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(15)~~ ~~TALBOT~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

~~(16)~~ ~~WASHINGTON~~ ~~COUNTY;~~

(17) WICOMICO COUNTY; OR

~~(18)~~ ~~WORCESTER~~ ~~COUNTY.~~

~~13–4802.~~

(A) THERE IS A RURAL NONEMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION
~~PROGRAM.~~

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS FOR HOSPITALS TO COORDINATE
~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FROM~~
MEDICAL SERVICES FOR ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS.

~~13–4803.~~

(A) A PROGRAM ADOPTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL:

(1) COORDINATE TRANSPORTATION PROVIDED BY A NONPROFIT
~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~TRAVEL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~MEDICAL~~
~~SERVICES;~~

(2) INCLUDE A MONTHLY BUDGET SET BY EACH NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION PARTICIPATING IN A PROGRAM ADOPTED BY A HOSPITAL
~~ESTABLISHING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TOTAL~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~THE~~
~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~PATIENTS~~ ~~AT~~
THE HOSPITAL THROUGH THE PROGRAM; AND

(3) PROVIDE INFORMATION TO A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION ABOUT
~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~COORDINATOR~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~SELECTED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RECEIVE~~
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES THROUGH THE PROGRAM IN A MANNER THAT
COMPLIES WITH STATE AND FEDERAL PRIVACY LAWS.

(B) A PROGRAM MAY NOT PROVIDE TRANSPORTATION:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 332

(1) TO AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL FOR MORE THAN 120 DAYS AT A
TIME; OR

(2) TO AN INDIVIDUAL WHO REQUESTS TRANSPORTATION BUT DOES
NOT USE THE TRANSPORTATION PROVIDED ON MORE THAN ONE OCCASION.

~~13–4804.~~

(A) A HOSPITAL MAY ADOPT A PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

(B) IF A HOSPITAL ADOPTS A PROGRAM, THE HOSPITAL SHALL:

(1) CONTRACT WITH A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION TO PROVIDE
~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~PATIENTS~~ ~~AT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOSPITAL~~
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) ESTABLISH AND ADOPT A PROCESS OF NOTIFYING PATIENTS AT
THE HOSPITAL ABOUT SERVICES AVAILABLE THROUGH THE PROGRAM.

(C) A HOSPITAL CARE COORDINATOR SHALL:

(1) DETERMINE WHICH PATIENTS OF THE HOSPITAL WHO ARE
INTERESTED IN RECEIVING TRANSPORTATION SERVICES THROUGH THE PROGRAM
ARE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS;

(2) DETERMINE WHICH ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS WILL RECEIVE
TRANSPORTATION THROUGH THE PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE BUDGET
PROVIDED BY THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION; AND

(3) COORDINATE TRANSPORTATION FOR AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL
~~WHO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOSPITAL~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~COORDINATOR~~ ~~SELECTS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RECEIVE~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~
~~TO~~ ~~TRAVEL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~RECEIVING~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCORDANCE~~ ~~WITH~~
THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) IF A HOSPITAL ENTERS INTO A CONTRACT WITH A NONPROFIT
~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURPOSES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~THROUGH~~
THE PROGRAM, A HOSPITAL SHALL REPORT THE NAME AND CONTACT INFORMATION
OF THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION TO THE DEPARTMENT WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER
THE DATE ON WHICH THE CONTRACT IS SIGNED.

~~13–4805.~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 332 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
AT LEAST $1,000,000 TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR THE PURPOSES OF CARRYING OUT
THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE FUNDS
APPROPRIATED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION:

(1) TO EACH NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT PROVIDES SERVICES
THROUGH THE PROGRAM, AS REPORTED UNDER § 13–4804(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE;
~~AND~~

(2) IN AN AMOUNT PROPORTIONAL TO THE NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION’S ESTIMATED ANNUAL BUDGET FOR PROVIDING TRANSPORTATION
UNDER THE PROGRAM.

Article – Transportation

7–1002.

(a) There is a Maryland Senior Rides Program in the Administration.

(b) The purpose of the Program is to encourage regional providers to provide
door–to–door transportation for low–income to moderate–income seniors.

(c) The Administration shall award grants to qualified Program applicants, as
provided in § 7–1003 of this subtitle, for the operation of transportation services as specified
in this section.

(d) To be eligible for a grant under § 7–1003 of this subtitle, a Program applicant
shall:

(1) Provide door–to–door transportation for low–income to
moderate–income seniors who have difficulty accessing or using other existing
transportation systems;

(2) Use primarily volunteer drivers who drive their own vehicles;

(3) Use a dispatcher system to respond quickly to requests from
low–income to moderate–income seniors for door–to–door transportation; and

(4) Define a geographic area for which door–to–door transportation is
provided.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 332

(e) A Program participant may provide door–to–door transportation to an eligible
senior who does not reside in the geographic area defined by the Program participant under
subsection (d)(4) of this section when applying to participate in the Program, so long as
service is not diminished to an eligible senior who does reside in the defined geographic
area.

(f) A Program participant shall expend a matching fund of at least 25% of the
total capital or operating costs associated with providing door–to–door transportation for
low–income to moderate–income seniors.

(g) [The Administration may not award more than $500,000 in grants per year.

(h)] A Program participant may charge reasonable fees for door–to–door
transportation provided by the Program participant.

[(i)] (H) Nothing in this section prohibits a Program participant from providing
services in addition to those described in subsection (d) of this section.

7–1102.

There is a Job Access and Reverse Commute Program in the Administration.

[7–1107.

Funds for the Program shall be as provided by the Governor in the State budget, not
to exceed $400,000 annually.]

7–1107.

THE GOVERNOR SHALL PROVIDE FUNDING FOR THE PROGRAM IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

7–1109.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “STATE AGENCY” MEANS AN EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT, AGENCY,
OR OFFICE OF THE STATE.

(3) “TRANSPORTATION–DISADVANTAGED” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL
WHO QUALIFIES FOR FEDERALLY CONDUCTED OR FEDERALLY ASSISTED
TRANSPORTATION–RELATED PROGRAMS OR SERVICES, AS IMPLEMENTED AND
COORDINATED BY A STATE AGENCY, DUE TO DISABILITY, INCOME, OR ADVANCED
AGE.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 332 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THERE IS A STATE COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION.

(C) THE COMMITTEE CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE SECRETARY OF HUMAN SERVICES, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(3) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE SECRETARY OF AGING, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE SECRETARY OF DISABILITIES, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(6) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT,
OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(7) THE SECRETARY OF PLANNING, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(8) THE SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(9) THE SECRETARY OF LABOR, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(10) THE DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR THE DEAF AND
HARD OF HEARING, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(11) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES COUNCIL, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S
DESIGNEE;

(12) THE EXECUTIVE BOARD CHAIR OF THE RURAL MARYLAND
COUNCIL, OR THE EXECUTIVE BOARD CHAIR’S DESIGNEE; AND

(13) ANY ADDITIONAL MEMBERS RECOMMENDED BY THE CHAIR OF
THE COMMITTEE AND APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR TO PROVIDE INPUT FROM
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, EMPLOYERS, AGENCIES, AND ORGANIZATIONS SERVING
PRIORITY POPULATIONS, TRANSPORTATION PROVIDERS, AND CONSUMERS FROM
PRIORITY POPULATIONS.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 332

(D) (1) THE APPOINTED MEMBERS SERVE AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
GOVERNOR.

(2) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 3 YEARS.

(3) THE GOVERNOR MAY STAGGER THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED
MEMBERS.

(E) THE SECRETARY, OR THE DESIGNEE OF THE SECRETARY, SHALL CHAIR
THE COMMITTEE.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COMMITTEE.

(G) A MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(H) THE COMMITTEE SHALL:

(1) EXAMINE THE TRANSPORTATION NEEDS OF RESIDENTS OF THE
STATE WHO:

(I) ARE ELDERLY;

(II) HAVE A DISABILITY; OR

(III) REQUIRE TRANSPORTATION TO ACCESS JOBS, MEDICAL
AND OTHER HEALTH–RELATED APPOINTMENTS, SENIOR CITIZEN PROGRAMS, OR
OTHER PROGRAMS REQUIRING THE TRANSPORTATION OF INDIVIDUALS WHO
QUALIFY AS TRANSPORTATION–DISADVANTAGED;

(2) COORDINATE EFFORTS IN THE STATE TO PROVIDE QUALITY
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION SERVICES BY WORKING WITH
APPROPRIATE FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL AGENCIES, TRANSIT CONSUMERS, AND
TRANSPORTATION PROVIDERS, TO DEVELOP A COOPERATIVE AND COORDINATED
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM;

(3) CONDUCT AN INVENTORY AND ASSESSMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION PROVIDERS IN THE STATE;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 332 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) DEVISE A 5–YEAR HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT SETS GOALS AND OBJECTIVES TO HELP
TRANSPORTATION–DISADVANTAGED RESIDENTS OF THE STATE ACCESS JOBS,
EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMS, HEALTH CARE SERVICES, AND OTHER
ACTIVITIES BY PROVIDING COST–EFFECTIVE, AFFORDABLE, HIGH–CAPACITY,
HIGH–QUALITY, EASILY UNDERSTOOD, AND SAFE AND ACCESSIBLE
TRANSPORTATION; AND

(5) (I) SERVE AS THE CLEARINGHOUSE FOR HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES TRANSPORTATION COORDINATION ISSUES IN THE STATE;

(II) IDENTIFY AND FACILITATE RESOLUTION TO ISSUES
REGARDING HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION, BOTH LOCALLY AND
STATEWIDE;

(III) PARTICIPATE IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL
ALLOCATIONS OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION RESOURCES
DURING EMERGENCY EVACUATIONS;

(IV) EVALUATE COST–SAVING MEASURES;

(V) INVESTIGATE THE NEED FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND DRIVERS WITHIN HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS; AND

(VI) EXAMINE OTHER APPROPRIATE AREAS TO FACILITATE THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A QUALITY HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM IN THE STATE.

(I) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE COMMITTEE SHALL
REPORT ON ITS ACTIVITIES TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10