START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 432

Chapter 432

(House Bill 548)

AN ACT concerning

Financial Regulation – Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund –
Establishment
(Access to Banking Act)

FOR the purpose of ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~establishment~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ establishing the Maryland
Community Investment Venture Fund ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~of~~ ~~Financial~~ ~~Regulation~~
as an instrumentality of the State for certain purposes; providing for certain
assessment offset credits for certain banking institutions and credit unions ~~that~~
~~establish~~ ~~de~~ ~~novo~~ ~~branches~~ ~~or~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~branches~~ in certain areas; authorizing the
use of the Banking Institution and Credit Union Regulation Fund for certain
purposes; and generally relating to ~~financial~~ ~~regulation~~ the Maryland Community
Investment Venture Fund and the assessment of banking institutions and credit
unions.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Financial Institutions
Section 2–118, 5–203, and 6–712
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Financial Institutions
Section 2–118.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Financial Institutions
Section 5–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Financial Institutions

2–118.

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the Banking Institution and Credit Union
Regulation Fund established under this section.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 432 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) There is a Banking Institution and Credit Union Regulation Fund that
consists of:

(1) All revenue received for the chartering and regulation of persons who
engage in the business of a banking institution or credit union under this article; and

(2) Any other fee, assessment, or revenue received by the Commissioner
from banking institutions and credit unions under this article.

(c) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, the Commissioner shall pay all
fines and penalties collected by the Commissioner from banking institutions and credit
unions under this article into the General Fund of the State.

(d) The purpose of the Fund is to pay all the costs and expenses incurred by the
Commissioner that are related to the regulation of banking institutions and credit unions
under this article, including:

(1) Expenditures authorized under this article; [and]

(2) INVESTMENTS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 2–118.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE;
AND

[(2)] (3) Any other expense authorized in the State budget.

(e) (1) All the costs and expenses of the Commissioner relating to the
regulation of banking institutions and credit unions under this article shall be included in
the State budget.

(2) Any expenditures from the Fund to cover costs and expenses of the
Commissioner may be made only:

(i) By an appropriation from the Fund approved by the General
Assembly in the annual State budget; or

(ii) By the budget amendment procedure provided for in § 7–209 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(3) If, in any given fiscal year, the amount of the revenue collected by the
Commissioner and deposited into the Fund exceeds the actual appropriation for the
Commissioner to regulate banking institutions and credit unions under this article, the
excess amount shall be carried forward within the Fund.

(f) (1) The State Treasurer is the custodian of the Fund.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 432

(2) The State Treasurer shall deposit payments received from the
Commissioner into the Fund.

(g) (1) The Fund is a continuing, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to §
7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, and may not be deemed a part of the
General Fund of the State.

(2) Unless otherwise provided by law, no part of the Fund may revert or be
credited to:

(i) The General Fund of the State; or

(ii) A special fund of the State.

2–118.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT
VENTURE FUND.

(2) (3) “LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 5–203 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(3) “PRIVATE VENTURE FUND” MEANS THE SEPARATE ENTITY OR
ENTITIES CHARTERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTIONS (B) AND (K) OF THIS
~~SECTION.~~

(B) (1) THE COMMISSIONER MAY INVEST IN THERE IS A MARYLAND
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT VENTURE FUND.

(2) THE MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT VENTURE FUND IS A
PRIVATE VENTURE FUND THAT ~~IS~~ ~~A~~ ~~SEPARATELY~~ ~~CHARTERED~~ ~~EQUITY~~ ~~FUND~~ ~~USING~~
~~BOTH:~~

(I) IS AN INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE; AND

(II) USES PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT FUNDS.

(3) (C) (1) THE SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE PURPOSE OF THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND FUND IS TO DEVELOP
OPPORTUNITIES FOR BANKING INSTITUTIONS AND CREDIT UNIONS TO BETTER
SERVE THE NEEDS OF LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACTS BY:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 432 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) INVESTING IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF FINANCIAL PRODUCT
OR FINANCIAL PRODUCT UNDERWRITING INNOVATIONS THAT ~~WILL~~ ENHANCE
ACCESS TO CAPITAL, FUNDING, AND OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR BUSINESSES
IN LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACTS IN MARYLAND THE STATE;

(II) DEPLOYING, TESTING, AND EVALUATING THESE THE
INNOVATIONS FOR PROVIDING CAPITAL AND FUNDING TO BUSINESSES IN LOW– TO
MODERATE–INCOME TRACTS IN MARYLAND THE STATE; AND

(III) PROMOTING AND MAKING THESE THE INNOVATIONS
AVAILABLE TO ~~A~~ ~~VARIETY~~ ~~OF~~ BANKING INSTITUTIONS AND CREDIT UNIONS FOR USE
IN ENHANCING ACCESS TO CAPITAL, FUNDING, AND OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
FOR BUSINESSES IN LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACTS IN MARYLAND THE
STATE.

(2) WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE COMMISSIONER, THE PURPOSE OF
THE FUND MAY BE ALTERED IN A MANNER THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH THE INTENT
AND REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

(D) (1) (I) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH A GOVERNANCE
STRUCTURE FOR THE FUND.

(II) THE COMMISSIONER MAY COLLABORATE WITH INVESTORS
IN THE FUND WHEN ESTABLISHING THE GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE.

(2) THE COMMISSIONER, OR THE COMMISSIONER’S DESIGNEE,
SHALL SERVE ON THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE FUND.

(C) (E) (1) THE COMMISSIONER MAY EXPEND USE UP TO $250,000
FROM THE BANKING INSTITUTION AND CREDIT UNION REGULATION FUND
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–118 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO COVER THE EXPENSES
ASSOCIATED WITH ~~CHARTERING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ORGANIZING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~VENTURE~~ ~~FUND~~
ESTABLISHING THE FUND, INCLUDING ACCOUNTING, ADVISORY, THIRD–PARTY
SERVICE PROVIDER, MARKETING, AND OTHER NECESSARY EXPENSES.

(D) (2) TO ENCOURAGE PRIVATE INVESTMENT, THE COMMISSIONER MAY
PROVIDE ~~THE~~ AN INITIAL EQUITY CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN THE ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~VENTURE~~
FUND FUND IN AN AMOUNT UP TO $2,500,000 FROM THE BANKING INSTITUTION
AND CREDIT UNION REGULATION FUND.

(E) (F) (1) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2028, THE COMMISSIONER MAY MATCH
ANY AN INVESTMENT MADE IN THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND FUND BY A BANKING
INSTITUTION OR CREDIT UNION UP TO THE AMOUNT OF THE ASSESSMENT CREDIT

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 432

EARNED BY ~~THAT~~ THE BANKING INSTITUTION OR CREDIT UNION ~~UNDER~~ IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–203(C) § 5–203(D) OR § 6–712(C)(4) OF THIS ARTICLE.

(F) (2) THE COMMISSIONER MAY NOT MAKE ANY FURTHER
INVESTMENTS AN INVESTMENT IN THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND FUND AFTER JUNE
30, 2028.

(G) ANY AND ALL ALL INVESTMENT RETURNS OR RETURN OF CAPITAL
FROM THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND FUND WITH RESPECT TO ANY AN INVESTMENT
AUTHORIZED BY THE COMMISSIONER SHALL BE THE PROPERTY OF CREDITED TO
THE BANKING INSTITUTION AND CREDIT UNION REGULATION FUND.

(H) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COMMISSIONER MAY NEGOTIATE APPROPRIATE GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES FOR
THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND WITH OTHER INVESTORS.

(2) THE COMMISSIONER OR A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
COMMISSIONER SHALL ALWAYS SERVE ON THE BODY GOVERNING THE PRIVATE
VENTURE FUND.

(3) (I) THE PURPOSE OF THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND MAY NOT BE
ALTERED OR AMENDED WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE COMMISSIONER.

(II) ANY ALTERED OR AMENDED PURPOSE MUST REMAIN
CONSISTENT WITH THIS SECTION.

(I) (H) AT THE DIRECTION OF THE COMMISSIONER, AND IN ADDITION TO
ANY CUSTOMARY AND APPROPRIATE AUDITS OF THE FUND FUND, THE PRIVATE
VENTURE FUND GOVERNING BODY OF THE FUND SHALL BE REQUIRED TO ENGAGE
OBTAIN THE SERVICES OF AN INDEPENDENT THIRD PARTY DESIGNATED BY THE
COMMISSIONER ON AN ANNUAL BASIS TO EVALUATE WHETHER ALL THE
INVESTMENTS MEET THE CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY MADE TO THE FUND COMPLY
WITH THIS SECTION.

(J) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
DIVISION II OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE DOES NOT
APPLY TO A SERVICE THAT THE COMMISSIONER OBTAINS UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) THE COMMISSIONER IS SUBJECT TO TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 OF
THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE FOR SERVICES CONTRACTED
UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OR (K) OF THIS SECTION.

(K) (I) (1) TO THE EXTENT IF THE COMMISSIONER DETERMINES THAT
SEPARATE PRIVATE VENTURE FUNDS ARE NECESSARY TO ACCOMPLISH THE
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 432 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

PURPOSE OF THE PRIVATE VENTURE FUND FUND, THE COMMISSIONER MAY EXPEND
FUNDS USE MONEY FROM THE FUND TO CHARTER AND ORGANIZE ESTABLISH
ADDITIONAL PRIVATE VENTURE FUNDS.

(2) ANY AN ADDITIONAL PRIVATE VENTURE FUNDS CHARTERED AND
~~ORGANIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~ FUND ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION
~~ARE~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LIMITATIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~
MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT VENTURE FUND UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
THIS SECTION, INCLUDING THE AGGREGATE EXPENSE AND INVESTMENT
LIMITATIONS STATED IN SUBSECTIONS (C) THROUGH (F) OF THIS SECTION SHALL
COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTIONS (B) THROUGH (F) OF THIS
SECTION.

5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “CAMELS” means the composite rating adopted by the federal Financial
Institutions Examination Council to evaluate the adequacy of capital, quality of assets,
capability of management, quality and level of earnings, adequacy of liquidity, and
sensitivity to market risk.

5–203.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION, UNLESS THE CONTEXT CLEARLY REQUIRES
OTHERWISE, THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS INDICATED.

(2) “BRANCH” MEANS A DEPOSIT–TAKING OFFICE OF A BANKING
INSTITUTION IN MARYLAND OTHER THAN THE MAIN OFFICE AS DEFINED BY THE
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION.

(3) “DE NOVO BRANCH” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–1001 OF
THIS TITLE WITH RESPECT TO A BANKING INSTITUTION.

(4) “DEPOSIT GROWTH CAP” MEANS THE YEAR–OVER–YEAR
PERCENTAGE CHANGE OF DOMESTIC OFFICE DEPOSITS AS REPORTED ON
DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR BY THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
IN THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION QUARTERLY BANK PROFILE.

(5) “DEPOSITS” MEANS DEPOSITS ORIGINATED AND HOUSED AT A
BRANCH LOCATED IN A LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT AS REPORTED BY A
BANKING INSTITUTION TO THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
EACH YEAR AS OF JUNE 30.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 432

(6) “LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT” MEANS A CENSUS TRACT
DELINEATED BY THE U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS IN THE MOST RECENT
DECENNIAL CENSUS AS PUBLISHED BY THE FEDERAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
EXAMINATION COUNCIL THAT CORRESPONDS TO LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME
LEVEL CLASSIFICATIONS AS DEFINED BY THE REGULATION OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE BOARD IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT,
12 C.F.R. 228.12.

(B) The Commissioner shall impose annual assessments on each banking
institution as provided in this section, to cover the expense of regulating banking
institutions.

[(b)] (C) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the
Commissioner shall assess each banking institution the sum of:

(i) $8,000; plus

(ii) 1. 12 cents for each $1,000 of the assets of the institution over
$50,000,000, but not more than $250,000,000;

2. 10 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $250,000,000, but
not more than $500,000,000;

3. 9 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $500,000,000, but not
more than $1,000,000,000;

4. 8 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $1,000,000,000, but
not more than $10,000,000,000; and

5. 7 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $10,000,000,000.

(2) If a banking institution is not in the business of accepting deposits or
retaining funds in a deposit account as defined in § 5–509 of this title, the Commissioner
shall assess the banking institution the sum of:

(i) $5,000; plus

(ii) 1. 0.3 cents for each $1,000 of managed assets held in a
fiduciary capacity up to $5,000,000,000;

2. 0.2 cents for each $1,000 of managed assets held in a
fiduciary capacity over $5,000,000,000, but not more than $20,000,000,000;

3. 0.1 cent for each $1,000 of managed assets held in a
fiduciary capacity over $20,000,000,000 up to $27,500,000,000;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 432 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. 0.2 cents for each $1,000 of nonmanaged and custodial
assets held in a fiduciary capacity up to $5,000,000,000; and

5. 0.1 cent for each $1,000 of nonmanaged and custodial
assets held in a fiduciary capacity over $5,000,000,000 up to $20,000,000,000.

(3) The assessments shall be based on assets stated in a banking
institution’s most recent financial report.

(D) A WELL–CAPITALIZED BANKING INSTITUTION WITH A COMPOSITE
CAMELS RATING OF 1 OR 2 MAY FILE WITH THE COMMISSIONER A REQUEST FOR
AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT OF:

(1) 12 CENTS FOR EACH $1,000 OF DEPOSITS IN A DE NOVO BRANCH
LOCATED IN A LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT FOR THE FIRST 5 YEARS AFTER
THE DATE THE BRANCH OPENED; OR

(2) 6 CENTS FOR EACH $1,000 OF DEPOSITS IN A BRANCH LOCATED IN
A LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT NOT TO EXCEED THE DEPOSIT GROWTH CAP.

[(c)] (E) Notwithstanding subsection [(b)] (C) of this section, for a banking
institution with a composite CAMELS rating of 3, 4, or 5 for its most recent examination,
the annual assessment imposed under this section shall be increased by an additional 25%.

[(d)] (F) A banking institution shall pay the assessment imposed under this
section to the Commissioner on or before the April 15 after it is imposed.

(G) THE COMMISSIONER MAY DESIGNATE A SUCCESSOR INDEX FOR:

(1) THE LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT IF THE FEDERAL
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS EXAMINATION COUNCIL TRACT INCOME LEVEL DATA IS
NO LONGER PUBLISHED; OR

(2) THE DEPOSIT GROWTH CAP IF THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT
INSURANCE CORPORATION REPORT OF DOMESTIC OFFICE DEPOSITS IS NO LONGER
PUBLISHED.

6–712.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION, UNLESS THE CONTEXT CLEARLY REQUIRES
OTHERWISE, THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS INDICATED.

(2) “DE NOVO BRANCH” MEANS A BRANCH OF A CREDIT UNION THAT
WAS ORIGINALLY ESTABLISHED BY THE CREDIT UNION IN MARYLAND THE STATE.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 432

(3) “DEPOSIT GROWTH CAP” MEANS THE YEAR–OVER–YEAR
PERCENTAGE CHANGE OF TOTAL SHARES AND DEPOSITS REPORTED DECEMBER 31
EACH YEAR BY FEDERALLY INSURED CREDIT UNIONS TO THE NATIONAL CREDIT
UNION ADMINISTRATION AND PUBLISHED IN THE NATIONAL CREDIT UNION
ADMINISTRATION CALL REPORT AGGREGATE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
REPORTS.

(4) “DEPOSITS” MEANS DEPOSITS ORIGINATED AND HOUSED AT A
CREDIT UNION BRANCH LOCATED IN A LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT AS
REPORTED BY A CREDIT UNION TO THE COMMISSIONER EACH YEAR AS OF JUNE 30.

(5) “LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 5–203 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) This section applies only to a credit union with assets of $300,000 or greater.

[(b)] (C) (1) The Commissioner shall impose an annual assessment on each
credit union as provided in this subsection to cover the expense of regulating credit unions.

(2) The Commissioner shall assess each credit union the sum of:

(i) $1,000; and

(ii) 8 cents for each $1,000 of the assets of the credit union over
$1,000,000.

(3) The assessment shall be based on assets stated in the credit union’s
most recent financial report.

(4) A WELL–CAPITALIZED CREDIT UNION WITH A COMPOSITE
CAMELS RATING OF 1 OR 2 MAY FILE WITH THE COMMISSIONER A REQUEST FOR
AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT OF:

(I) 12 CENTS FOR EACH $1,000 OF DEPOSITS IN A DE NOVO
BRANCH LOCATED IN A LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT FOR THE FIRST 5 YEARS
AFTER THE DATE THE DE NOVO BRANCH OPENED; OR

(II) 6 CENTS FOR EACH $1,000 OF DEPOSITS IN A BRANCH
LOCATED IN A LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME TRACT NOT TO EXCEED THE DEPOSIT
GROWTH CAP.

[(c)] (D) A credit union shall pay the assessment imposed under this section to
the Commissioner on or before the March 1 after the assessment is imposed.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 432 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) THE COMMISSIONER MAY DESIGNATE A SUCCESSOR INDEX FOR THE
DEPOSIT GROWTH CAP IF THE NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION CALL
REPORT AGGREGATE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE REPORTS IS NO LONGER
PUBLISHED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10