START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 581 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 581 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health Benefits - Creditable Service 
 
 
This bill redefines “creditable service” for the purpose of determining eligibility for retiree 
health benefits from the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
(the State plan) to be any period during which an individual was employed by the State in 
the Executive, Legislative, or Judicial branch and enrolled as a member of any plan in the 
State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) or in the Optional Retirement Program 
(ORP). It makes conforming changes to the calculation of years of service under ORP for 
the purpose of calculating eligibility for retiree health benefits to include any employment 
in the Executive, Legislative, or Judicial branch during which an individual was a member 
of SRPS. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in State liabilities for Other Post Employment 
Benefits (OPEB), as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State plan is established in statute to provide health insurance benefit 
options to State employees and retirees. The Secretary of Budget and Management is 
charged with developing and administering the State plan, including selecting the insurance 
options to be offered. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 581/ Page 2 
Health benefits provided to retirees are often referred to as OPEB to distinguish them from 
pension benefits. 
 
Creditable service, for the purpose of calculating eligibility for retiree health benefits, is 
defined as service credit toward a retirement allowance under State pension law. For 
members of ORP, the calculation of years of service for the purpose of determining 
eligibility for retiree health benefits includes only years of service while a participant in 
ORP. 
 
Eligibility for Coverage and Subsidies 
 
Upon their retirement, and provided they receive a retirement allowance from SRPS, 
retired State employees may enroll and participate in any of the health insurance options 
provided by the State plan. Until the enactment of Chapter 397 of 2011, this had allowed 
retired State employees to retain the same health coverage they had as active employees. 
In addition, active State employees earn eligibility for a partial State subsidy of the cost of 
health insurance coverage when they retire. 
 
Chapter 397 established new eligibility requirements for retirees to enroll in the State plan 
and qualify for the premium subsidy if they are hired on or after July 1, 2011. Therefore, 
the eligibility requirements to enroll in the State plan are different for those who began 
employment with the State before July 1, 2011, and those who began employment with the 
State on or after that date. Employees hired before July 1, 2011, are eligible to enroll and 
participate in the group coverage when they retire if they have:   
 
 
retired directly from the State with at least 5 years of creditable service; 
 
retired directly from State service with a disability; 
 
ended State service with at least 16 years of creditable service; 
 
ended State service with at least 10 years of creditable service and within 5 years of 
retirement age; or 
 
ended State service on or before June 30, 1984. 
 
Employees who began employment with the State on or after July 1, 2011, are eligible to 
enroll in the State plan if they:   
 
 
retire directly from the State with at least 10 years of creditable service; 
 
retire directly from State service with a disability; 
 
end State service with at least 25 years of creditable service; or 
 
end State service with at least 10 years of creditable service and within 5 years of 
normal retirement age. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 581/ Page 3 
Similarly, eligibility for the premium subsidy differs depending on when the retiree began 
employment with the State. A retiree hired before July 1, 2011, must have at least 16 years 
of service to receive the same subsidy of health insurance premiums that is provided to 
active employees:   
 
 
80% of preferred provider organization premiums; 
 
83% of point of service premiums; and 
 
85% of premiums for exclusive provider organizations and integrated health 
models. 
 
If a retiree has fewer than 16 years of State service (but at least 5 years), the benefit is 
prorated. A retiree hired on or after July 1, 2011, must have 25 years of service to receive 
the same subsidy as that provided to active employees. If a retiree has fewer than 25 years 
(but at least 10), the benefit is prorated. 
 
Similar rules apply to individuals who retire as ORP participants, except that the 
calculation of years of service includes only their time employed while a participant in 
ORP. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill applies to individuals who have partial service credit in both 
ORP and SRPS, as the bill allows them to combine their service credit for the purpose of 
determining eligibility for retiree health benefits. Enrollment and disenrollment in ORP is 
generally managed by institutions of higher education in the State, and enrollment in SRPS 
is managed by the State Retirement Agency. Moreover, State public institutions of higher 
education maintain separate personnel systems from the State Personnel Management 
System. Therefore, there is no available data on how many employees have partial service 
in both ORP and an SRPS plan. 
 
To the extent that some employees have credit in both programs, and that credit in either 
program is not sufficient to qualify for retiree coverage or a full subsidy, the bill likely 
increases State OPEB liabilities by allowing them to combine their service credit and claim 
a benefit (or a greater subsidy). In the absence of data on the number and characteristics of 
State employees who may qualify, a reliable estimate of the effect on OPEB liabilities is 
not feasible. Nevertheless, it is expected to be minimal. The most recent actuarial valuation 
measured the State’s net OPEB liability to be $12.4 billion as of June 30, 2022. The State 
pays retiree health benefits on a pay-as-you-go basis, so any increase in liabilities has no 
immediate direct effect on State finances but likely increases benefit payments in future 
years. Any such effect is beyond the five-year scope of this fiscal and policy note.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 581/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 395 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4