START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 550 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 550 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Energy Administration – Energy Programs – Modifications (Clean 
Transportation and Energy Act) 
 
 
This Administration bill (1) modifies two transportation sector programs funded by the 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF); (2) modifies the authorized uses of certain 
Alternative Compliance Payments (ACPs) deposited in SEIF; and (3) increases the dollar 
amount cap on the amount of certain SEIF revenues that may be allocated toward 
administrative expenses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures are affected, as summarized in the table below 
and discussed further in the Analysis section. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
increases a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
7,750,000 
7,500,000 
7,500,000 
5,000,000 
- 
Net Effect 
($7,750,000) 
($7,500,000) 
($7,500,000) 
($5,000,000) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments may benefit from the bill’s changes, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) See Small Business Effect discussion below. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 550/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program 
 
The bill replaces requirements that the Governor, in each of fiscal 2024 through 2027, 
include, in the annual budget bill, appropriations from SEIF of (1) at least $1.0 million for 
grants under the Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty (MHD) Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant 
Program for qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles and (2) at least 
$750,000 for grants under the program for zero-emission heavy equipment property. The 
requirements are replaced with a single requirement that the Governor, in each of 
fiscal 2024 through 2027, include in the annual budget bill an appropriation from SEIF of 
at least $10.0 million for grants under the program for qualified newly manufactured 
medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles or zero-emission heavy equipment 
property. Under existing law and under the bill, the appropriations must be made 
irrespective of existing provisions specifying the allocation of SEIF revenues from the sale 
of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) allowances among various uses. 
 
The bill modifies a limit on the amount of individual grants awarded under the program for 
qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles and zero-emission heavy 
equipment property and eliminates the availability of grants for qualified medium- or 
heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle supply equipment under the program. Under the bill, for 
each of fiscal 2024 through 2027, a person or unit of local government may apply to the 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) for a grant for up to 75% of the incremental cost 
(rather than the existing limit of 20% of the cost) of a qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty 
zero-emission vehicle or zero-emission heavy equipment property. “Incremental cost” 
means the difference in price of (1) a conventional model vehicle and a zero-emission 
model that is attributable to the functional features of the vehicle or (2) conventional heavy 
equipment property and zero-emission heavy equipment property that is attributable to the 
functional features of the equipment. The bill also modifies the definition of a “qualified 
medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle” so that it means a motor vehicle that is 
rated at more than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (rather than 8,500 pounds unloaded 
gross weight) and powered by electricity that is stored in a battery or produced by a 
hydrogen fuel cell. 
 
The bill also establishes that the MHD Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program applies only 
to vehicles and equipment intended for commercial or industrial use. In addition, in issuing 
program grants, MEA must give preference to: 
 
 
qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles that are (1) expected 
to be primarily domiciled and operated in the State and (2) to be owned or operated 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 550/ Page 3 
by an entity engaged in business activity that impacts public health, the 
environment, or infrastructure in an overburdened or underserved community; and 
 
zero-emission heavy equipment property that is expected to be used primarily at 
locations in the State.  
 
“Overburdened community” and “underserved community” have the meanings stated 
under existing provisions of the Environment Article of the Maryland Code that establish 
and govern the Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities. 
“Overburdened community” means any census tract for which three or more of specified 
environmental health indicators are above the seventy-fifth percentile statewide. 
“Underserved community” means any census tract in which, according to the most recent 
U.S. Census Bureau Survey (1) at least 25% of the residents qualify as low-income; (2) at 
least 50% of the residents identify as nonwhite; or (3) at least 15% of the residents have 
limited English proficiency. 
 
Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program 
 
The bill extends through fiscal 2026 the Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate 
Program and raises the annual cap for the total amount of rebates that MEA may issue 
under the program from $1.8 million to $2.5 million. 
 
Additionally, the bill modifies limits on the amount of individual rebates so that MEA may 
issue a rebate to (1) an individual in an amount equal to the lesser of 50% (rather than 40%) 
of the costs of acquiring and installing qualified electric vehicle recharging equipment or 
$700 or (2) a business entity or unit of State or local government in an amount equal to the 
lesser of 50% (rather than 40%) of the costs of acquiring and installing qualified electric 
vehicle recharging equipment or $5,000 (rather than $4,000). The bill correspondingly 
eliminates an increased maximum rebate available to retail service stations that, under 
current law, is $1,000 higher than the maximum available to other business entities and 
units of State or local government. 
 
The bill authorizes MEA to alter the program, and adopt regulations, to offer additional 
benefits for the installation of qualified electric vehicle recharging equipment in 
multifamily housing, planned urban developments, and condominiums in (1) low- to 
moderate-income communities located in a census tract with an average median income at 
or below 80% of the State’s average median income or (2) overburdened or underserved 
communities. The bill makes an existing requirement – that a rebate issued under the 
program be limited to the acquisition of one recharging system per individual – subject to 
the authorization for MEA to alter the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 550/ Page 4 
Authorized Uses of Alternative Compliance Payments 
 
The bill modifies the authorized uses of ACPs (excluding ACPs related to 
post-2022 geothermal systems) generated under Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard (RPS). Under the bill, instead of being used only to make loans and grants to 
support the creation of new Tier 1 renewable energy sources (and specifically new solar 
energy sources, in the case of solar ACPs) in the State, that are owned by or directly benefit 
low-income residents of the State, the bill establishes that the revenues may instead be used 
only to make loans and grants to support the creation of new Tier 1 renewable energy 
sources (and specifically new solar energy sources, in the case of solar ACPs) in the State 
that are owned by or directly benefit (1) low- to moderate-income communities located in 
a census tract with an average median income at or below 80% of the State’s average 
median income or (2) overburdened or underserved communities. 
 
Administration of the Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
The bill increases the dollar amount cap on the amount of proceeds from the sale of 
allowances under RGGI that may be credited to an administrative expense account for costs 
related to the administration of SEIF. Under the bill, up to 10%, but not more than 
$7.5 million (rather than $5.0 million) of the proceeds may be credited to an administrative 
expense account. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program 
 
Chapter 234 of 2022 established the MHD Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program. 
Chapter 234, for fiscal 2024 through 2027, and subject to available funding, authorizes a 
person or unit of local government to apply to MEA for a grant of up to 20% of the cost of 
a qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle, qualified medium-duty or 
heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle supply equipment, or zero-emission heavy equipment 
property. 
 
A qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle is a motor vehicle that is 
(1) rated at more than 8,500 pounds unloaded gross weight and (2) powered by electricity 
that is stored in a battery or produced by a hydrogen fuel cell. Qualified medium-duty or 
heavy-duty zero-emission vehicle supply equipment is property in the State that is used for 
recharging or refueling medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles or 
zero-emission heavy equipment property. Zero-emission heavy equipment property is 
construction, earthmoving, or industrial heavy equipment, including any attachment for the 
equipment, that is mobile and does not use an internal combustion engine. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 550/ Page 5 
Chapter 234 specifies that – irrespective of existing provisions specifying the allocation of 
SEIF revenues from the sale of RGGI allowances among various uses – in fiscal 2024 
through 2027, the Governor must include, in the annual budget bill, appropriations from 
SEIF totaling at least $1.75 million for the program, including (1) at least $1.0 million for 
grants for qualified medium-duty or heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles and (2) at least 
$750,000 for grants for zero-emission heavy equipment property. 
 
Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program 
 
The Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program, administered by MEA, 
authorizes, for fiscal 2021 through 2023, an individual, a business entity, or a unit of State 
or local government to apply to MEA for an electric vehicle recharging equipment rebate 
for the costs of acquiring and installing qualified electric vehicle recharging equipment. 
The rebate is equal to 40% of the costs of acquiring and installing qualified electric vehicle 
recharging equipment, up to a maximum of $700 for individuals, $4,000 for business 
entities (other than retail service stations) and units of State and local government, and 
$5,000 for retail service stations. An electric vehicle recharging equipment rebate is limited 
to the acquisition of one recharging system per individual. 
 
MEA may award an annual maximum of $1.8 million in rebates each fiscal year and is 
authorized to use SEIF to provide rebates under the program. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program 
and the implementing SEIF to decrease energy demand and increase energy supply to 
promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. SEIF is funded through the proceeds from 
the auction of carbon allowances to power plants under RGGI, and the fund also receives 
ACP revenues generated under Maryland’s RPS. 
 
 
Alternative Compliance Payments 
 
Maryland’s RPS requires that renewable sources generate specified percentages of 
Maryland’s electricity supply each year. Utilities and other electricity suppliers must 
submit renewable energy credits equal to these percentages in each year or else pay an ACP 
equivalent to the shortfall. ACP revenues are deposited into SEIF and, aside from ACPs 
related to post-2022 geothermal sources, may only be used to make loans and grants to 
support the creation of new Tier 1 renewable energy sources (wind, solar, geothermal, 
qualifying biomass, and others) in the State that are owned by or directly benefit 
low-income residents of the State. Solar ACPs must be accounted for separately in the fund 
and may only be used to make loans and grants to support the creation of new solar energy 
sources in the State that are owned by or directly benefit low-income residents of the State. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 550/ Page 6 
A low-income resident has an annual household income at or below 175% of the federal 
poverty level. 
 
 
Administrative Expense Account 
 
The proceeds received by SEIF from the sale of allowances under RGGI are subject to 
statutory allocations, including an allocation of up to 10%, but not more than $5.0 million, 
to an administrative expense account for costs related to the administration of SEIF. 
 
Background: 
 
Medium- and Heavy-Duty Zero Emission Vehicles 
 
Maryland is a signatory state of the Multi-State Medium- and Heavy-Duty Zero Emission 
Vehicle Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), signed in July 2020, which identified 
transportation as being the nation’s largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, with 
medium- and heavy-duty trucks being the next largest source of transportation sector 
greenhouse gas emissions after light-duty vehicles. Under the MOU, the signatory states 
agree to work together to foster a self-sustaining market for zero emission medium- and 
heavy-duty vehicles and to seek to accelerate the deployment of zero-emission 
medium- and heavy-duty trucks and buses to benefit disadvantaged communities that have 
been historically burdened with higher levels of air pollution. 
 
The MOU required the development of a multi-state action plan to identify barriers and 
propose solutions to support widespread electrification of medium- and heavy-duty 
vehicles. The action plan, issued in July 2022, includes various recommendations for the 
design of vehicle and infrastructure incentive programs to improve the economics of 
electrification for fleets and prioritize electrification of trucks and buses that operate in 
overburdened and underserved communities, including (1) subsidizing a portion of the total 
incremental cost differential between an electric and diesel or gasoline truck or bus, or 
conversion or repowering to a zero-emission powertrain where appropriate; (2) reserving 
a percentage of funding for deployments that will benefit state-defined overburdened 
communities; (3) prioritizing and offering increased incentives that cover a larger portion 
of the cost differential to fleets that are domiciled or operate in overburdened communities 
such as ports and drayage trucks, fleets operating near warehouse and goods distribution 
hubs, and school and transit buses; and (4) striving to establish sustainable sources of 
funding to support vehicle and infrastructure incentive programs. 
 
Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program 
 
While statute does not allow for applications to be submitted to MEA for a rebate under 
the Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program beyond fiscal 2023, MEA 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 550/ Page 7 
plans to continue to operate the program in fiscal 2024 under its broad authority and 
responsibilities under the SEIF statute, which include investing in the promotion, 
development, and implementation of climate change programs directly related to reducing 
or mitigating the effects of climate change. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General 
Assembly includes $4.6 million in special funds for the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund (SEIF) expenditures increase by at least $7.75 million 
in fiscal 2024, at least $7.5 million in fiscal 2025 and 2026, at least $5.0 million in 
fiscal 2027, and by an indeterminate amount in fiscal 2028, as shown in Exhibit 1. This 
estimate reflects the information and assumptions discussed below.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Increased Strategic Energy Investment Fund Expenditures 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Medium- and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission 
Vehicle Grant Program 
$5.3  
$5.0  
$5.0 
$5.0 
$0.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment 
Rebate Program 
2.5 
2.5  
2.5 
0.0 
0.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spending of ACP Revenues 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased Administrative Expenses Cap 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0 
0.0 
0.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
$7.8  
$7.5  
$7.5 
$5.0 
-  
 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
“-”:  indeterminate increase 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Medium-Duty and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program 
 
SEIF expenditures increase by $5.25 million in fiscal 2024 and $5.0 million annually from 
fiscal 2025 through 2027, reflecting the difference between (1) appropriations to the 
MHD Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program, under the bill, of at least $10.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 through 2027 (with the fiscal 2024 appropriation being discretionary and the 
fiscal 2025 through 2027 appropriations mandated) and (2) appropriations to the program, 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 550/ Page 8 
in the absence of the bill, of $4.75 million in fiscal 2024 (the amount included for the 
program in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly) and $5.0 million in 
fiscal 2025 through 2027 (the amount MEA indicates is an approximate minimum amount 
of annual funding needed to sustain a viable program). While current law only mandates a 
minimum of $1.75 million for the program, this analysis assumes that, in the absence of 
the bill, the amount included in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
($4.75 million) is appropriated in fiscal 2024 and the minimum amount needed for a viable 
program ($5.0 million) is appropriated in fiscal 2025 through 2027. 
 
Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program 
 
SEIF expenditures increase by $2.5 million in fiscal 2024 through 2026, due to the bill’s 
extension of the Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program through 
fiscal 2026 in statute, subject to the $2.5 million statutory cap for the issuance of rebates 
under the program. MEA expects there to be sufficient demand for rebates to use the full 
$2.5 million in rebate funding available each year. 
 
As mentioned above under Background, while statute does not allow for applications to be 
submitted to MEA for an electric vehicle recharging equipment rebate beyond fiscal 2023, 
MEA plans to continue to operate the program in fiscal 2024. This analysis, however, 
nonetheless reflects the extension of the program in statute as increasing expenditures even 
though MEA intends to continue the program in the absence of the bill at least through 
fiscal 2024. An increase in expenditures is assumed to be associated with the extension of 
the program in statute because it removes MEA’s discretion of whether or not to continue 
the program, requiring the program to continue through fiscal 2026. 
 
Spending of Alternative Compliance Payment Revenues 
 
Due to recent, significantly increased ACP revenues, there is an accumulation of the 
revenues in SEIF (Department of Legislative Services’ (DLS) analysis of proposed MEA 
fiscal 2024 budget, pgs. 15, 18-19). MEA indicates that the bill’s modification of the 
allowable uses of ACP revenues will allow it to increase spending of those revenues in the 
near term; however, the extent and duration of increased spending cannot be reliably 
determined at this time. While the extent and duration of increased spending cannot be 
reliably determined, this analysis assumes indeterminate increases in SEIF spending of 
ACP revenues may occur in each of fiscal 2024 through 2028, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
Increased Administrative Expenses Cap 
 
The increase in the dollar amount cap on the amount of RGGI proceeds that may be 
allocated toward MEA administrative expenses is not expected to have a net effect on SEIF 
expenditures since it expressly reallocates the distribution of RGGI revenues within SEIF 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 550/ Page 9 
(by modifying the RGGI revenue distribution formula) and does not create an added SEIF 
funding obligation. MEA indicates that this bill itself does not create a need for additional 
administrative expenditures but having the ability to use more RGGI proceeds for 
administrative expenses will help it meet the demands of administering an increasing 
amount of funding from RGGI, ACP, and other revenues. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As eligible applicants under both programs, local governments may 
benefit from (1) the bill’s increase in funding for the MHD Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant 
Program and increased individual grant amounts under the program and (2) the extension 
of the Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program in statute, with higher 
rebate amounts available and authorization of MEA to offer specified additional benefits. 
This analysis assumes that the bill’s provision establishing that the MHD Zero-Emission 
Vehicle Grant Program applies only to vehicles and equipment intended for commercial or 
industrial use is not intended to eliminate the availability of the program to local 
governments, since local governments are still authorized to apply to MEA for a grant 
under the program. Local governments may also benefit from any increased spending of 
ACP revenues to make loans and grants to support the creation of new Tier 1 renewable 
energy sources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  DLS concurs that the bill has minimal or no impact on small 
businesses in general. However, small businesses are eligible applicants under both the 
MHD Zero-Emission Vehicle Grant Program and the Electric Vehicle Recharging 
Equipment Rebate Program and may benefit from the bill’s changes in a similar manner as 
local governments (discussed above). Additionally, small businesses that are involved in 
the installation of electric vehicle infrastructure, sales or servicing of medium- and heavy-
duty zero-emission vehicles, or the installation of Tier 1 renewable energy sources could 
see an increase in business as a result of additional funding/spending under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 548 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Public Service 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 550/ Page 10 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 8, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 550/ Page 11 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Energy Administration – Energy Programs – Modifications 
(Clean Transportation and Energy Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0550 
  
PREPARED BY: 
Landon R. Fahrig, Esq. 
  
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X     
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
           
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
MEA anticipates minimal impacts on small businesses. However, transportation programs within 
MEA that support fleet vehicles, including zero emission heavy-duty vehicles, will be bolstered, 
offering a greater volume and magnitude of benefit to small business grantees. 
 

END OF PAGE 11