START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 597

Chapter 597

(House Bill 558)

AN ACT concerning

Carroll County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Residency Requirement

FOR the purpose of requiring a certain applicant for an alcoholic beverages license in
Carroll County to be a resident of the State, rather than the county, when an
application for a license is filed and to remain a resident of the State for the license
to remain valid; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Carroll
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 16–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 16–1401 and 16–1405
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

16–102.

This title applies only in Carroll County.

16–1401.

(a) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 1 (“Applications for Local Licenses”)
of Division I of this article apply in the county without exception or variation:

(1) § 4–102 (“Applications to be filed with local licensing board”);

(2) [§ 4–103 (“Application on behalf of partnership”);

(3) § 4–104 (“Application on behalf of corporation or club”);

(4) § 4–105 (“Application on behalf of limited liability company”);
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 597 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5)] § 4–106 (“Payment of notice expenses”);

[(6)] (3) § 4–108 (“Application form required by Comptroller”);

[(7)] (4) § 4–111 (“Payment of license fees”);

[(8)] (5) § 4–113 (“Refund of license fees”); and

[(9)] (6) § 4–114 (“Fees for licenses issued for less than 1 year”).

(b) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 1 (“Applications for Local Licenses”)
of Division I of this article apply in the county:

(1) § 4–103 (“APPLICATION ON BEHALF OF PARTNERSHIP”), SUBJECT
TO § 16–1405 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) § 4–104 (“APPLICATION ON BEHALF OF CORPORATION OR CLUB”),
SUBJECT TO § 16–1405 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(3) § 4–105 (“APPLICATION ON BEHALF OF LIMITED LIABILITY
COMPANY”), SUBJECT TO § 16–1405 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(1)] (4) § 4–107 (“Criminal history records check”), subject to §§ 16–1403
and 16–1404 of this subtitle;

[(2)] (5) § 4–109 (“Required information on application –– In general”),
subject to § 16–1405 of this subtitle;

[(3)] (6) § 4–110 (“Required information on application –– Petition of
support”), subject to § 16–1405.1 of this subtitle; and

[(4)] (7) § 4–112 (“Disposition of license fees”), subject to § 16–1406 of this
subtitle.

16–1405.

(A) AT AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A RESIDENT OF THE STATE AT THE TIME AN
APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE IS FILED, AT LEAST ONE OF THE APPLICANTS SHALL
BE A RESIDENT OF THE STATE MEETS THE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS UNDER §§
4–103, 4–104, AND 4–105 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) The license remains valid only for as long as AT LEAST ONE OF the [resident
applicant] APPLICANTS remains a resident of the [county] STATE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 597

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3