START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

Chapter 454

(House Bill 584)

AN ACT concerning

Income Tax Credit – Food Donations by Qualified Farms – ~~Extension~~ Sunset
Repeal and Alterations
(Farmers Feeding Families Act)

FOR the purpose of ~~extending~~ repealing certain termination provisions for a certain credit
against the State income tax for certain food donations; altering the amounts of the
tax credit that a qualified farm is eligible to receive under certain circumstances; and
generally relating to a State income tax credit for certain food donations.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 10–745
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

10–745.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Certified organic produce” means an eligible food donation that is
certified under Title 10, Subtitle 14 of the Agriculture Article as an organically produced
commodity.

(3) “Eligible food donation” means fresh farm products for human
consumption.

(4) “Qualified farm” means a farm business that is located in the State.

(5) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Agriculture or the Secretary’s
designee.

(6) “Tax credit certificate administrator” means a person or an
organization that is authorized by the State Department of Agriculture under subsection
(e) of this section to receive eligible food donations.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 454 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) Subject to the limitations of this section, for a taxable year beginning
after December 31, 2016, but before January 1, [2024] 2026, a qualified farm may claim a
credit against the State income tax in the amount stated on any tax credit certificates
issued to the qualified farm during the taxable year.

(2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, for
any taxable year, the aggregate amount of credits authorized under this subsection for a
qualified farm may not exceed $5,000.

(ii) For any taxable year, the Secretary may increase the credit
limitation under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph for a qualified farm by an amount not
to exceed $5,000.

(3) If the credit allowed under this section exceeds the State income tax,
any unused credit may be carried forward and applied for succeeding taxable years until
the earlier of:

(i) the date on which the full amount of the credit is used; or

(ii) the date of the expiration of the 5th year after the taxable year
for which the credit was allowed.

(c) (1) A qualified farm that makes an eligible food donation is eligible for a
tax credit certificate with a stated tax credit amount equal to [50%] 75% 100% of the value
of the eligible food donation.

(2) A qualified farm that makes a donation of certified organic produce is
eligible for a tax credit certificate with a stated tax credit amount equal to [75%] 100% of
the value of the donated certified organic produce.

(d) (1) Each week the Secretary shall establish and publish the categories and
value of certified organic produce and eligible food donations.

(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, the value of each
category of certified organic produce and eligible food donations is the wholesale value of
the category established by the State Department of Agriculture and based on United
States Department of Agriculture reports on Maryland products sold at Maryland markets.

(3) If the Secretary determines that the value established under paragraph
(2) of this subsection is insufficient to pay for the cost of harvesting a category of certified
organic produce or eligible food donation, the Secretary may establish a value in excess of
the value under paragraph (2) of this subsection.

(e) (1) The Secretary, in consultation with the Comptroller, shall establish a
process to certify a person or an organization to act as a tax credit certificate administrator.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(2) A tax credit certificate administrator that receives a donation of
certified organic produce or an eligible food donation from a qualified farm shall issue the
qualified farm a tax credit certificate.

(3) The tax credit certificate shall:

(i) state the date of the donation;

(ii) identify the qualified farm;

(iii) describe the type of donation;

(iv) state the weight of the donation;

(v) identify the value of the donation;

(vi) state the maximum amount of the tax credit for which the
qualified farm is eligible; and

(vii) provide any other information the State Department of
Agriculture or Comptroller requires.

(4) The Secretary, in consultation with the Comptroller, shall prepare tax
credit certificate forms for the use of the tax credit certificate administrators.

(5) Within 30 days after issuing a tax credit certificate, the tax credit
certificate administrator shall provide a copy of the tax credit certificate to the Secretary
and the Comptroller.

(6) (i) The Secretary shall notify each tax credit certificate
administrator to stop issuing tax credit certificates if the amount of tax credit certificates
issued during the fiscal year equals or exceeds the amount of tax credit certificates
authorized to be issued during the fiscal year under subsection (f) of this section less
$50,000.

(ii) The Secretary, in consultation with the Comptroller, shall adopt
regulations providing procedures to issue the remaining $50,000 of tax credit certificates
under this paragraph.

(f) (1) For each fiscal year, the total amount of tax credit certificates issued
under this section may not exceed $100,000.

(2) If the total amount of tax credit certificates issued during any fiscal
year totals less than the maximum amount provided under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
any excess amount may be carried forward and issued under tax credit certificates in a
subsequent fiscal year.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 454 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) A tax credit certificate may not be issued after December 31, [2023]
~~2025.~~

(g) On or before January 1, 2018, and January 1 each year thereafter ~~until~~
January 1, [2025] 2027, the Secretary, in consultation with the Comptroller, shall submit
a report to the Governor and, subject to § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the
General Assembly on the use and impact of the tax credit established under this section.

(h) The Secretary, in consultation with the Comptroller, shall adopt regulations
to administer this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
Assembly that the State Department of Agriculture, in an amount consistent with the
amount of funding expended by the Department before the effective date of this Act in
administering the tax credit established under § 10–745 of the Tax – General Article, shall
continue to fund the marketing of the credit program and facilitate the donation of eligible
food donations by qualified farms in accordance with § 10–745 of the Tax – General Article,
as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, through the reimbursement of transportation costs or
direct assistance with the transportation of eligible food donations.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2022.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4