START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 15

Chapter 15

(House Bill 504)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council as an
independent unit of State government; and generally relating to the Maryland
Developmental Disabilities Council.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 7–12A–01 through 7–12A–04 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 12A.
Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 12A. MARYLAND DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES COUNCIL.

7–12A–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ACT” MEANS THE FEDERAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
ASSISTANCE AND BILL OF RIGHTS ACT OF 2000.

(C) “COUNCIL” MEANS THE MARYLAND DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
COUNCIL.

(D) “STATE PLAN” MEANS THE STRATEGIC PLAN DEVELOPED UNDER §
7–12A–02(E) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–12A–02.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES COUNCIL.

(B) THE COUNCIL IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 15 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE COUNCIL OPERATES AND RECEIVES FUNDING IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE ACT.

(D) THE COUNCIL HAS THE AUTHORITY TO:

(1) CONDUCT AND SUPPORT ADVOCACY, SYSTEMS CHANGE, AND
CAPACITY–BUILDING EFFORTS TO PROMOTE INCLUSIVE COMMUNITIES AND EQUITY
IN SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES IN THE STATE;

(2) RESEARCH BEST PRACTICES AND PROVIDE RELATED TRAINING
AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE; AND

(3) INFORM STATE AND LOCAL LEADERS ABOUT DISABILITY ISSUES.

(E) THE COUNCIL SHALL:

(1) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A 5–YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE ACT;

(2) MONITOR, REVIEW, AND ANNUALLY EVALUATE THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STATE PLAN;

(3) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, REVIEW ANY PLAN IN THE STATE
THAT RELATES TO PROGRAMS AFFECTING INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITIES;

(4) ON REQUEST, SUBMIT TO THE SECRETARY OF THE FEDERAL
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES PERIODIC REPORTS ON ITS
ACTIVITIES;

(5) SERVE AS AN ADVOCATE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES;

(6) CONDUCT OR SUPPORT PROGRAMS, PROJECTS, AND ACTIVITIES
THAT CARRY OUT THE PURPOSE OF THE ACT;

(7) ADVISE THE GOVERNOR, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, STATE
AGENCIES, AND OTHER RELEVANT ORGANIZATIONS ON POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND
ISSUES RELATED TO THE NEEDS OF INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITIES AND THEIR FAMILIES; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 15

(8) REVIEW AND MAKE FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING PROGRAMS RELATED TO THE SUPPORT AND SERVICES PROVIDED TO
INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES AND THEIR FAMILIES.

(F) A STATE ENTITY MAY NOT INTERFERE WITH THE COUNCIL’S ADVOCACY,
CAPACITY BUILDING, SYSTEMIC CHANGE ACTIVITIES, BUDGET, PERSONNEL, OR
STATE PLAN DEVELOPMENT OR IMPLEMENTATION.

7–12A–03.

(A) THE COUNCIL SHALL HIRE AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY EMPLOY ADDITIONAL STAFF
NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE COUNCIL’S FUNCTIONS.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL DETERMINE THE ORGANIZATIONAL
STRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL LOCATION OF COUNCIL STAFF.

7–12A–04.

(A) MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL SHALL COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS
OF THE ACT.

(B) THE COUNCIL CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY
THE GOVERNOR:

(1) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, OR THE
SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE ASSISTANT STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE DIVISION OF
REHABILITATION SERVICES, OR THE ASSISTANT STATE SUPERINTENDENT’S
DESIGNEE;

(3) THE SECRETARY OF DISABILITIES, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(4) THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF THE DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITIES ADMINISTRATION, OR THE DEPUTY SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE SECRETARY OF AGING, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(6) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND CENTER FOR
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 15 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF DISABILITY RIGHTS MARYLAND;

(8) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PREVENTION AND HEALTH
PROMOTION ADMINISTRATION OR ANY OTHER STATE ENTITY AUTHORIZED TO
ADMINISTER FUNDS PROVIDED UNDER TITLE V OF THE FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY
ACT;

(9) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND MEDICAL
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM OR ANY OTHER STATE ENTITY AUTHORIZED TO ADMINISTER
FUNDS PROVIDED UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY ACT;

(10) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A LOCAL NONGOVERNMENTAL
AGENCY;

(11) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A PRIVATE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
THAT PROVIDES SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
IN THE STATE; AND

(12) ANY ADDITIONAL INDIVIDUALS NECESSARY TO MEET THE
REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION AND THE ACT.

(C) (1) AT LEAST 60% OF THE MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL MUST BE:

(I) INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES;

(II) PARENTS OR GUARDIANS OF CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES; OR

(III) IMMEDIATE RELATIVES OR GUARDIANS OF ADULTS WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES WHO CANNOT ADVOCATE FOR THEMSELVES.

(2) IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) AT LEAST ONE–THIRD OF THE MEMBERS MUST BE
INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES;

(II) AT LEAST ONE–THIRD OF THE MEMBERS MUST BE PARENTS
OR GUARDIANS OF CHILDREN WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES OR GUARDIANS
OR IMMEDIATE RELATIVES OF ADULTS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES WHO
CANNOT ADVOCATE FOR THEMSELVES; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 15

(III) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER MUST BE:

1. AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY
WHO RESIDES OR PREVIOUSLY RESIDED IN AN INSTITUTION; OR

2. AN IMMEDIATE RELATIVE OR GUARDIAN OF AN
INDIVIDUAL WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY WHO RESIDES OR PREVIOUSLY
RESIDED IN AN INSTITUTION.

(D) THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE COUNCIL SHALL BE GEOGRAPHICALLY
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE STATE AND REFLECT THE DIVERSITY OF THE STATE WITH
RESPECT TO RACE AND ETHNICITY.

(E) THE COUNCIL SHALL ELECT A CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR FROM AMONG ITS
MEMBERS.

(F) THE COUNCIL SHALL ADOPT BYLAWS, POLICIES, AND OPERATING
PROCEDURES THAT ARE IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND WITH STATE LAW.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5