START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 541 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 541 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Earnable Compensation, Nonvested 
Former Members, and Immediate Vesting 
 
 
This bill (1) excludes specified payments to members of the State Retirement and Pension 
System (SRPS) from the definition of “earnable compensation”; (2) requires the SRPS 
Board of Trustees, after receiving proof of death of a former member, to pay any remaining 
accumulated contributions of a deceased nonvested former member to the former 
member’s designated beneficiary or, if there is no beneficiary, to the former member’s 
estate; (3) and clarifies which State government employees vest immediately upon 
becoming members of SRPS. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023; the exclusion from 
earnable compensation applies retroactively, as described below.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s provisions (1) have no discernible effect on State pension 
liabilities or contribution rates; (2) conform statute to current law; or (3) are clarifying in 
nature, as discussed below. No effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Earnable Compensation 
 
“Earnable compensation” does not include (1) a lump sum payment by a participating 
employer that represents a retroactive salary increase to one or more classes of employees 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 541/ Page 2 
for periods of employment that took place before the award of the payment and (2) any 
other payment that the SRPS Board of Trustees determines is not part of the member’s 
annual salary rate payable for working the normal time in the member’s position. Exclusion 
of these payments from the definition of “earnable compensation” applies retroactively to 
any applicable lump sum payment made on or after July 1, 2022. However, this provision 
does not apply to any lump sum payment by the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT) made between July 1, 2022, and June 30, 2023, inclusive, that represents a 
retroactive salary increase, as specified, if member and employer contributions on the 
payments were made to SRPS. 
 
Immediate Vesting 
 
The bill clarifies that, in addition to the Secretary of a principal department of the 
Executive Branch, the following individuals have immediate vesting rights: 
 
 
Executive Director of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; 
 
Adjutant General of the Military Department; 
 
Chair of the State Board of Contract Appeals; 
 
Chair of the Public Service Commission; 
 
Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Commission; 
 
Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings; 
 
Director of the Health Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; 
 
Director of the Maryland Energy Administration; 
 
Director of the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; 
 
Director of the Office of Homeland Security; 
 
Director of the Office of Performance Improvement; 
 
Director of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
 
Director of the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
 
Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Community and Crime; 
 
Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and 
Victim Services; 
 
Executive Director of the State Retirement Agency (SRA); 
 
Insurance Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance Administration; 
 
Special Secretary of the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; 
 
State Archivist; and 
 
State Prosecutor of the State Prosecutor’s Office. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 541/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Earnable Compensation 
 
“Earnable compensation” is defined as one-twelfth of a member’s annual salary rate 
payable for working the normal time in the member’s position, including the employer’s 
pickup contribution or a contribution to a Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plan. 
 
Deceased Former Members 
 
Members of SRPS who began service before July 1, 2011, vest after 5 years of service; 
members who began service on or after that date vest after 10 years of service. Members 
who vest, separate from service, and do not withdraw their accumulated contributions are 
entitled to a vested retirement allowance when they reach normal retirement age. The 
allowance is calculated based on their years of service and average final compensation 
(AFC) at the time they separated from service. Nonvested members who separate from 
service are entitled only to a return of their accumulated contributions, with interest. 
 
When a vested former member dies before payment of the vested allowance begins, the 
SRPS board, after receiving proof of death, must pay the former member’s accumulated 
contributions to the designated beneficiary or, if there is no beneficiary, to the former 
member’s estate. 
 
Immediate Vesting 
 
The following members of SRPS have immediate vesting rights in the State system in 
which they are a member: 
 
 
a Secretary of a principal department of State government; 
 
a head of a department, office, or any other unit of State government who (1) serves 
at the pleasure of the Governor or (2) is appointed by the Governor for a fixed term; 
and 
 
the Executive Director of SRA (but only if that individual commenced employment 
in that position on or after January 1, 2021). 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Earnable Compensation 
 
“Earnable compensation” is used to calculate AFC, which in turn is used to calculate a 
member’s basic retirement allowance at the time of retirement. SRA is not aware of any 
specific retroactive salary increases awarded as lump sum payments, so a reliable estimate 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 541/ Page 4 
of the effect on State pension liabilities is not feasible. However, except for MDOT 
payments exempted by the bill, to the extent that any such payments have been made since 
July 1, 2022, or will be made in the future, the payments are not counted as earnable 
compensation. As this provision limits or reduces earnable compensation used to calculate 
retirement benefits, it represents a potential reduction in pension liabilities. Regardless, any 
such effect is expected to be negligible and have no discernible effect on State pension 
contributions. 
 
Deceased Former Members 
 
Although statute is silent with respect to payment of the accumulated contributions of a 
deceased nonvested former member, the SRPS board advises that it has been its practice to 
pay the accumulated contributions of deceased nonvested former members to their 
beneficiaries or estates, as required by the bill. Therefore, the bill conforms statute to 
current practice. 
 
Immediate Vesting 
 
The bill’s listing of individuals who have immediate vesting rights is clarifying in nature, 
as it lists individuals who already have those rights under current law. The provision is 
intended to avoid confusion or disputes about who is or is not entitled to immediate vesting 
rights. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 274 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 541/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5