START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 548 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 548 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Financial Regulation - Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund - 
Establishment (Access to Banking Act) 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes the Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund, 
which is a private venture fund that (1) is an instrumentality of the State and (2) uses both 
public and private investment funds. Generally, the purpose of the fund is to develop 
opportunities for banking institutions and credit unions to better serve needs of low- to 
moderate-income areas, as specified. To encourage private investment, the Office of the 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) is authorized to provide an initial equity 
capital investment in the fund in an amount of up to $2.5 million from the 
Banking Institution and Credit Union Regulation Fund. OCFR may also use a total of 
$250,000 to cover any administrative expenses associated with establishing the fund. 
OCFR may provide assessment offset credits for banking institutions and credit unions that 
meet certain requirements and may also match any investment made by those financial 
institutions (up to the amount of the assessment credit earned). OCFR may not make an 
investment in the fund (including a matching investment) after June 30, 2028. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by approximately $2.8 million in 
FY 2024, reflecting the initial investment authorized by the bill, administrative expenses, 
and matching expenditures. Out-year expenditures reflect residual administrative costs and 
matching expenditures. Special fund revenues decrease by an estimated $171,000 in 
FY 2024 and by $310,000 in FY 2028 due to reduced assessments on financial institutions. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
($171,000) 
($246,000) 
($265,500) 
($287,000) 
($310,000) 
SF Expenditure 
$2,838,500 
$328,500 
$265,500 
$287,000 
$310,000 
Net Effect 
($3,009,500) 
($574,500) 
($531,000) 
($574,000) 
($620,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 548/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
“Deposit growth cap” means the year-over-year percentage change of domestic office 
deposits as reported on December 31 each year by the relevant federal supervisory entity. 
 
For a credit union, “de novo branch” means a branch of a credit union that was originally 
established by the credit union in the State. This definition is similar to the existing 
definition of a “de novo branch” for a banking institution (which specifically excludes 
existing branches that are acquired, merged, converted, or consolidated). 
 
“Low- to moderate-income tract” means a census tract delineated by the U.S. Census 
Bureau in the most recent decennial census that corresponds to low- to moderate-level 
classifications as defined by regulations implementing the federal Community 
Reinvestment Act. 
 
Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund 
 
Generally, the purpose of the fund is to develop opportunities for banking institutions and 
credit unions to better serve the needs of low- to moderate-income tracts by: 
 
 
investing in the development of financial product (or financial product 
underwriting) innovations that enhance access to capital, funding, and other 
financial services for businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State; 
 
deploying, testing, and evaluating the innovations for providing capital and funding 
to businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State; and 
 
promoting and making the innovations available to banking institutions and 
credit unions for use in enhancing access to capital, funding, and other financial 
services for businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 548/ Page 3 
With the approval of the commissioner, the purpose of the fund may be altered in a manner 
that is consistent with the intent and requirements of the bill.  
 
OCFR must establish a governance structure for the fund and may collaborate with 
investors in the fund when doing so. The commissioner (or designee, if applicable) must 
always serve on the governing body of the fund.  
 
All investment returns (or return of capital) from the fund with respect to an investment 
authorized by OCFR accrue to the Banking Institution and Credit Union Regulation Fund. 
 
At the direction of the commissioner (and in addition to any customary and appropriate 
audits of the fund), the governing body of the fund must obtain the services of an 
independent third party (designated by the commissioner) on an annual basis to evaluate 
whether investments made to the fund comply with the bill.  
 
If the commissioner determines that separate private venture funds are necessary to 
accomplish the fund’s purpose, the commissioner may use money from the fund to 
establish additional private venture funds. However, an additional private venture fund 
remains subject to the requirements of the bill (including the aggregate expense and 
investment limitations). 
 
Assessment Offset Credits 
 
A well-capitalized banking institution or credit union with a composite CAMELS rating of 
1 or 2 may file with OCFR a request for an assessment offset credit of: 
 
 
12 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a de novo branch located in a low- to 
moderate-income tract for the first five years after the branch opened; or 
 
6 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a branch located in a low- to moderate-income 
tract (not to exceed the deposit growth cap). 
 
OCFR is authorized to establish a successor index for both (1) the low- to moderate-income 
tract or (2) the deposit growth cap, if the designated sources under the bill are no longer 
published. 
 
Current Law:  OCFR within the Maryland Department of Labor regulates State-chartered 
and 
State-licensed 
financial 
institutions 
operating 
in 
Maryland, 
including 
Maryland-chartered banks and credit unions. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 548/ Page 4 
Assessments on Banking Institutions and Credit Unions 
 
OCFR is required to impose annual assessments on each State-chartered banking institution 
and credit union to cover the expenses of regulating them. The assessment amounts vary 
based on the deposit levels of the financial institution. 
 
Banking Institutions:  Banking institutions that accept deposits or retain funds in deposit 
accounts are subject to a graduated annual assessment of $8,000 plus $0.12 for each 
$1,000 of the assets of the institution over $50 million but up to $250 million, $0.10 for 
each $1,000 of assets over $250 million but up to $500 million, $0.09 for each $1,000 of 
assets over $500 million but up to $1 billion, $0.08 for each $1,000 of assets over $1 billion 
but up to $10 billion, and $0.07 for each $1,000 of assets over $10 billion. 
 
Credit Unions:  Credit unions with assets of $300,000 or greater are subject to an annual 
assessment of $1,000, plus $0.08 for each $1,000 of the assets of the institution over 
$1 million. 
 
Banking Institution and Credit Union Regulation Special Fund 
 
The purpose of the fund is to pay all the costs and expenses incurred by OCFR that are 
related to the regulation of banking institutions and credit unions, as specified. The fund is 
a special, nonlapsing fund not subject to reversion to the general fund. As of June 30, 2022, 
the fund had a balance of $9.9 million. 
 
CAMELS Rating System  
 
“CAMELS” means the composite rating adopted by the federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council to evaluate the adequacy of capital, quality of assets, capability of 
management, quality and level of earnings, adequacy of liquidity, and sensitivity to market 
risk. 
 
Background:  OCFR advises that the bill is intended to address concerns that certain 
locations in the State do not have adequate access to financial services  
(i.e., banking deserts). The bill seeks to address this by (1) enhancing the availability of 
capital for businesses in low- to moderate-income neighborhoods and (2) creating an 
incentive for depository institutions to maintain and establish branches in the same areas. 
 
OCFR further advises that the fund will be used to invest in companies that successfully 
underwrite small or micro business credit in low- to moderate-income communities. As 
these underwriting capabilities are developed, the fund is intended to serve as a source of 
capital for loans to (or investments in) small businesses. OCFR advises that banks and 
credit unions will be encouraged to invest any assessment credits received into the fund 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 548/ Page 5 
and that any amounts contributed by those entities will be matched by OCFR as allowed 
under the bill. 
 
CAMELS Rating System 
 
More broadly, under the CAMELS rating system, the appropriate federal supervisory 
institution (e.g., the U.S. Federal Reserve, National Credit Union Association, etc.) assigns 
each bank and credit union a rating that allows comparisons over time with peer 
institutions. Just as defined in the Financial Institutions Article, the acronym represents 
six features that are considered in developing the rating: 
 
 
capital adequacy; 
 
asset quality; 
 
management; 
 
earnings; 
 
liquidity; and 
 
sensitivity to market risk. 
 
The financial institution is rated on each feature and subsequently receives a composite 
rating varying from 1 (strong) to 5 (critically deficient). 
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures increase by $2,838,500 in fiscal 2024, 
reflecting the following assumptions:  (1) OCFR exercises the bill’s authorization for it to 
make an initial $2,500,000 investment in the fund; (2) OCFR incurs first-year 
administrative expenses totaling $167,500 to charter and organize the fund; and (3) OCFR 
makes matching expenditures totaling $171,000. In fiscal 2025, special fund expenditures 
increase by $82,500 (i.e., the remaining portion of the bill’s $250,000 expense 
authorization). All other special fund expenditures reflect matching amounts paid by OCFR 
into the venture fund; these amounts are assumed to correspond to the assessment credit 
revenue decrease discussed below. 
 
OCFR advises that, following the expenditure of the initial authorization of $250,000 to 
establish the fund, it can manage the fund with existing resources. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues decrease by $171,000 in fiscal 2024 due to the 
assessment credits authorized by the bill. In subsequent years, special fund revenues 
decrease by varying amounts; by fiscal 2028, the revenue decrease is estimated at 
$310,000. OCFR advises the estimate is based on the asset levels of the 59 total financial 
institutions with de novo branches that meet the criteria established by the bill (48 banks 
and 11 credit unions). To the extent that additional de novo branches are opened that meet 
the bill’s requirements, special fund revenues decrease further. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 548/ Page 6 
The estimate above assumes that the assessment credits granted to financial institutions are 
invested by the relevant financial institutions into the Maryland Community Investment 
Venture Fund and subsequently matched by OCFR. DLS advises that, while OCFR may 
encourage financial institutions to invest the assessment credits into the new fund, the bill 
does not require banks or credit unions to do so. Moreover, there is no direct financial 
incentive for banks or credit unions to reinvest their credits in the fund since all returns 
from the fund’s investments accrue to OCFR, not to the investor. Thus, to the extent that 
the assessment credits are retained by financial institutions (rather than invested into the 
new fund), special fund matching expenditures may be reduced, which in turn reduces 
available funds in the new venture fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 550 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 548/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Financial Regulation - Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund - 
Establishment (Access to Banking Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0548 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Joe Cunningham, Director of Legislative Response and Special Projects 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
   X      WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Small businesses will be affected positively by this legislation, for one of its key aspects is to 
encourage, as well as facilitate, small business investment.  Specifically, creation of the Maryland 
Community Investment Venture Fund aims to focus on ensuring the availability of credit and 
investment capital  for small businesses in low-and-moderate income (“LMI”) communities 
throughout the State by investing in entities that (1) develop, expand, and ensure the continued 
availability of data points and streams that can be used to successfully underwrite small business 
credit in low to moderate income communities and (2) providing loans and capital investments for 
small businesses using these data streams as the basis for underwriting the loans or investments. 
 

END OF PAGE 7