START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 504 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 504 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council - Establishment 
 
 
This bill codifies the Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council as an independent unit 
of State government. The council operates and receives funding in accordance with the 
federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000. The council 
must (1) develop, implement, monitor, review, and evaluate a five-year strategic plan; 
(2) review any plan in the State that affects individuals with developmental disabilities; 
(3) submit periodic reports; (4) serve as an advocate for individuals with developmental 
disabilities; (5) conduct or support programs, projects, and activities that carry out the Act; 
(6) advise the Governor, the General Assembly, State agencies, and other relevant 
organizations on policies, programs, and issues related to the needs of individuals with 
developmental disabilities; and (7) review and make findings and recommendations, as 
specified. This bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill codifies an existing council that is funded under federal law. Any 
impact on the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) to participate on the council is 
assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 504/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The council may (1) conduct and support advocacy, systems change, and 
capacity-building efforts, as specified; (2) research best practices and provide related 
training and technical assistance; and (3) inform State and local leaders about disability 
issues. No State entity may interfere with the council’s advocacy, capacity building, 
systemic change activities, budget, personnel, or strategic plan development or 
implementation.  
 
The council must hire an executive director, who must determine the organization’s 
structure and physical location of the council’s staff and who may employ additional staff. 
 
Council Members 
 
The membership of the council must be geographically representative of the State and 
reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the State. The council must elect a chair and 
vice-chair from its members and adopt bylaws, policies, and operating procedures that 
comply with the Act and with State law. 
 
The council comprises at least 11 members, all appointed by the Governor, including 
representatives of State agencies (including MDOA, which is not currently represented on 
the council), the Maryland Center for Developmental Disabilities, Disability Rights 
Maryland, a local nongovernmental agency, a private nonprofit organization that provides 
services to individuals with developmental disabilities in the State, and any additional 
individuals necessary to comply with the bill and the Act. 
 
Per the Act, at least six members of the council must be (1) individuals with developmental 
disabilities; (2) parents or guardians of a child with developmental disabilities; or 
(3) immediate relatives or guardians of an adult with developmental disabilities who cannot 
advocate for themselves. At least one-third of the members must be parents or guardians 
of children with developmental disabilities or immediate relatives or guardians of adults 
with developmental disabilities who cannot advocate for themselves. One member must be 
an individual with a developmental disability who resides or previously resided in an 
institution or an immediate relative or guardian of an individual with a developmental 
disability who resides or previously resided in an institution. 
 
Current Law:  The federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act 
of 1970 required each state to have a developmental disabilities council to ensure that 
individuals with developmental disabilities and their family members participate in 
designing programs, services, and advocacy efforts to support, integrate, and promote the 
independence of individuals with developmental disabilities in their respective state. The 
Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council was subsequently established by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 504/ Page 3 
executive order in 1971, and subsequently updated in 1987. The federal Act was last 
updated in 2000 and governs the council’s membership, activities, and funding. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The council is an independent State agency that employs an 
executive director and four additional staff. The council is fully funded through the Act 
and reports to the federal Administration on Disabilities, Office of Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities. The Governor’s Office of Financial Administration receives 
and administers funds for the council. Thus, there is no additional fiscal impact to codify 
the council as an independent unit of State government. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 168 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Disabilities; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3