START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 352

Chapter 352

(House Bill 520)

AN ACT concerning

City of Annapolis – Alcoholic Beverages – Art Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing an art establishment beer and wine license in the City of
Annapolis; authorizing the Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to
sell or serve beer and wine for on–premises consumption to a nonprofit organization
primarily engaged in certain activities; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages
in the City of Annapolis.

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 10–1001
to be Section 10–1002
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 10–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 10–1001
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 10–1001 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated Code of Maryland
be renumbered to be Section(s) 10–1002.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

10–102.

This title applies only in the City of Annapolis.

10–1001.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 352 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THERE IS AN ART ESTABLISHMENT BEER AND WINE LICENSE.

(B) (1) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE TO A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION PRIMARILY ENGAGED IN:

(I) THE DISPLAY, SALE, OR DEMONSTRATION OF ART BY AN
INDIVIDUAL ARTIST OR A GROUP OF ARTISTS;

(II) THE INSTRUCTION OF PARTICIPATING CLIENTS IN
CREATING ART; OR

(III) LIVE PERFORMANCES, INCLUDING MUSICAL ACTS OR
THEATER PERFORMANCES.

(2) THE BOARD MAY NOT ISSUE THE LICENSE TO AN ORGANIZATION
THAT:

(I) DISPLAYS AND SELLS COMMERCIALLY PREPARED OR
MASS–PRODUCED ARTISTIC PRODUCTS; OR

(II) HAS A CORPORATE PURPOSE THAT IS NOT DEDICATED TO
THE ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL OR SERVE BEER AND
WINE AT RETAIL FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(D) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL OR SERVE BEER AND WINE DURING
THE HOURS AND DAYS SET FOR BEER AND LIGHT WINE LICENSES UNDER § 10–2003
OF THIS TITLE.

(E) THE LICENSE MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER LOCATION.

(F) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $205 $1,000.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2