START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 535 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 535 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Ballot Issuance, Processing, and Reporting Procedures and 2024 
Primary Date 
 
   
This bill makes changes to State election law relating to (1) the issuance of absentee ballots; 
(2) the start of absentee ballot processing during an election; (3) the definition of “canvass”; 
(4) a voter’s ability to correct a failure to sign the oath on an absentee ballot envelope; 
(5) instances where a local board of elections receives more than one ballot from the same 
individual; and (6) reporting of election results by precinct. The bill also alters the date, in 
2024, of the statewide primary election and the primary election for municipal offices in 
Baltimore City so that they are held on the second Tuesday in May, instead of the fourth 
Tuesday in April. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $84,100 in FY 2024, and by 
ongoing amounts in future years, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
84,100 
100,700 
105,200 
109,900 
115,700 
Net Effect 
($84,100) 
($100,700) 
($105,200) 
($109,900) 
($115,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, beginning in FY 2024, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of 
local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 535/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Issuance of Absentee Ballots 
 
The bill requires a local board of elections, not later than 43 days before an election, to 
send a ballot to each voter who qualifies to vote by absentee ballot and has made a request 
at least 60 days before the election to receive the ballot by mail, facsimile transmission, or 
the Internet. A local board must provide a ballot to a voter who qualifies to vote by absentee 
ballot and makes a request less than 60 days before an election (1) as soon as practicable 
after receipt of the request or (2) immediately for an in-person transaction with a voter or 
the voter’s duly authorized agent.  
 
Start of Absentee Ballot Processing 
 
The bill replaces a provision that prohibits a local board of elections from opening any 
envelope of an absentee ballot prior to 8:00 a.m. on the Wednesday following Election Day 
with a provision that instead requires a local board to begin processing absentee ballots on 
the day that is eight business days before the first day of early voting. The State 
Administrator of Elections may grant a waiver from this requirement if a local board seeks 
a determination by the State Administrator that early canvassing is not (1) necessary due 
to the low number of absentee ballots received by the local board or (2) practicable due to 
limited resources or other constraints on the local board. The bill also authorizes a local 
board to conduct vote tallying (recording of votes cast by individual voters on a certified 
voting system) when absentee ballots are processed; however, a local board or an employee 
of a local board is prohibited from conducting absentee ballot vote tabulation (aggregation 
of votes to produce vote totals) before the polls open on Election Day. The bill also 
prohibits a local board from releasing absentee ballot vote totals before the polls close on 
Election Day. The bill clarifies that an existing requirement – that a local board prepare 
and release a report of the unofficial results/returns of the absentee vote tabulation at the 
end of each day of canvassing – applies after the polls close on Election Day. 
 
Definition of “Canvass” 
 
The bill modifies the definition of “canvass” by repealing a reference to the auditing of 
votes. 
 
Failure to Sign the Oath on an Absentee Ballot Envelope 
 
The bill replaces a requirement that a local board reject an absentee ballot if the voter failed 
to sign the oath on the ballot envelope with a requirement that the local board reject an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 535/ Page 3 
absentee ballot if the voter both failed to sign the oath on the ballot envelope or ballot/return 
envelope and failed to correct the omission before 10:00 a.m. on the day that is 10 days 
after Election Day. The bill requires a local board – promptly after receipt of an absentee 
ballot – to review the ballot envelope or ballot/return envelope for the omission of the 
voter’s signature on the oath. The bill also requires a local board to record the receipt of an 
absentee ballot in the statewide voter registration system and make the information 
available through the State Board of Elections’ (SBE) free access system as soon as 
practicable, but not later than two business days after receipt of an absentee ballot provided 
by mail or four business days after receipt of an absentee ballot provided through the 
Internet or by facsimile transmission. 
 
SBE must adopt regulations requiring a local board to, as soon as practicable but not later 
than three business days after the date on which it was determined that a voter failed to 
sign the oath on the ballot envelope or ballot/return envelope, notify the voter of the failure 
and provide the voter an opportunity to correct the omission and have the ballot counted. 
The regulations must allow a voter to (1) supply a signature to the local board through a 
digital picture message sent by mobile telephone or email and (2) choose among multiple 
methods of communicating with the local board to correct the failure to sign the oath, 
including text message, email, an accessible online portal, a mailed form, and an in-person 
visit to the local board office. 
 
Multiple Ballots Received from the Same Individual  
 
The bill requires a local board of elections, if the local board receives more than one ballot 
from the same individual, to count the first ballot from the individual that is determined to 
be legally sufficient and reject any other ballot. Pursuant to an existing provision, however, 
the local board must reject an absentee ballot if the local board received more than 
one ballot from the same individual for the same election in the same ballot envelope. 
 
Under provisions governing canvassing of absentee ballots, the bill repeals a provision that 
requires a local board of elections, if the local board receives more than one legally 
sufficient ballot, in separate envelopes, from the same individual, to count only the ballot 
with the latest properly signed oath and reject any other ballot. The bill also repeals a 
requirement that a local board reject a provisional ballot if the individual cast more than 
one ballot for the same election. 
 
Election Results by Precinct 
 
The bill requires that SBE’s reports of election results by precinct include the early, 
absentee, and provisional vote, and requires local boards of elections’ statements of 
election results to report the early, absentee, and provisional vote separately. The bill also 
repeals requirements that local boards of elections (1) report election results by precinct 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 535/ Page 4 
and (2) publish a sufficient number of copies of the complete election results, tabulated by 
precinct, and make the copies available to the public at cost. 
 
Date of the 2024 Primary Election 
 
The bill alters the date, in 2024, of the statewide primary election and the primary election 
for municipal offices in Baltimore City so that they are held on the second Tuesday in May, 
instead of the fourth Tuesday in April. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Issuance of Absentee (Mail-in) Ballots 
 
If an absentee (mail-in) ballot applicant qualifies to vote by absentee ballot, a local board 
must provide the ballot by one of the following methods requested by the voter:  (1) mail; 
(2) facsimile transmission; (3) the Internet; or (4) by hand during an in-person transaction. 
 
Once ballots are available, the local board must provide the ballot to a qualified applicant 
(1) as soon as practicable after receipt of the request or (2) immediately for an in-person 
transaction with a voter or the voter’s duly authorized agent. 
 
Absentee Ballot Processing/Canvassing 
 
Following an election, each local board of elections must meet at its designated counting 
center to canvass absentee ballots cast in that election in accordance with the regulations 
and guidelines established by SBE. “Canvass” means the entire process of vote tallying, 
vote tabulation, and vote verification or audit, culminating in the production and 
certification of the official election results. For absentee ballots, the “canvass” includes the 
opening of any envelope accompanying an absentee ballot and the assembly and review of 
absentee ballots in preparation for vote tallying. 
 
A local board of elections may not open any envelope of an absentee ballot prior to 
8:00 a.m. on the Wednesday following Election Day. 
 
SBE regulations require that local boards of elections start to canvass absentee ballots at 
10:00 a.m. on the Thursday after the election and start the second absentee ballot canvass 
at 10:00 a.m. on the second Friday after an election. 
 
“Canvass,” Certification of Results, and Postelection Tabulation Audits  
 
After each election, each board of canvassers (a local board of elections organized for the 
purpose of canvassing the vote) must transmit to the Governor, SBE, and the clerk of the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 535/ Page 5 
circuit court for the county certified copies of the election results in the county. The 
transmittal must be made on the second Friday after a primary or general election or, if the 
canvass is completed after that date, within 48 hours after the completion of the canvass. 
As mentioned above, “canvass” means the entire process of vote tallying, vote tabulation, 
and vote verification or audit, culminating in the production and certification of the official 
election results.  
 
Chapter 523 of 2018 requires SBE to conduct an audit of the accuracy of the voting 
system’s tabulation of votes, following each statewide general election, by completing 
(1) an automated software audit of the electronic images of all ballots cast in the election 
and (2) a specified manual audit of voter-verifiable paper records. Following each 
statewide primary election, SBE (1) must complete an automated software audit of the 
electronic images of all ballots cast in the election and (2) may complete a manual audit of 
voter-verifiable paper records in a manner prescribed by SBE. The manual audit that must 
be completed following each statewide general election must be completed within 120 days 
after the general election, and Chapter 523 establishes that both the manual audits and 
automated software audits may not have any effect on the certified election results and 
must be used to improve the voting system and voting process for future elections. 
 
Failure to Sign the Oath on an Absentee Ballot Envelope 
 
A local board of elections may not reject an absentee ballot except by unanimous vote and 
in accordance with SBE regulations. A local board must reject an absentee ballot if the 
voter failed to sign the oath on the ballot envelope. 
 
SBE regulations require an election director – if an absentee ballot is timely received but 
the voter did not sign the required oath – to (1) as soon as practicable, but not later than 
three business days after the election director determines that the voter failed to sign the 
oath, notify the voter that the voter did not sign the oath and (2) explain how the voter can 
provide a signed oath and when the signed oath must be received for the voter’s ballot to 
be accepted. The regulations authorize a voter to provide a signature by email, mail, 
in-person visit to the local board, or other means offered by SBE. 
 
Multiple Ballots Received from the Same Individual 
 
State law requires a local board of elections to reject a provisional ballot if the individual 
cast more than one ballot for the same election. Pursuant to SBE regulations, if an absentee 
ballot and provisional ballot are received from the same individual, the local board must 
reject the provisional ballot; however, if the local board receives an absentee ballot after a 
provisional ballot from the same voter has been counted the local board must reject the 
absentee ballot. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 535/ Page 6 
Under provisions governing canvassing of absentee ballots, State law requires a local board 
of elections – if the local board receives more than one legally sufficient ballot, in separate 
envelopes, from the same individual – to count only the ballot with the latest properly 
signed oath and reject any other ballot. The local board must reject an absentee ballot if the 
local board received more than one ballot from the same individual for the same election 
in the same ballot envelope. SBE regulations clarify that (1) if a single return absentee 
ballot envelope contains more than one ballot from the same individual for the same 
election, all ballots from that individual must be rejected and (2) if more than one ballot is 
received from the same individual in different envelopes, and the signed oaths all have the 
same dates or all have indecipherable dates, all ballots must be rejected. 
 
Election Results by Precinct 
 
State law requires local boards of elections and SBE to make election results available by 
precinct, but prohibits a statement prepared by a local board from reporting the absentee 
vote separately by precinct. Each local board must publish a sufficient number of copies of 
the complete election results, tabulated by precinct, and must make the copies available to 
the public at cost. 
 
Date of the Primary Election 
 
In the year in which the President of the United States is elected, the statewide primary 
election and the primary election for municipal offices in Baltimore City must be held on 
the fourth Tuesday in April. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $84,091 in fiscal 2024, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023, effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring an information technology (IT) programmer within SBE to assist in the 
development and maintenance of a system that will meet the bill’s requirements for a 
voter’s ability to correct a failure to sign the oath on the voter’s mail-in ballot envelope 
through text messaging and an accessible online portal. An additional cost, for the State’s 
share of contractual services (expected to be shared 50/50 by SBE and the local boards) 
that SBE anticipates also needing, to allow for a voter to supply a signature to a local board 
through a text message, cannot be quantified at this time. While the system is used by the 
local boards of elections to communicate with voters, this estimate assumes a centralized 
system is developed and/or procured by SBE. The estimate for the cost to hire the IT 
programmer includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 535/ Page 7 
Position 
        1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$76,682 
Operating Expenses 
    7,409 
Total FY 2024 Minimum State Expenditures 
$84,091 
 
Future year expenditures associated with the IT programmer position reflect a full salary 
with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
General fund expenditures may further increase, by a relatively minimal amount, to pay 
for the State’s share of the cost of additional flash drives certain local board of elections 
expect to need for early canvassing, in order to process and scan mail-in ballots and store 
the recorded vote information without tabulating the mail-in vote totals before the polls 
open on Election Day. A smaller number of counties have also indicated a potential need 
for additional scanners, due to limited availability of scanners before or on Election Day, 
when scanners are dedicated to use in early voting centers and Election Day polling places. 
The statewide cost for additional flash drives, and a limited number of additional scanners 
if necessary, has not been quantified; however, based on information provided by a number 
of local boards, the increase in general fund expenditures to cover the State’s share (50%) 
of the cost for additional flash drives and any additional scanners is expected to be 
relatively minimal. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Expenditures increase in certain counties to begin canvassing mail-in 
ballots eight business days before the first day of early voting, to the extent additional 
personnel costs for early canvassing are not fully offset by any savings in 
post-Election Day canvassing due to fewer mail-in ballots needing to be canvassed after 
Election Day. Of the counties that have provided estimates of additional staff costs to begin 
canvassing eight days before early voting, it appears that any net increase in expenditures, 
for most of them, is less than $5,000.  
 
As discussed above under the State Fiscal Effect, at least some local governments expect 
to also incur costs to acquire additional flash drives and potentially scanners; however, 
those costs (shared 50/50 with the State), on average, are expected to be relatively minimal 
for each local board.  
 
Also, as discussed under the State Fiscal Effect, local board expenditures increase to cover 
50% of the cost of contractual services SBE anticipates needing, to allow for a voter to 
supply a signature to a local board through a text message; however, those costs have not 
been quantified. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 535/ Page 8 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 163 and HB 862 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 379 (Senator Kagan, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Allegany, Anne Arundel, Calvert, Caroline, 
Carroll, Dorchester, Harford, St. Mary’s, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8