START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 551 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 551 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Office of Statewide Broadband - Study of Broadband Expansion Incentives 
 
 
This Administration bill requires the Office of Statewide Broadband (OSB) within the 
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to study and make 
recommendations regarding (1) how the State can incentivize broadband service providers 
to expand broadband infrastructure to communities that are unserved or underserved, 
including through either regulatory or financial incentives; (2) how the State can ensure 
that federal broadband infrastructure grants are deployed to best serve the needs of 
Marylanders; and (3) how other states have encouraged private investment in broadband 
networks and how the State might implement similar measures. OSB must submit its 
findings to the Governor and the General Assembly by January 1, 2024. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources; however, general fund expenditures for DHCD may increase by a limited 
amount in FY 2024 only, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The attached assessment does not reflect amendments 
to the bill. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that the bill, as amended, 
has minimal or no impact on small business. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 551/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 74 of 2021 established OSB within DHCD as the successor to the 
Office of Rural Broadband and charged OSB with expanded responsibilities relating to 
planning, data collection, outreach, and intergovernmental coordination. Notably, the Act 
required OSB to prepare a statewide plan ensuring universal, affordable, reliable broadband 
Internet connectivity exceeding specified federal standards by December 31, 2026. OSB 
must annually report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the progress of the 
State’s efforts to develop and implement the statewide plan, among other things. 
 
Chapter 74 also established (1) the Digital Inclusion Fund, to provide a competitive grant 
program to support capacity building for local governments and nonprofit organizations 
seeking to further access to high-speed Internet and implement programs to expand digital 
literacy and (2) the Digital Connectivity Fund, to assist in the establishment and expansion 
of affordable broadband communication services in disconnected areas and communities 
in the State. In addition, the Act transferred the existing Rural Broadband Coordination 
Board and Rural Broadband Assistance Fund from the Department of Commerce to OSB. 
The purpose of the Rural Broadband Assistance Fund is to assist in the establishment of 
broadband communication services in rural and underserved areas of the State. 
 
Background:  The federal American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) and Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) included significant funding for broadband programs. The 
State has designated approximately $400 million in federal ARPA funds for the purpose of 
broadband expansion and anticipates more than $100 million in federal broadband funding 
from the IIJA. 
 
State Expenditures:  OSB advises that it does not have the expertise to fully conduct the 
required study and requires the assistance of consultants at an estimated cost of $100,000 
to $150,000. OSB further advises that such costs can be absorbed without incurring 
additional expenditures by shifting budgeted funds from other planned projects. 
 
DLS is unable to independently verify the need for contractual assistance to complete the 
required study and advises that the work required by the bill is within OSB’s existing scope 
of 
responsibilities, 
which 
includes, 
among 
other 
things, 
developing 
policy 
recommendations to improve the availability of and access to broadband Internet services 
in the State. Thus, it is assumed that OSB can likely meet the bill’s requirements with 
existing budgeted resources. However, to the extent specialized assistance is needed, and 
existing budgeted funds cannot be reallocated, general fund expenditures for DHCD 
potentially increase by a limited amount in fiscal 2024 only. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 551/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 547 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis; IHS Markit; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison, 
Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 551/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Office of Statewide Broadband - Study of Broadband Expansion Incentives 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0551/SB0547 
 
PREPARED BY:  
Brad Fallon 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Through the 5-year moratorium on the collection of sales and use tax for certain purchases related 
to broadband network construction and the decoupling provision set forth in the bill, additional 
individuals and businesses located in Maryland will have access to Internet services. This will 
bolster the ability of these individuals and businesses to participate in commerce and the workforce 
market. This will further incentivize investment by telecommunications companies to build 
networks in Maryland, contributing to overall economic growth.  
 
In the short term, this legislation will incentivize spending on Maryland-based broadband 
equipment and workforce. In the long term, increased access to broadband networks will have a 
substantial impact on Maryland's economy.  
 

END OF PAGE 4