START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 586 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 586 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement - Purchasing - Compost, Mulch, and Soil Amendments and 
Aggregate 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Green Purchasing Committee (MGPC) to establish 
specifications for purchasing compost, mulch, or other soil amendments or aggregate 
produced from municipal solid waste, food waste, dredged material, construction waste, 
yard waste, clean wood waste, or other recycled or organic materials. MGPC must publish 
and maintain the specifications online for use by State agencies. State agencies that 
purchase compost, mulch, or other soil amendments or aggregate must include the 
specifications in their solicitations if the products are readily available and competitively 
priced, and if the quality is satisfactory for the intended purposes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MGPC can develop the required specifications with existing resources. Any 
fiscal effect stemming from the use of the specifications in procurement solicitations 
depends on the wording of the specifications and the availability and pricing of recycled 
and organic material relative to inorganic materials and, therefore, cannot be reliably 
estimated. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues to the extent that the State 
purchases more municipal solid waste. No effect on expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A State or local agency responsible for the maintenance of public lands 
must, to the maximum extent practicable, give consideration and preference to the use of 
compost in any land maintenance activity paid for with public funds. It is the goal of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 586/ Page 2 
Department of General Services (DGS) to (1) compost all landscape waste on State 
property that is under its operation, to the extent practicable, for use as fertilizer and 
(2) increase the percentage of landscaped area fertilized by compost each year. 
 
MGPC is established in statute with membership consisting of the Treasurer and the heads 
of many Executive Branch agencies, or their designees. The Secretary of General Services, 
or designee, chairs the committee, and DGS provides staff support. The committee 
provides the State with information and assistance regarding environmentally preferable 
purchasing, including the publication of environmentally preferable specifications to be 
adopted by State agencies. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Natural Resources and DGS both advise that 
there are risks associated with contaminants, heavy metals, and toxic substances in solid 
waste and food waste. Due to these risks, they further advise that products derived from 
these substances cannot or should not be used in many parks and on other State lands. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 782 (Senator Hester) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Maryland-National Capital 
Park and Planning Commission; North East Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland School for the Deaf; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2