START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 526 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 526 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
St. Mary's County - Transfer of Child Support Unit and Personnel to the Child 
Support Administration 
 
 
This bill transfers the functions, powers, duties, and staff of the Child Support Unit of the 
Office of the State’s Attorney for St. Mary’s County to the Child Support Administration 
(CSA) of the Department of Human Services (DHS) on October 1, 2023. The bill includes 
specifications for (1) the creation of position identification numbers (PINs) within DHS for 
the transferred employees; (2) the salary, seniority, pension, and leave accumulation for 
transferred employees; and (3) St. Mary’s County to pay each employee transferred any 
salary compensation due to the employee on termination of county employment as of 
September 30, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues for DHS decrease by $24,200 in FY 2024 and by 
$32,300 annually thereafter from no longer receiving an administrative fee from St. Mary’s 
County. Federal fund revenues and expenditures also increase by $38,400 in FY 2024 
primarily due to the inclusion of one additional position, as discussed below. General fund 
expenditures for DHS increase by $236,300 in FY 2024, reflecting the State’s share of 
child support enforcement costs, included in the FY 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly. Future year federal fund revenues and general/federal fund 
expenditures reflect annualization, inflation, and elimination of one-time costs. Pension 
fund transfers are not reflected, as discussed below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($24,200) 
($32,300) 
($32,300) 
($32,300) 
($32,300) 
FF Revenue 
$38,400 
$44,600 
$46,600 
$48,700 
$51,300 
GF Expenditure 
$236,300 
$251,900 
$263,100 
$274,800 
$289,300 
FF Expenditure 
$38,400 
$44,600 
$46,600 
$48,700 
$51,300 
Net Effect 
($260,500) 
($284,200) 
($295,400) 
($307,000) 
($321,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 526/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County expenditures decrease by an estimated $249,200 in 
FY 2024 and at least $332,300 annually thereafter. Any expenditure decrease in FY 2024 
is partially offset by payments (1) to any employees due to the termination of county 
employment and (2) for the transfer of local pension liabilities to the State. Federal 
revenues passed through to the county are retained at the State level. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Any personnel of the local enforcement office involved in the transfer 
must be in the State Personnel Management System and must be placed in the position that 
is comparable to or most closely compares to their former position without further 
examination or qualification. Each transferred employee must also be given State service 
credit for years of county employment for the purposes of seniority, including the 
determination of leave accumulation as well as layoff rights. The salary grade of the 
employees must be determined using a salary based on the same hourly rate of salary of 
the employee at the time of transfer. Transferred employees retain any accumulated annual 
leave, as specified. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) must establish PINs for each 
transferred employee, to be allocated to DHS and assigned to the St. Mary’s County 
Department of Social Services. DBM must create additional PINs for any assistant State’s 
Attorneys appointed by the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to continue to provide 
child support services for St. Mary’s County after September 30, 2023. 
 
All employer contributions and interest on those contributions made by St. Mary’s County 
on behalf of employees transferred by the bill must be transferred within the accumulation 
fund for the State Employees’ Pension System from the municipal pool to the State pool. 
The actuarial valuation required under current law must be performed by the actuary 
designated by the Board of Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension System. 
 
Current Law:  CSA may enter into cooperative reimbursement agreements with local 
governments that wish to carry out child support enforcement within their jurisdiction. 
Under cooperative agreements, the local agency undertaking the child support function 
receives the 66% federal match for expenses it incurs for completing this function. The 
federal funds are budgeted within CSA as the State child support agency. 
 
A county or circuit court with a local child support enforcement office is authorized by 
State law to request that the responsibility for support enforcement be transferred to CSA 
within DHS. Any such request for transfer of responsibility must be made to DHS by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 526/ Page 3 
September 1 of the year preceding the fiscal year for which responsibility will be 
transferred. State law generally requires similar positions, salaries, and seniority levels, for 
the transferred employees and allows the transfer of accumulated leave. 
 
If a member of a State or local retirement or pension system transfers to another State or 
local retirement or pension system because of an involuntary transfer of the member’s unit 
to another employer, all the employer contributions on behalf of the member and interest 
on those contributions must be transferred to the new system. The amount to be transferred 
must be determined by an actuarial valuation. 
 
If a member of a State or local retirement or pension system transfers to another State or 
local retirement system because of an involuntary transfer of the member’s unit to another 
employer, all of the employer contributions made on behalf of the member and interest on 
those contributions must be transferred to the new system. The amount to be transferred 
must be determined by an actuarial valuation, the cost of which must be shared equally by 
the previous system and the new system. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$695,049 to transfer eight staff (including $236,317 in general funds and $458,732 in 
federal funds) from St. Mary’s County to State employment, which is contingent on 
enactment of this bill. 
 
New Positions in State Government 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly specifies that the 
eight additional PINs, including the assistant Attorney General (AAG), are within DHS; 
however, AAGs are generally employed and appointed by OAG, but funded by the agency 
they work with on a fee-for-service basis. This discrepancy does not affect total 
expenditures but results in an operational inconsistency with State personnel practices. 
Additionally, St. Mary’s County has eight other positions (two of which are vacant). 
However, the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly creates only 
seven other PINs in DHS to handle the bill’s transfer, so this analysis assumes that one of 
the vacant PINs is eliminated. 
 
As the bill effectuates the fiscal 2024 contingent appropriation, general fund expenditures 
increase by $236,317 in fiscal 2024. This amount covers the general fund share of the costs 
associated with transferring the eight employees (which includes the attorney) and other 
operating expenses related to the new PINs, such as office furniture and computers for 
them. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 526/ Page 4 
General and Federal Fund Revenues 
 
St. Mary’s County currently pays DHS an annual administrative fee of approximately 
$32,292 for child support functions in the State’s Attorney’s Office. By transferring the 
functions of child support enforcement to CSA, the county no longer pays the fee, so 
general fund revenues decrease by approximately $24,219 in fiscal 2024 (which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date) and by $32,292 annually thereafter. 
 
Under the bill, DHS continues to receive matching federal funds for child support 
functions. Rather than passing the funds through to St. Mary’s County to use for child 
support, DHS instead retains them once the duties of the office become a State function. 
However, since St. Mary’s County has two vacancies and the budget includes funding to 
fill one of those vacancies, the federal matching funds (and corresponding expenditures, 
which include new equipment) increase by $38,414 in fiscal 2024 for the additional 
position (which is assumed to be filled once transferred to DHS); out-year increases reflect 
inflation and elimination of one-time costs. 
 
Pension Costs 
 
St. Mary’s County is a participating governmental unit in the State Employees’ Retirement 
System, Alternate Contributory Pension Selection system, and Reformed Contributory 
Pension Benefit system. As such, all current St. Mary’s County employees should already 
be members of one of the State systems. The State Retirement Agency (SRA) can conduct 
the necessary actuarial valuation, and complete the transfer of assets, with existing 
resources. Thus, the bill should not affect SRA, as affected employees generally remain in 
the same plan. Although pension liabilities associated with the transferred personnel shift 
from being local to State liabilities, the required transfer of assets results in the shift having 
no net effect on State or local pension liabilities. 
 
Local Expenditures:  St. Mary’s County estimates that its expenditures decrease by at 
least $249,230 in fiscal 2024 (which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date) 
and $332,307 annually thereafter once it is relieved of the obligation to pay its share of 
child support operations. The annualized estimate reflects $285,484 of personnel savings 
from transferring the positions, along with other operating expenses of $46,823, which 
includes the administrative fee paid to DHS. In fiscal 2024 only, any expenditure decrease 
associated with no longer providing child support operations is partially offset by the 
amount of any compensation owed to employees due to the termination of county 
employment. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the savings to St. Mary’s County are 
greater than the resulting costs to the State in part because of the elimination of one funded 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 526/ Page 5 
position currently partially funded by St. Mary’s County. Other factors include different 
fringe benefits provided by the State and the county. 
 
Additional Comments:  The general fund appropriation of $236,317 for eight additional 
PINs in DHS in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly is for a full year 
of compensation, based on the assumption that positions are transferred as of July 1, 2023. 
However, the bill takes effect October 1, 2023, so the State is required to pay only 
nine months of compensation. Therefore, the budgeted general fund appropriation exceeds 
the projected cost of paying for the additional PINs in fiscal 2024 by at least $25,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Human 
Services; State Retirement Agency; St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 7, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5