START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

Chapter 254

(House Bill 556)

AN ACT concerning

Cannabis Reform

FOR the purpose of renaming the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission to be the Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; establishing the Maryland Cannabis
Administration as an independent unit of State government; establishing a
regulatory and licensing system for adult–use cannabis under the ~~Commission~~
Administration; imposing the sales and use tax on the sale of adult–use cannabis at
~~certain~~ ~~rates~~ ~~in~~ ~~certain~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~years~~ at a certain rate; establishing the Office of Social
Equity, in the Maryland Cannabis Commission and the Advisory Board on Medical
and Adult–Use Cannabis, and the Social Equity Partnership Grant Fund in the
Commission; altering provisions of law relating to the Community Reinvestment and
Repair Fund; ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~ ~~Division~~ ~~as~~ ~~an~~
~~independent~~ ~~unit~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission;~~ requiring the ~~Division~~ Administration to
establish and maintain a State cannabis testing laboratory; establishing the
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring
that the investment earnings of the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund be
credited to the Fund; repealing certain provisions of law establishing and governing
the Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission; requiring the ~~Division~~
Administration, rather than the Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission,
to take certain actions related to medical cannabis; requiring the ~~Division~~
Administration, on or before a certain date and under certain circumstances, to
convert medical cannabis licenses to licenses to operate a medical and adult–use
cannabis business; regulating the actions that ~~local~~ ~~jurisdictions~~ political
subdivisions may take regarding cannabis businesses; prohibiting certain
individuals from taking certain actions related to cannabis licensees and registrants;
establishing the Medical Cannabis Compassionate Use Fund as a special, nonlapsing
fund; requiring that the interest earnings of the Medical Cannabis Compassionate
Use Fund be credited to the Fund; authorizing certain entities to register with the
~~Division~~ Administration to purchase cannabis for research purposes; establishing
prohibitions related to the advertising of cannabis and cannabis products; requiring
a person to be approved by the ~~Division~~ Administration to offer a certain training
program; establishing certain legal protections related to the use of cannabis;
establishing a Capital Access Program in the Department of Commerce; establishing
certain prohibitions related to banking by cannabis businesses; altering certain
provisions of law relating to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund; exempting the
Commission from State procurement requirements under certain circumstances;
requiring a cannabis licensee, under certain circumstances, to comply with the
State’s Minority Business Enterprise Program; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~contract~~
~~with~~ ~~an~~ ~~independent~~ ~~consultant~~ ~~to~~ ~~complete~~ ~~a~~ ~~study~~ ~~on~~ ~~wholesale~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~licenses;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~study~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~submitted~~ ~~to~~ ~~certain~~ ~~persons~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Economic~~ ~~Development~~ ~~Corporation~~ ~~to~~ ~~identify~~ ~~certain~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~locations~~ ~~and~~ ~~submit~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~report~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~
~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~study~~ ~~and~~ ~~report~~ ~~on~~ ~~certain~~ ~~matters~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~on–site~~ ~~consumption~~
~~and~~ ~~certain~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~products;~~ requiring the Administration to contract with an
independent consultant to complete a study on wholesale cannabis licenses; requiring
the study to be submitted to certain persons on or before a certain date; requiring the
Maryland Economic Development Corporation to identify certain locations and
submit a certain report to the General Assembly; requiring the Administration to
study and report on certain matters relating to on–site consumption; requiring that
certain growers be awarded certain dispensary licenses under certain circumstances;
and generally relating to medical and adult–use cannabis.

BY repealing
Article – Health – General
Section 13–3301 through 13–3316 and the subtitle “Subtitle 33. Natalie M. LaPrade
Medical Cannabis Commission”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Health – General
The subtitle designation “Subtitle 46. Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund”
immediately preceding Section 13–4601
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 26 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022)

BY transferring
Article – Health – General
Section 13–4601
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 26 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022)
to be
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 1–322
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 1–101(d) through (y) and (z) through (ii)
to be Section 1–101(e) through (z) and (bb) through (kk), respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 1–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 1–101(d) and (aa), 1–309.1, 1–309.2, and 1–323; and 36–101 through
36–1507 to be under the new division “Division III. Cannabis”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 1–101(g) and (r)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 4 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section ~~1–101(f)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(q)~~ 1–202; and 1–302, 1–303(a), 1–304, 1–307 through 1–310,
and 1–313 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 3. Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Cannabis Commission”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Alcoholic~~ ~~Beverages~~
~~Section~~ ~~1–309.1,~~ ~~1–309.2,~~ ~~and~~ ~~1–323;~~ ~~and~~ ~~36–101~~ ~~through~~ ~~36–1507~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~
~~new~~ ~~division~~ ~~“Division~~ ~~III.~~ ~~Cannabis”~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2016~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 1–322
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 3 of this Act)

BY adding to
Article – Tax – General
Section 2–1302.2, 11–104(k), and 11–245
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 2–1303
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–1901
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–201(e) and 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172. and 173.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 23–201(a)(13) and (14) and 26–201(a)(22)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 23–201(a)(15)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 13–4505

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY renaming
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
to be Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 13–3301 through 13–3316 and the subtitle “Subtitle 33. Natalie M. LaPrade
Medical Cannabis Commission” of Article – Health – General of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the subtitle designation
“Subtitle 46. Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund” immediately preceding §
13–4601 of the Health – General Article be repealed.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 13–4601 of Article
– Health – General of the Annotated Code of Maryland be transferred to be Section(s)
1–322 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated Code of Maryland.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 1–101(d) through
(y) and (z) through (ii) of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated Code of Maryland
be renumbered to be Section(s) 1–101(e) through (z) and (bb) through (kk), respectively.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

1–101.

(a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

(D) (1) “CANNABIS” MEANS THE PLANT CANNABIS SATIVA L. AND ANY
PART OF THE PLANT, INCLUDING ALL DERIVATIVES, EXTRACTS, CANNABINOIDS,
ISOMERS, ACIDS, SALTS, AND SALTS OF ISOMERS, WHETHER GROWING OR NOT, WITH
A DELTA–9–TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL CONCENTRATION GREATER THAN 0.3% ON A
DRY WEIGHT BASIS.

(2) “CANNABIS” INCLUDES CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

(3) “CANNABIS” DOES NOT INCLUDE HEMP OR HEMP PRODUCTS, AS
DEFINED IN § 14–101 OF THE AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) (g) “Commission” means the Alcohol [and], Tobacco, AND CANNABIS
Commission.

(q) (r) (1) “License holder” means the holder of [a] AN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
BEVERAGES license issued or a permit granted under this article.

(2) “License holder” includes:

(i) a county liquor control board and a county dispensary; and

(ii) for the delivery and billing purposes of Title 2, Subtitle 3 and §§
2–213 and 2–314 of this article, a corporation on behalf of which an individual has obtained
a license.

(AA) “POLITICAL SUBDIVISION” MEANS A COUNTY OR A MUNICIPALITY.

1–202.

(a) To the extent that a statement of a general rule of law conflicts or is
inconsistent with an exception or a qualification applicable to a special area, particular
person, or set of circumstances, the exception or qualification prevails.

(b) A provision in Division II of this article prevails over a conflicting or
inconsistent provision in Division I of this article or a provision in the Tax – General Article
relating to alcoholic beverages.

(C) A PROVISION IN DIVISION III OF THIS ARTICLE PREVAILS OVER A
CONFLICTING OR INCONSISTENT PROVISION IN DIVISION I OF THIS ARTICLE OR A
PROVISION IN THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE RELATING TO CANNABIS.

Subtitle 3. Alcohol [and], Tobacco, AND CANNABIS Commission.

1–302.

There is an Alcohol [and], Tobacco, AND CANNABIS Commission.

1–303.

(a) (1) The Commission consists of [five] SEVEN members to be appointed by
the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.

(2) The presiding officer of either House of the General Assembly may
recommend to the Governor a list of individuals for appointment to the Commission.

(3) Of the Commission members:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(i) one shall be knowledgeable and experienced in public health
matters;

(ii) one shall be knowledgeable and experienced in law enforcement
matters;

(iii) one shall be knowledgeable and experienced in the alcoholic
beverages industry; [and]

(IV) TWO SHALL BE KNOWLEDGEABLE AND EXPERIENCED IN
~~THE~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~INDUSTRY~~ ONE SHALL HAVE EXPERTISE IN CANNABIS RESEARCH AND
POLICY;

(V) ONE SHALL HAVE EXPERTISE IN ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO
POLICY; AND

[(iv)] (V) (VI) two shall be members of the public who are
knowledgeable and experienced in fiscal matters and shall have substantial experience:

1. as an executive with fiduciary responsibilities in charge of
a large organization or foundation;

2. in an academic field relating to finance or economics; or

3. as an accountant, an economist, or a financial analyst.

(4) In addition to the members appointed under paragraph (3) of this
subsection, the Secretary of Health and the Secretary of State Police, or their designees,
may participate in the Commission as ex officio nonvoting members.

1–304.

(a) A member of the Commission may not:

(1) have a direct or indirect financial interest, ownership, or management,
including holding any stocks, bonds, or other similar financial interests, in the alcohol [or],
tobacco, OR CANNABIS industries;

(2) have an official relationship to a person who holds a license or permit
under this article or Title 16, Title 16.5, Title 16.7, or Title 16.9 of the Business Regulation
Article;

(3) be an elected official;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) receive or share in, directly or indirectly, the receipts or proceeds of any
activities conducted in the alcohol [or], tobacco, OR CANNABIS industries;

(5) have a beneficial interest in any contract for the manufacture or sale of
any device or product or the provision of any independent consulting services in connection
with a holder of a license or permit issued under this article or Title 16, Title 16.5, Title
16.7, or Title 16.9 of the Business Regulation Article; or

(6) accept a contribution of money or property worth at least $100 from an
entity or individual associated with the alcohol [or], tobacco, OR CANNABIS industries with
respect to the regulation of alcohol [or], tobacco, OR CANNABIS.

(b) A member of the Commission shall file a financial disclosure statement with
the State Ethics Commission in accordance with Title 5, Subtitle 6 of the General
Provisions Article.

1–307.

(a) The Commission has the powers and duties set forth in this section.

(b) The Commission shall:

(1) educate the public, by resource sharing and serving as an information
clearinghouse, on such topics as:

(i) recent increases in alcohol content for popular beer and other
beverages;

(ii) the proper limits of drinking for adults;

(iii) the adverse consequences of surpassing those limits;

(iv) parental or adult responsibility for serving alcohol to underage
individuals; and

(v) comparable topics relating to smoking, vaping, tobacco, other
tobacco products, [and] electronic nicotine delivery systems, CANNABIS, AND CANNABIS
PRODUCTS; and

(2) subject to federal approval, ensure that all alcoholic beverages sold in
the State with an alcohol content exceeding 4.5% by volume bear a large and conspicuous
label stating the percentage of alcohol content.

(c) (1) The Commission shall conduct studies of:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(i) the operation and administration of similar laws in other states
or countries; and

(ii) federal laws that may affect the operation of the alcohol [or],
tobacco, OR CANNABIS industries, the literature on those industries, and the reaction of
residents of the State to existing and potential features of those industries.

(2) The Commission shall submit to the Governor and, in accordance with
§ 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly the studies required under
this subsection.

1–308.

The Commission shall develop best practices for:

(1) the dedication of a minimum effective portion of the budget of a local
licensing board to administrative enforcement activities, such as inspections, compliance
checks, overservice, operations, and trade practice violations;

(2) the carrying out of compliance checks for alcoholic beverages licenses,
in which each license is checked at least once a year;

(3) the development of guidelines for the minimum capacity of inspections
carried out by inspectors of local licensing boards, based on the number and type of licensed
outlets in the licensing jurisdiction;

(4) ensuring that alcoholic beverages inspections be based on data such as
the violation history of the license holder, and calls for emergency assistance, emergency
medical service, or nonemergency service, so that resources are being allocated based on
where the greatest need is;

(5) the reporting of aggregate data between local police and local licensing
boards;

(6) the development of mandatory State–provided training for liquor
inspectors;

(7) reporting by the State to the affected local licensing board of a
State–issued license or permit within 10 days after the State receives an application;

(8) the development of a public health impact statement for all changes to
the State alcoholic beverages laws; [and]

(9) ensuring that:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) all license holders, managers, and servers receive certification
from an approved alcohol awareness program; and

(ii) at least one employee who is certified in an alcohol awareness
program be on the licensed premises at all times when alcoholic beverages are served;

(10) REGULATING THE CANNABIS INDUSTRY AND IMPLEMENTING
PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES RELATING TO CANNABIS; AND

(11) REGULATING, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, MEDICAL AND
ADULT–USE CANNABIS IN A SIMILAR MANNER.

1–309.

(a) With the advice and consent of the Senate, the Governor shall appoint an
Executive Director of the Commission.

(b) The Executive Director serves at the pleasure of the Governor.

(c) The Executive Director shall:

(1) have the training and experience, including knowledge of the Maryland
alcohol, TOBACCO, AND CANNABIS regulatory system, that is needed to direct the work of
the Commission; AND

(2) ~~be~~ ~~a~~ ~~sworn~~ ~~police~~ ~~officer~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~powers~~ ~~granted~~ ~~to~~ ~~an~~ ~~officer~~ ~~or~~
~~employee~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Field~~ ~~Enforcement~~ ~~Division~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~1–313~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ devote full time to the duties of office and may not engage in another
profession or occupation.

(d) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY BE A SWORN POLICE OFFICER WITH
THE POWERS GRANTED TO AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE FIELD
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION UNDER § 1–313 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) The Executive Director is entitled to the salary provided in the State budget.

1–309.1.

(A) (1) THERE IS AN OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY WITHIN IN THE
~~COMMISSION.~~

(2) THE OFFICE IS AN INDEPENDENT OFFICE THAT FUNCTIONS
WITHIN THE MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(B) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY
SHALL HAVE AT LEAST 5 YEARS OF EXPERIENCE IN CIVIL RIGHTS ADVOCACY, CIVIL
RIGHTS LITIGATION, OR ANOTHER AREA OF SOCIAL JUSTICE.

(C) THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY MAY EMPLOY STAFF AND RETAIN
CONTRACTORS AS MAY BE REQUIRED TO CARRY OUT THE FUNCTIONS OF THE
OFFICE.

(D) THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY SHALL:

(1) PROMOTE AND ENCOURAGE FULL PARTICIPATION IN THE
REGULATED CANNABIS INDUSTRY BY PEOPLE FROM COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE
PREVIOUSLY BEEN DISPROPORTIONATELY ~~HARMED~~ IMPACTED BY THE WAR ON
DRUGS IN ORDER TO POSITIVELY IMPACT THOSE COMMUNITIES;

(2) CONSULT WITH AND ASSIST THE COMPTROLLER IN THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR FUND UNDER
§ 1–322 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(3) CONSULT WITH AND ASSIST THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE IN
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE CANNABIS BUSINESS ASSISTANCE FUND UNDER §
5–1901 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE;

(4) IDENTIFY AND OPPOSE REGULATIONS THAT UNNECESSARILY
BURDEN OR UNDERMINE THE LEGISLATIVE INTENT OF THE OFFICE, INCLUDING
REGULATIONS THAT IMPOSE UNDUE RESTRICTIONS OR FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS;

(5) PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE COMMISSION ON
REGULATIONS RELATED TO:

(I) DIVERSITY; AND

(II) SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICATIONS;

(6) WORK WITH THE COMMISSION CANNABIS REGULATION AND
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION TO IMPLEMENT
FREE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR SOCIAL EQUITY AND MINORITY CANNABIS
BUSINESS APPLICANTS;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) PRODUCE REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON DIVERSITY AND
EQUITY IN OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND EMPLOYMENT IN THE LEGAL CANNABIS
ECONOMY; AND

(8) ASSIST BUSINESSES WITH OBTAINING FINANCING THROUGH THE
CAPITAL ACCESS PROGRAM UNDER TITLE 36, SUBTITLE 14 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(9) DETERMINE WHICH INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES SHALL BE
GRANTED LOANS OR GRANTS FROM THE CANNABIS BUSINESS ASSISTANCE FUND
UNDER § 5–1901 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

(E) (1) ON OR BEFORE MARCH 1 EACH YEAR, THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL
EQUITY SHALL PRODUCE AND MAKE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE A REPORT ON HOW THE
FUNDS IN THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR FUND UNDER § 1–322 OF
THIS SUBTITLE AND THE CANNABIS BUSINESS ASSISTANCE FUND UNDER § 5–1901
OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE WERE WAS ALLOCATED DURING THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR.

(2) THE REPORT SHALL ALSO BE SUBMITTED TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(F) (1) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL
EQUITY SHALL SOLICIT PUBLIC INPUT ON THE USES OF THE FUNDS IN THE
COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR FUND UNDER § 1–322 OF THIS SUBTITLE
AND THE CANNABIS BUSINESS ASSISTANCE FUND UNDER § 5–1901 OF THE
~~ECONOMIC~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~ARTICLE.~~

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 15 EACH YEAR, THE OFFICE OF
SOCIAL EQUITY SHALL PUBLISH A REVIEW OF THE INPUT RECEIVED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON A PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE PART OF THE
COMMISSION’S WEBSITE.

1–309.2.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ADVISORY BOARD” MEANS THE ADVISORY BOARD
ON MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS.

(B) THERE IS AN ADVISORY BOARD ON MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE
CANNABIS.

(C) THE ADVISORY BOARD SHALL:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(1) CONSIDER ALL MATTERS SUBMITTED TO IT BY THE COMMISSION,
THE GOVERNOR, THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION
MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION, OR THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY; AND

(2) ON ITS OWN INITIATIVE, PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
COMMISSION OR THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION
MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION ESTABLISHED UNDER § 36–201 OF THIS
ARTICLE REGARDING GUIDELINES, RULES, AND REGULATIONS THAT THE ADVISORY
BOARD CONSIDERS IMPORTANT OR NECESSARY FOR REVIEW AND CONSIDERATION
BY THE COMMISSION OR THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT
~~DIVISION~~ MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION.

(D) THE ADVISORY BOARD CONSISTS OF:

(1) THE DIRECTOR OF THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION, WHO SHALL
SERVE AS CHAIR OF THE ADVISORY BOARD; AND

(2) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH
THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE:

(I) THREE MEMBERS THAT HAVE SUBSTANTIAL EXPERIENCE IN
ONE OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING:

1. CANNABIS LAW, SCIENCE, OR POLICY;

2. PUBLIC HEALTH OR HEALTH CARE;

3. AGRICULTURE;

4. FINANCE; OR

5. ADDICTION TREATMENT;

(II) ONE ACADEMIC RESEARCHER WITH AT LEAST 5 YEARS OF
EXPERIENCE IN SOCIAL OR HEALTH EQUITY;

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORY REGISTERED UNDER § 36–408 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(IV) THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO HOLD A STANDARD
GROWER, PROCESSOR, OR DISPENSARY LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO HOLD A STANDARD
PROCESSOR LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(VI) TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO HOLD A STANDARD
DISPENSARY LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(V) (VII) THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO HOLD A MICRO
GROWER, PROCESSOR, OR DISPENSARY LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(VIII) TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO HOLD A MICRO PROCESSOR
LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(IX) TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO HOLD A MICRO DISPENSARY
LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(X) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WHO HOLDS AN INCUBATOR SPACE
LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(XI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WHO HOLDS AN ON–SITE
CONSUMPTION LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(VI) (XII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION THAT
ADVOCATES ON BEHALF OF PATIENTS WHO ENGAGE IN THE MEDICAL USE OF
CANNABIS;

(VII) (XIII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION THAT
ADVOCATES ON BEHALF OF CONSUMERS WHO ENGAGE IN THE ADULT USE OF
CANNABIS; AND

(VIII) (XIV) ONE HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WHO IS REGISTERED
TO CERTIFY PATIENTS TO OBTAIN MEDICAL CANNABIS UNDER § 36–301 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(E) THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE AND THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE
MAY RECOMMEND TO THE GOVERNOR A LIST OF INDIVIDUALS FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE ADVISORY BOARD.

(F) (1) THE TERM OF A MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY BOARD IS 4 YEARS.

(2) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(3) AN APPOINTED MEMBER MAY NOT SERVE MORE THAN TWO FULL
TERMS.

(4) THE POSITIONS FOR MEMBERS APPOINTED UNDER SUBSECTION
(D)(2)(VII) THROUGH (XI) OF THIS SECTION BECOME EFFECTIVE WHEN THE FIRST
LICENSES ARE ISSUED UNDER THOSE RESPECTIVE LICENSE TYPES.

(G) AN APPOINTED MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY BOARD MUST BE:

(1) AT LEAST 25 YEARS OLD;

(2) A RESIDENT OF THE STATE WHO HAS RESIDED IN THE STATE FOR
AT LEAST THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 5 YEARS BEFORE THE APPOINTMENT; AND

(3) A REGISTERED VOTER OF THE STATE.

(H) THE ADVISORY BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH AT LEAST TWO
SUBCOMMITTEES TO FOCUS ON MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS.

(I) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND CONSISTENT WITH FEDERAL AND
STATE LAW, THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE ADVISORY BOARD SHALL REFLECT THE
RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND GENDER DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

1–310.

The Executive Director and all employees in the Office of the Executive Director may
not accept a contribution of money or property worth at least $100 from an entity or
individual associated with the alcohol [or], tobacco, OR CANNABIS industries with respect
to regulation of alcohol [or], tobacco, OR CANNABIS.

1–313.

(a) There is a Field Enforcement Division in the Office of the Executive Director.

(b) (1) The Field Enforcement Division may employ officers and employees as
provided in the State budget.

(2) The officers and employees of the Field Enforcement Division:

(i) shall be sworn police officers;

(ii) shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of peace
officers to enforce the provisions of this article relating to:

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. the unlawful importation of alcoholic beverages [and],
tobacco, AND CANNABIS into the State;

2. the unlawful manufacture of alcoholic beverages [and],
tobacco, AND CANNABIS in the State;

3. the transportation and distribution throughout the State
of alcoholic beverages [and], tobacco, AND CANNABIS that are manufactured illegally and
on which any alcoholic beverages taxes [or], tobacco taxes, OR CANNABIS TAXES imposed
by the State are due and unpaid; and

4. the manufacture, sale, barter, transportation,
distribution, or other form of owning, handling, or dispersing alcoholic beverages [or],
tobacco, OR CANNABIS by any person not licensed or authorized under this article,
provisions of the Tax – General Article relating to alcoholic beverages [or], tobacco, OR
CANNABIS, or provisions of the Business Regulation Article relating to tobacco OR
CANNABIS; and

(iii) may make cooperative arrangements for and work and cooperate
with the Office of the Comptroller, local State’s Attorneys, sheriffs, bailiffs, police, and other
prosecuting and peace officers to enforce this article.

(c) The Field Enforcement Division:

(1) shall consult with and advise the local State’s Attorneys and other law
enforcement officials and police officers regarding enforcement problems in their respective
jurisdictions; and

(2) may recommend changes to improve the administration of this article,
provisions of the Tax – General Article relating to alcoholic beverages [and], tobacco, AND
CANNABIS, and provisions of the Business Regulation Article relating to tobacco.

1–322.

(a) (1) There is a Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund.

(2) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funds to community–based
organizations that serve communities determined by THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY,
IN CONSULTATION WITH the Office of the Attorney General, to have been the most
impacted by disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before July 1, 2022.

(3) The Comptroller shall administer the Fund.

(4) (i) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to §
7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(ii) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(5) The Fund consists of:

(i) [Revenue distributed to the Fund that is at least 30% of the
revenues from adult–use cannabis] SALES AND USE TAX REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO
THE FUND UNDER § 2–1302.2 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(ii) [Licensing] CONVERSION fees paid by [dual–licensed cannabis
establishments] BUSINESSES UNDER § 36–403 OF THIS ARTICLE; and

(iii) [Any] ANY other money from any other source accepted for the
benefit of the Fund, in accordance with any conditions adopted by the Comptroller for the
acceptance of donations or gifts to the Fund.

(6) (i) The Fund may be used only for:

1. [Funding] FUNDING community–based initiatives
intended to benefit low–income communities;

2. [Funding] FUNDING community–based initiatives that
serve [communities disproportionately harmed by the cannabis prohibition and
enforcement] DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTED AREAS, AS DEFINED IN § 36–101 OF
THIS ARTICLE; and

3. [Any] ANY related administrative expenses.

(ii) Money may not be expended from the Fund for law enforcement
agencies or activities.

(iii) Money expended from the Fund is supplemental to and may not
supplant funding that otherwise would be appropriated for preexisting local government
programs.

(7) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(8) No part of the Fund may revert or be credited to:

(i) [The] THE General Fund of the State; or

(ii) [Any] ANY other special fund of the State.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(9) The Comptroller shall pay out money from the Fund.

(10) The Fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as
provided for in § 2–1220 of the State Government Article.

(b) (1) The BASED ON THE PERCENTAGE ALLOCABLE TO EACH COUNTY
DETERMINED BY THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY AND REPORTED BY THE OFFICE TO
THE COMPTROLLER ON OR BEFORE JULY 31 EACH YEAR, THE Comptroller shall
distribute funds from the Fund to each county in an amount that, for the period from July
1, 2002, to [June 30, 2022] JANUARY 1, 2023, both inclusive, is proportionate to the total
number of [cannabis arrests POSSESSION CHARGES in the county compared to the total
number of cannabis arrests POSSESSION CHARGES in the State] INDIVIDUALS
~~RESIDING~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~WERE~~ ~~CHARGED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~CRIME~~
~~COMPARED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TOTAL~~ ~~NUMBER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~ ~~CHARGED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~CANNABIS~~
CRIMES IN THE STATE.

(2) (i) Subject to the limitations under subsection (a)(6) of this section,
each county shall adopt a law establishing the purpose for which money received from the
Fund may be used.

(ii) On or before December 1 every 2 years, beginning in 2024, each
local jurisdiction POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT RECEIVES FUNDS FROM THE FUND
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION shall submit a report to the Governor and,
in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the Senate Budget and
Taxation Committee[, the Senate Finance Committee, the House Judiciary Committee, and
the House Health and Government Operations Committee] AND THE HOUSE
APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE on how funds received from the Fund were spent during
the immediately preceding 2 fiscal years.

1–323.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ADMINISTRATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 36–101 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

(2) (3) “CANNABIS LICENSEE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
36–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(3) “DIVISION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 36–101 OF THIS
~~ARTICLE.~~

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(4) “GRANT PROGRAM” MEANS THE SOCIAL EQUITY PARTNERSHIP
GRANT PROGRAM.

(5) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY.

(5) (6) (I) “QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIP” MEANS A MEANINGFUL
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN AN OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEE AND A SOCIAL
EQUITY LICENSEE THAT:

1. SUPPORTS OR ADVISES THE SOCIAL EQUITY
LICENSEE; AND

2. IS AUTHORIZED BY THE COMMISSION
ADMINISTRATION.

(II) “QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIP” INCLUDES A PARTNERSHIP
THROUGH WHICH THE OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEE PROVIDES ANY OF THE
FOLLOWING TO A SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE:

1. TRAINING;

2. MENTORSHIP; OR

3. SHARED COMMERCIAL SPACE OR EQUIPMENT.

(6) (7) “SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE” MEANS A SOCIAL EQUITY
APPLICANT, AS DEFINED HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 36–101 OF THIS ARTICLE,
WHO HAS BEEN AWARDED A CANNABIS LICENSE OR CANNABIS REGISTRATION.

(B) (1) THERE IS A SOCIAL EQUITY PARTNERSHIP GRANT PROGRAM IN
THE COMMISSION OFFICE.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE GRANT PROGRAM IS TO PROMOTE
QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIPS BETWEEN OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEES AND
SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEES.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSION OFFICE SHALL IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER
THE GRANT PROGRAM, INCLUDING BY CLEARLY DEFINING THE PARAMETERS OF A
QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIP.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COMMISSION OFFICE HAS DISCRETION TO APPROVE, DENY, OR REVOKE
QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIPS.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) (I) THE COMMISSION OFFICE MAY APPROVE QUALIFYING
PARTNERSHIPS WHERE A COST OR OTHER FEE IS IMPOSED BY AN OPERATIONAL
CANNABIS LICENSEE ON A SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE IF THE COST OR OTHER FEE IS
SUBSTANTIALLY REDUCED FROM THE MARKET VALUE.

(II) COSTS OR OTHER FEES UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH MAY INCLUDE CHARGES FOR THE RENT OF FACILITIES OR EQUIPMENT.

(D) (1) THE COMMISSION OFFICE SHALL AWARD GRANTS TO
OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEES THAT HAVE QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIPS WITH
A SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE.

(2) GRANT AMOUNTS SHALL BE BASED ON THE NATURE OF THE
QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE AND THE
OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(3) IF AN OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEE HAS A LICENSE THAT
WAS CONVERTED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION UNDER § 36–401(B)(1)(II) OF
THIS ARTICLE, THE TOTAL AWARD AMOUNT OF ANY GRANTS FROM THE COMMISSION
ISSUED BY THE OFFICE UNDER THIS SECTION TO THE LICENSEE MAY NOT EXCEED:

(I) THE COST OF THE LICENSE CONVERSION FEE THAT WAS
PAID BY THE LICENSEE; OR

(II) $250,000 PER YEAR PER QUALIFYING PARTNERSHIP.

(E) THE COMMISSION OFFICE MAY REQUIRE A GRANT RECIPIENT THAT
FAILS TO FULFILL THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE GRANT TO RETURN ALL OR PART OF
THE GRANT TO THE GRANT PROGRAM.

(F) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$5,000,000 FOR THE GRANT PROGRAM.

(G) THE COMMISSION OFFICE SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO:

(1) IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION;

(2) ADMINISTER THE GRANT PROGRAM;

(3) ESTABLISH ELIGIBILITY AND GRANT APPLICATION
REQUIREMENTS;

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(4) ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR REVIEWING GRANT APPLICATIONS
AND AWARDING GRANTS TO SOCIAL EQUITY OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEES;
AND

(5) SPECIFY CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES TO MONITOR ELIGIBILITY
FOR THE GRANTS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION.

TITLE 34. RESERVED.

TITLE 35. RESERVED.

DIVISION III. CANNABIS.

TITLE 36. MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS.

SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS.

36–101.

(A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ACADEMIC RESEARCH REPRESENTATIVE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
IS:

(1) AN EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER
EDUCATION, A RELATED MEDICAL FACILITY, OR AN AFFILIATED BIOMEDICAL
RESEARCH FIRM THAT FILED A REGISTRATION WITH THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION UNDER § 36–701 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(2) AUTHORIZED TO PURCHASE MEDICAL CANNABIS FOR THE
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION, RELATED MEDICAL FACILITY, OR AFFILIATED
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FIRM.

(C) “ADMINISTRATION” MEANS THE MARYLAND CANNABIS
ADMINISTRATION ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) (1) “CANNABIS” MEANS THE PLANT CANNABIS SATIVA L. AND ANY
PART OF THE PLANT, INCLUDING ALL DERIVATIVES, EXTRACTS, CANNABINOIDS,
ISOMERS, ACIDS, SALTS, AND SALTS OF ISOMERS, WHETHER GROWING OR NOT, WITH
A DELTA–9–TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL CONCENTRATION GREATER THAN 0.3% ON A
DRY WEIGHT BASIS.

(2) “CANNABIS” INCLUDES CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “CANNABIS” DOES NOT INCLUDE HEMP OR HEMP PRODUCTS, AS
DEFINED IN § 14–101 OF THE AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

(D) (C) (D) “CANNABIS AGENT” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE, A VOLUNTEER, OR ANY
OTHER AUTHORIZED PERSON WHO ACTS FOR OR AT THE DIRECTION OF A CANNABIS
LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT.

(E) (D) (E) “CANNABIS BUSINESS” MEANS A BUSINESS LICENSED OR
REGISTERED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO OPERATE IN THE CANNABIS
INDUSTRY.

(F) (E) (F) “CANNABIS CONCENTRATE” MEANS A PRODUCT DERIVED FROM
CANNABIS THAT IS KIEF, HASHISH, BUBBLE HASH, OIL, WAX, OR ANY OTHER
PRODUCT PRODUCED BY EXTRACTING CANNABINOIDS FROM THE PLANT THROUGH
THE USE OF SOLVENTS, CARBON DIOXIDE, OR HEAT, SCREENS, PRESSES, OR STEAM
DISTILLATION.

(G) (F) (G) “CANNABIS–INFUSED PRODUCT” MEANS OIL, WAX, OINTMENT,
SALVE, TINCTURE, CAPSULE, SUPPOSITORY, DERMAL PATCH, CARTRIDGE, OR ANY
OTHER PRODUCT CONTAINING CANNABIS CONCENTRATE OR USABLE CANNABIS
THAT HAS BEEN PROCESSED SO THAT THE DRIED LEAVES AND FLOWERS ARE
INTEGRATED INTO OTHER MATERIAL.

(H) (G) (H) “CANNABIS LICENSEE” MEANS A BUSINESS LICENSED BY THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO OPERATE IN THE CANNABIS INDUSTRY.

(I) (H) (I) “CANNABIS PRODUCTS” MEANS PRODUCTS THAT ARE COMPOSED
OF CANNABIS, CANNABIS CONCENTRATE, CANNABIS EXTRACT, OR OTHER
INGREDIENTS AND ARE INTENDED FOR USE OR CONSUMPTION, INCLUDING EDIBLE
PRODUCTS, OILS, AND TINCTURES.

(J) (I) (J) “CANNABIS REGISTRANT” MEANS AN INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORY, A TRANSPORTER, A DELIVERY SERVICE, A SECURITY GUARD
COMPANY, A WASTE DISPOSAL COMPANY, AND ANY OTHER TYPE OF CANNABIS
BUSINESS REGISTERED UNDER THIS TITLE AND AUTHORIZED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

(K) (J) (K) (1) “CANOPY” MEANS THE TOTAL SQUARE FOOTAGE OF SPACE
USED BY A CANNABIS LICENSEE FOR THE PRODUCTION OF FLOWERING CANNABIS
PLANTS.

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) “CANOPY” INCLUDES EACH LAYER OF FLOWERING CANNABIS
PLANTS GROWN ON ANY RACK OR SHELVING.

(3) “CANOPY” DOES NOT INCLUDE SQUARE FOOTAGE USED FOR:

(I) MOTHER STOCK;

(II) PROPAGATION;

(III) IMMATURE OR NONFLOWERING PLANTS;

(IV) PROCESSING;

(V) DRYING;

(VI) CURING;

(VII) TRIMMING;

(VIII) STORAGE;

(IX) OFFICES;

(X) HALLWAYS;

(XI) PATHWAYS;

(XII) WORK AREAS; OR

(XIII) OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE AND NONPRODUCTION USES.

~~(L)~~ ~~(K)~~ (L) (1) “CAREGIVER” MEANS:

(I) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS AGREED TO ASSIST WITH A
QUALIFYING PATIENT’S MEDICAL USE OF CANNABIS; AND

(II) FOR A QUALIFYING PATIENT UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS:

1. A PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN; AND

2. NOT MORE THAN TWO ADDITIONAL ADULTS
DESIGNATED BY THE PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN.

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “CAREGIVER” DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY DESIGNATED SCHOOL
PERSONNEL AUTHORIZED TO ADMINISTER MEDICAL CANNABIS TO A STUDENT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–446 OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(M) (L) (M) “CERTIFYING PROVIDER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) (I) 1. HAS AN ACTIVE, UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO
PRACTICE MEDICINE THAT WAS ISSUED BY THE STATE BOARD OF PHYSICIANS
UNDER TITLE 14 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE; AND

2. IS IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE STATE BOARD OF
PHYSICIANS;

(II) 1. HAS AN ACTIVE, UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO
PRACTICE DENTISTRY THAT WAS ISSUED BY THE STATE BOARD OF DENTAL
EXAMINERS UNDER TITLE 4 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE; AND

2. IS IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE STATE BOARD OF
DENTAL EXAMINERS;

(III) 1. HAS AN ACTIVE, UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO
PRACTICE PODIATRY THAT WAS ISSUED BY THE STATE BOARD OF PODIATRIC
MEDICAL EXAMINERS UNDER TITLE 16 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE;
AND

2. IS IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE STATE BOARD OF
PODIATRIC MEDICAL EXAMINERS;

(IV) 1. HAS AN ACTIVE, UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO
PRACTICE REGISTERED NURSING OR AND HAS AN ACTIVE, UNRESTRICTED
CERTIFICATION TO PRACTICE AS A NURSE PRACTITIONER OR A NURSE MIDWIFE
THAT WAS ISSUED BY THE STATE BOARD OF NURSING UNDER TITLE 8 OF THE
HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE; AND

2. IS IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE STATE BOARD OF
NURSING; OR

(V) 1. HAS AN ACTIVE, UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO
PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT ISSUED BY THE STATE BOARD OF PHYSICIANS
UNDER TITLE 15 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE;

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

2. HAS AN ACTIVE DELEGATION AGREEMENT WITH A
PRIMARY SUPERVISING PHYSICIAN WHO IS A CERTIFYING PROVIDER; AND

3. IS IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE STATE BOARD OF
PHYSICIANS;

(2) HAS A STATE CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES
REGISTRATION; AND

(3) IS REGISTERED WITH THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO MAKE
CANNABIS AVAILABLE TO PATIENTS FOR MEDICAL USE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(N) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND CANNABIS
COMMISSION ESTABLISHED UNDER § 1–302 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(O) (M) (N) “CONSUMER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD
WHO PURCHASES CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS FOR PERSONAL USE BY
INDIVIDUALS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

~~(P)~~ ~~(N)~~ (O) (1) “CONTROL” MEANS:

(1) (I) THE DECISION–MAKING AUTHORITY OVER THE
MANAGEMENT, OPERATIONS, OR POLICIES THAT GUIDE A BUSINESS; OR

(2) (II) AUTHORITY OVER THE OPERATION OF THE TECHNICAL
ASPECTS OF A BUSINESS.

(2) “CONTROL” INCLUDES:

(I) HOLDING A VOTING INTEREST OF 5% OR MORE IN A
CANNABIS LICENSEE OR A RIGHT TO VETO SIGNIFICANT EVENTS;

(II) THE RIGHT OR AUTHORITY TO MAKE OR VETO DECISIONS
REGARDING OPERATIONS AND STRATEGIC PLANNING, CAPITAL ALLOCATIONS,
ACQUISITIONS, AND DIVESTMENTS;

(III) THE RIGHT OR AUTHORITY TO APPOINT OR REMOVE
DIRECTORS, CORPORATE–LEVEL OFFICERS, OR THEIR EQUIVALENT;

(IV) THE RIGHT OR AUTHORITY TO MAKE MAJOR MARKETING,
PRODUCTION, AND FINANCIAL DECISIONS; AND

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) THE RIGHT OR AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE EXCLUSIVE
CONTRACTS OR SIGNIFICANT CONTRACTS IN THE AGGREGATE OF $10,000 OR
GREATER ON BEHALF OF THE LICENSEE; AND

(VI) THE RIGHT OR AUTHORITY TO EARN 5% OR MORE OF THE
PROFITS OR COLLECT 5% OR MORE OF THE DIVIDENDS.

(Q) (O) (P) “DELIVERY SERVICE” MEANS A CANNABIS LICENSEE AUTHORIZED
TO DELIVER CANNABIS IN ACCORDANCE WITH A MICRO LICENSE TO OPERATE A
DISPENSARY.

(R) (P) (Q) “DISPENSARY” MEANS AN ENTITY LICENSED UNDER THIS TITLE
THAT ACQUIRES, POSSESSES, REPACKAGES, TRANSFERS, REPACKAGES,
TRANSPORTS, SELLS, DISTRIBUTES, OR DISPENSES CANNABIS OR CANNABIS
PRODUCTS, INCLUDING TINCTURES, AEROSOLS, OILS, AND OINTMENTS, RELATED
SUPPLIES, AND EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS FOR USE BY QUALIFYING PATIENTS,
CAREGIVERS, OR CONSUMERS THROUGH A STOREFRONT OR THROUGH A DELIVERY
SERVICE, BASED ON LICENSE TYPE.

(S) (Q) (R) “DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTED AREA” MEANS A GEOGRAPHIC
AREA IDENTIFIED BY THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY THAT HAS BEEN
~~DISPROPORTIONATELY~~ ~~IMPACTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROHIBITION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ HAD ABOVE
150% OF THE STATE’S 10–YEAR AVERAGE FOR CANNABIS POSSESSION CHARGES, AS
DETERMINED BY INFORMATION FROM THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE
~~COURTS.~~

(T) (R) “DIVISION” MEANS THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS TITLE.

(U) (S) (1) “EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCT” MEANS A CANNABIS
PRODUCT INTENDED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION BY ORAL INGESTION, IN WHOLE OR
IN PART.

(2) “EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCT” INCLUDES A CANNABIS PRODUCT
THAT DISSOLVES OR DISINTEGRATES IN THE MOUTH.

(3) “EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCT” DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY:

(I) CANNABIS CONCENTRATE;

(II) CANNABIS–INFUSED PRODUCT, INCLUDING AN OIL, A WAX,
AN OINTMENT, A SALVE, A TINCTURE, A CAPSULE, A SUPPOSITORY, A DERMAL
PATCH, OR A CARTRIDGE; OR

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(III) OTHER DOSAGE FORM THAT IS RECOGNIZED BY THE
UNITED STATES PHARMACOPEIA, THE NATIONAL FORMULARY, OR THE U.S. FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION AND IS APPROVED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

(V) (T) “GROWER” MEANS AN ENTITY LICENSED UNDER THIS TITLE THAT:

(1) CULTIVATES, OR PACKAGES, OR DISTRIBUTES CANNABIS; AND

(2) IS AUTHORIZED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE
CANNABIS TO OTHER CANNABIS LICENSEES AND REGISTERED INDEPENDENT
TESTING LABORATORIES.

(W) (U) “INCUBATOR SPACE” MEANS A FACILITY OPERATED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–401 § 36–401(C)(3) OF THIS TITLE.

(X) (V) “INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY” MEANS A FACILITY, AN
ENTITY, OR A SITE THAT IS REGISTERED WITH THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO
PERFORM TESTS RELATED TO THE INSPECTION AND TESTING OF CANNABIS AND
PRODUCTS CONTAINING CANNABIS.

(W) “INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
10–101 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(Y) (X) “MICRO LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE ISSUED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 36–401 § 36–401(C)(2) OF THIS TITLE.

(Z) (Y) “ON–SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT” MEANS AN ENTITY
LICENSED UNDER § 36–401(C)(4) OF THIS TITLE TO DISTRIBUTE CANNABIS OR
CANNABIS PRODUCTS FOR ON–SITE CONSUMPTION OTHER THAN CONSUMPTION BY
SMOKING INDOORS.

(AA) (Z) “OWNER” MEANS A PERSON WITH AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN A
CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(BB) (AA) “OWNERSHIP INTEREST” MEANS A DIRECT OR INDIRECT EQUITY
INTEREST IN A CANNABIS LICENSEE, INCLUDING IN ITS SHARES OR STOCK.

(BB) “PASSIVE INVESTOR” MEANS A PERSON AN INDIVIDUAL OR AN ENTITY
THAT:

(1) HOLDS AN AGGREGATE OWNERSHIP INTEREST OF LESS THAN 5%
IN A CANNABIS LICENSEE; AND
– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) DOES NOT HAVE CONTROL OF THE CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(CC) “PRINCIPAL OFFICER” MEANS A BOARD MEMBER, A PRESIDENT, A VICE
PRESIDENT, A SECRETARY, A TREASURER, A PARTNER, AN OFFICER, OR A MANAGING
MEMBER, OR ANY OTHER INDIVIDUAL WITH A PROFIT SHARING, FINANCIAL
INTEREST, OR REVENUE SHARING ARRANGEMENT, INCLUDING AN INDIVIDUAL WITH
THE AUTHORITY TO CONTROL A CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(DD) “PROCESSOR” MEANS AN ENTITY LICENSED UNDER THIS TITLE THAT:

(1) TRANSFORMS CANNABIS INTO ANOTHER PRODUCT OR AN
EXTRACT AND PACKAGES AND LABELS THE CANNABIS PRODUCT; AND

(2) IS AUTHORIZED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE
CANNABIS TO LICENSED DISPENSARIES AND REGISTERED INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORIES.

(EE) “QUALIFYING PATIENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) HAS BEEN PROVIDED WITH A WRITTEN CERTIFICATION BY A
CERTIFYING PROVIDER IN ACCORDANCE WITH A BONA FIDE PROVIDER–PATIENT
RELATIONSHIP; AND

(2) IF UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS, HAS A CAREGIVER.

(FF) “SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANT” MEANS AN APPLICANT FOR A CANNABIS
LICENSE OR CANNABIS REGISTRATION THAT:

(1) HAS AT LEAST 65% OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL HELD BY ONE OR
MORE INDIVIDUALS WHO:

(I) HAVE LIVED IN A DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTED AREA
FOR AT LEAST 5 OF THE 10 YEARS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE SUBMISSION OF
THE APPLICATION; OR

(II) ATTENDED A PUBLIC SCHOOL IN A DISPROPORTIONATELY
IMPACTED AREA FOR AT LEAST 5 YEARS; OR

(III) FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS, ATTENDED A 4–YEAR INSTITUTION
OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE WHERE AT LEAST 40% OF THE INDIVIDUALS
WHO ATTEND THE INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION ARE ELIGIBLE FOR A PELL
GRANT; OR

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) MEETS ANY OTHER CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION
BASED ON THE RESULTS OF A DISPARITY STUDY ADMINISTRATION.

(GG) (1) “SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE” MEANS A SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANT
WHO HAS BEEN AWARDED A CANNABIS LICENSE OR CANNABIS REGISTRATION.

(2) “SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE” INCLUDES A GROWER, PROCESSOR,
OR DISPENSARY THAT:

(I) HELD A STAGE ONE PREAPPROVAL FOR A LICENSE BEFORE
OCTOBER 1, 2022; AND

(II) WAS NOT OPERATIONAL BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022.

(GG) (HH) “STANDARD LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE ISSUED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 36–401 § 36–401(C)(1) OF THIS TITLE.

(HH) (II) “TRANSPORTER” MEANS AN ENTITY REGISTERED UNDER THIS
TITLE TO TRANSPORT CANNABIS BETWEEN CANNABIS LICENSEES AND REGISTERED
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORIES.

(II) (JJ) (1) “USABLE CANNABIS” MEANS THE DRIED LEAVES AND
FLOWERS OF THE CANNABIS PLANT.

(2) “USABLE CANNABIS” DOES NOT INCLUDE SEEDLINGS, SEEDS,
STEMS, STALKS, OR ROOTS OF THE PLANT OR THE WEIGHT OF ANY NONCANNABIS
INGREDIENTS COMBINED WITH CANNABIS, SUCH AS INGREDIENTS ADDED TO
PREPARE A TOPICAL ADMINISTRATION.

(JJ) (KK) “WRITTEN CERTIFICATION” MEANS A CERTIFICATION THAT:

(1) IS ISSUED BY A CERTIFYING PROVIDER TO A QUALIFYING PATIENT
WITH WHOM THE PROVIDER HAS A BONA FIDE PROVIDER–PATIENT RELATIONSHIP;

(2) INCLUDES A WRITTEN STATEMENT CERTIFYING THAT, IN THE
CERTIFYING PROVIDER’S PROFESSIONAL OPINION, AFTER HAVING COMPLETED AN
ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT’S MEDICAL HISTORY AND CURRENT MEDICAL
CONDITION, THE PATIENT HAS A CONDITION:

(I) THAT MEETS THE INCLUSION CRITERIA AND DOES NOT
MEET THE EXCLUSION CRITERIA OF THE CERTIFYING PROVIDER’S APPLICATION;
AND

– 29 –
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) FOR WHICH THE POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE MEDICAL
USE OF CANNABIS WOULD LIKELY OUTWEIGH THE HEALTH RISKS FOR THE PATIENT;
AND

(3) MAY INCLUDE A WRITTEN STATEMENT CERTIFYING THAT, IN THE
CERTIFYING PROVIDER’S PROFESSIONAL OPINION, A 30–DAY SUPPLY OF MEDICAL
CANNABIS WOULD BE INADEQUATE TO MEET THE MEDICAL NEEDS OF THE
QUALIFYING PATIENT.

SUBTITLE 2. CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION MARYLAND
CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION.

36–201.

(A) (1) THERE IS A CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION ESTABLISHED WITHIN THE OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF IN
THE COMMISSION.

(2) THE DIVISION IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT THAT FUNCTIONS
WITHIN, AND REPORTS DIRECTLY ONLY TO, THE COMMISSION.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND CANNABIS ADMINISTRATION ESTABLISHED AS
AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

(B) (1) THERE IS A DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(2) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT THE DIRECTOR OF THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE.

(3) THE DIRECTOR SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE GOVERNOR.

(C) THE DIRECTOR MUST HAVE THE TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE,
INCLUDING KNOWLEDGE OF THE STATE CANNABIS INDUSTRY AND REGULATORY
SYSTEM, THAT IS NEEDED TO DIRECT THE WORK OF THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

(D) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY EMPLOY OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES STAFF AND RETAIN CONTRACTORS AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

(E) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION:

– 30 –
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(1) SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR CARRYING OUT THE REQUIREMENTS
AND DUTIES ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS DIVISION TITLE; AND

(2) MAY RECOMMEND CHANGES TO IMPROVE THE ADMINISTRATION
OF THIS DIVISION TITLE RELATING TO THE REGULATION OF CANNABIS.

(F) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE
THIS TITLE.

36–202.

(A) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

(1) DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A SEED–TO–SALE TRACKING SYSTEM
THAT TRACKS CANNABIS FROM EITHER THE SEED OR IMMATURE PLANT STAGE
UNTIL THE CANNABIS IS SOLD TO A PATIENT, CAREGIVER, OR CONSUMER;

(2) CONDUCT FINANCIAL AND CRIMINAL BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS OF ANY PERSON WHO SUBMITS AN APPLICATION FOR A CANNABIS
LICENSE OR A CANNABIS LICENSEE, AS REQUIRED UNDER THIS TITLE;

(3) DEVELOP A PROCESS FOR CONSUMERS AND QUALIFYING
PATIENTS TO PURCHASE CLONES AND SEEDS, SEEDLINGS, STALKS, ROOTS, AND
STEMS OF THE CANNABIS PLANT FOR CULTIVATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–601.2
OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

(3) (4) SOLICIT, EVALUATE, AND ISSUE OR DENY APPLICATIONS
FOR CANNABIS LICENSES AND CANNABIS REGISTRATIONS, INCLUDING:

(I) LICENSES TO OPERATE A CANNABIS BUSINESS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE; AND

(II) REGISTRATION FOR INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORIES, TRANSPORTERS, SECURITY GUARD COMPANIES, AND WASTE
DISPOSAL COMPANIES;

(4) (5) AWARD OR DENY:

(I) A LICENSE TO OPERATE A CANNABIS BUSINESS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE; AND

(II) REGISTRATION TO INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORIES,
TRANSPORTERS, SECURITY GUARD COMPANIES, WASTE DISPOSAL COMPANIES, AND

– 31 –
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ANY OTHER TYPE OF CANNABIS BUSINESS AUTHORIZED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION;

(5) (6) CONDUCT ANNOUNCED AND UNANNOUNCED INSPECTIONS
OF ANY BUSINESS LICENSED OR REGISTERED UNDER THIS TITLE TO ENSURE
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS TITLE;

(6) (7) AFTER A DETERMINATION THAT A VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE
OR A REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE HAS OCCURRED, SUSPEND, FINE,
RESTRICT, OR REVOKE CANNABIS LICENSES AND CANNABIS REGISTRATIONS,
WHETHER ACTIVE, EXPIRED, OR SURRENDERED, OR IMPOSE ANY OTHER PENALTY
AUTHORIZED BY THIS TITLE OR ANY REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE;

(7) (8) (I) GIVE NOTICE AND HOLD A HEARING IN ACCORDANCE
WITH TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, FOR ANY:

1. CONTESTED CANNABIS LICENSE OR REGISTRATION
DENIAL; OR

2. VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE OR ANY REGULATION
ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE;

(II) ADMINISTER OATHS IN A PROCEEDING UNDER THIS
SECTION; AND

(III) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS SECTION, ALLOW
THE PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED TO BE REPRESENTED
AT THE HEARING BY COUNSEL;

(8) (9) ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT ITS
DUTIES UNDER THIS TITLE; AND

(9) (10) PERFORM ANY OTHER POWER AUTHORIZED OR DUTY
REQUIRED UNDER THIS TITLE OR ANY OTHER PROVISION OF STATE LAW.

(B) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION MAY:

(1) ISSUE A SUBPOENA FOR THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS TO
TESTIFY OR THE PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE IN CONNECTION WITH:

(I) ANY DISCIPLINARY ACTION UNDER THIS TITLE; OR

– 32 –
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(II) ANY INVESTIGATION OR PROCEEDING INITIATED FOR AN
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE;

(2) DELEGATE THE HEARING AUTHORITY AUTHORIZED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(7) (A)(8) OF THIS SECTION TO AN EMPLOYEE WITHIN THE
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(3) IF, AFTER DUE NOTICE, THE PERSON AGAINST WHOM A
DISCIPLINARY ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED DOES NOT APPEAR AT A HEARING, HEAR
AND DETERMINE THE MATTER.

36–203.

(A) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

(1) EVALUATE THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE NATALIE M.
LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION IN TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 62 OF THE
CODE OF MARYLAND REGULATIONS; AND

(2) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, ADOPT EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
TO:

(I) CARRY OUT THE LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIED
UNDER THIS TITLE;

(II) IMPLEMENT PROCEDURES RELATED TO CANNABIS
APPLICATIONS, LICENSES, AND REGISTRATIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE;

(III) ASSIST THE COMPTROLLER IN THE COLLECTION OF TAXES
IMPOSED ON THE SALE OF ADULT–USE CANNABIS UNDER § 11–104(K) OF THE TAX –
GENERAL ARTICLE;

(IV) IMPLEMENT INVENTORY MANAGEMENT AND TRACKING
THAT DOES NOT DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN ADULT–USE OR MEDICAL CANNABIS OR
CANNABIS PRODUCTS BEFORE THE POINT OF SALE, EXCEPT FOR PRODUCTS
ALLOWED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION FOR SALE ONLY TO PATIENTS AND
CAREGIVERS; AND

(V) ESTABLISH OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS
LICENSEES OR CANNABIS REGISTRANTS, INCLUDING REQUIREMENTS FOR:

1. SECURITY, INCLUDING LIGHTING, PHYSICAL
SECURITY, VIDEO, AND ALARM REQUIREMENTS;

– 33 –
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. SAFE AND SECURE DELIVERY, TRANSPORT, AND
STORAGE OF CANNABIS;

3. PREVENTING THE SALE OR DIVERSION OF CANNABIS
AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS; AND

4. PACKAGING AND LABELING OF CANNABIS AND
CANNABIS PRODUCTS, INCLUDING CHILD–RESISTANT PACKAGING; AND

5. HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS GOVERNING THE
CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURE, TESTING, AND DISPENSING OF CANNABIS OR
CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

(B) THE EMERGENCY REGULATIONS THAT THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
IS REQUIRED TO ADOPT UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) BE SUPPLEMENTAL TO THE MEDICAL CANNABIS REGULATIONS
UNDER TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 62 OF THE CODE OF MARYLAND REGULATIONS; AND

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, REMAIN IN EFFECT UNTIL
THE TAKING EFFECT OF NONEMERGENCY REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
SHALL ADOPT NONEMERGENCY REGULATIONS ~~NECESSARY~~ TO CARRY OUT ~~THE~~
PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

(2) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS:

(I) REQUIRING CANNABIS LICENSEES TO TRANSITION FROM A
CASH SYSTEM AND TO USE TRADITIONAL BANKING SERVICES; AND

(II) ESTABLISHING TRADE PRACTICE RESTRICTIONS.

(3) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS:

(I) GOVERNING INTERNET SALES OF CANNABIS;

(II) IMPLEMENTING AND SUPPLEMENTING PACKAGING AND
LABELING REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS PRODUCTS UNDER § 36–203.1 OF THIS
SUBTITLE;

– 34 –
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(III) ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR THE USE OF POINT OF
SALE TECHNOLOGIES BY DISPENSARIES FOR ALL TRANSACTIONS IN ORDER TO
VERIFY A CONSUMER’S AGE USING A DRIVER’S LICENSE OR OTHER VALID
IDENTIFICATION ISSUED BY A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT SPECIFIED BY THE
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(IV) ESTABLISHING HEALTH, SAFETY, SECURITY, AND TRACKING
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PACKAGING AND REPACKAGING OF CANNABIS BY A
DISPENSARY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–203.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, REGULATE MEDICAL
AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS IN THE SAME MANNER.

36–203.1.

(A) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING
LIMITS ON THE MAXIMUM POTENCY OF CANNABIS PRODUCTS SOLD IN THE STATE,
INCLUDING LIMITS ON THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF THC IN INDIVIDUAL CANNABIS
PRODUCTS AND LIMITS ON THE MAXIMUM AGGREGATE THC AMOUNT FOR MULTIPLE
EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCTS PACKAGED TOGETHER.

(B) A PACKAGE OF CANNABIS FOR DISTRIBUTION TO A CONSUMER OR
QUALIFYING PATIENT SHALL:

(1) CONFORM TO:

(I) CHILD–RESISTANT PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS
ESTABLISHED UNDER 16 C.F.R. § 1700.15(B)(1); AND

(II) TAMPER–EVIDENT PACKAGING;

(2) PROVIDE THAT PACKAGING AND LABELING SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A FINISHED PRODUCT LOT NUMBER AND EXPIRATION DATE
IF APPLICABLE;

(II) A STATEMENT:

1. THAT CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS MAY IMPAIR YOUR
ABILITY TO DRIVE A CAR OR OPERATE MACHINERY, USE EXTREME CAUTION;

2. OF POTENTIAL RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH CANNABIS
USE, ESPECIALLY DURING PREGNANCY OR BREAST FEEDING; AND
– 35 –
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. THAT THIS PACKAGE CONTAINS CANNABIS, KEEP OUT
OF THE REACH OF CHILDREN AND ANIMALS;

(III) THE NAME, ADDRESS, AND PHONE NUMBER OF THE
DISPENSARY THAT SOLD THE PRODUCT TO REPORT AN ADVERSE EVENT;

(IV) ANY ALLERGEN WARNING REQUIRED BY LAW;

(V) A LISTING OF NONCANNABIS INGREDIENTS; AND

(VI) AN ITEMIZATION, INCLUDING WEIGHT:

1. OF ALL CANNABINOID AND TERPENE INGREDIENTS
SPECIFIED FOR THE PRODUCT; AND

2. CONCENTRATIONS OF ANY CANNABINOID OF LESS
THAN 1% PRINTED WITH A LEADING ZERO BEFORE THE DECIMAL POINT.

(C) CANNABIS LABELING AND PACKAGING MAY NOT INCLUDE:

(1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, ANY IMAGE THAT
MAY APPEAL TO CHILDREN INCLUDING:

(I) IMAGES OF FOOD, CANDY, BAKED GOODS, CEREAL, FRUIT,
AND BEVERAGES; AND

(II) A RESEMBLANCE TO THE TRADEMARKED CHARACTERISTIC
PRODUCT–SPECIALIZED PACKAGING OF ANY COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE CANDY,
SNACK, BAKED GOOD, CEREAL, OR BEVERAGE;

(2) ANY IMAGE THAT IS DESIGNED OR LIKELY TO APPEAL TO MINORS,
INCLUDING CARTOONS, TOYS, ANIMALS, CHILDREN, OR ANY LIKENESS TO IMAGES,
CHARACTERS, OR PHRASES THAT ARE POPULARLY USED TO ADVERTISE TO
CHILDREN;

(3) A STATEMENT, ARTWORK, OR DESIGN THAT COULD REASONABLY
MISLEAD ANY INDIVIDUAL TO BELIEVE THAT THE PACKAGING CONTAINS ANYTHING
OTHER THAN A FINISHED CANNABIS PRODUCT; AND

(4) ANY IMAGE OF A SEAL, FLAG, CREST, COAT OF ARMS, OR OTHER
INSIGNIA THAT COULD REASONABLY MISLEAD ANY INDIVIDUAL TO BELIEVE THAT
THE PRODUCT HAS BEEN ENDORSED, MANUFACTURED, OR USED BY ANY AGENCY OF
A STATE OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.

– 36 –
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(D) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ALLOW THE SALE,
ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, OF CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS THAT ARE
LABELED OR PACKAGED USING IMAGES DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1) OF
THIS SECTION.

36–204.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION SHALL ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN A STATE CANNABIS TESTING
LABORATORY.

(2) (I) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE OR THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
MAY ENTER INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION TO TEST CANNABIS AT AN EXISTING STATE–OWNED LABORATORY
IF DOING SO WOULD BE A MORE ECONOMIC AND EFFICIENT ALTERNATIVE TO THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A TESTING LABORATORY UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(II) IF THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE OR
THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
DETERMINE THAT CO–LOCATING CANNABIS TESTING AT AN EXISTING
STATE–OWNED LABORATORY IS NOT OPERATIONALLY FEASIBLE, SUFFICIENT
FUNDING SHALL BE PROVIDED IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET TO COMPLY WITH
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) THE STATE CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR:

(1) DEVELOPING AND MAINTAINING A CANNABIS LABORATORY
REFERENCE LIBRARY THAT CONTAINS CANNABIS TESTING METHODOLOGIES IN THE
AREAS OF:

(I) POTENCY;

(II) HOMOGENEITY;

(III) DETECTION AND QUANTITATION OF CONTAMINANTS; AND

(IV) SOLVENTS;

(2) ESTABLISHING STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES FOR
SAMPLE COLLECTION, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS OF CANNABIS BY
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORIES;
– 37 –
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) CONDUCTING PROFICIENCY TESTING OF INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORIES;

(4) REMEDIATING PROBLEMS WITH INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORIES; AND

(5) CONDUCTING COMPLIANCE TESTING ON CANNABIS SAMPLES
ANALYZED BY INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORIES; AND

(6) IDENTIFYING AND DETECTING THE PRESENCE AND PURITY OF
CANNABIS, ALCOHOL, AND TOBACCO IN SAMPLES OR SEIZED CONTRABAND IN
SUPPORT OF THE REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSION OR
ADMINISTRATION.

(C) INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORIES LICENSED UNDER § 36–408 OF
THIS TITLE SHALL PROVIDE MATERIALS FOR THE CANNABIS LABORATORY
REFERENCE LIBRARY.

(D) THE STATE CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY SHALL HOLD MEDICAL
AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS TESTING TO THE SAME STANDARDS.

36–205.

(A) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY IMPOSE REGISTRATION AND
OTHER FEES TO DEFRAY THE COSTS OF:

(1) THE OPERATIONS OF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND THE
COMMISSION; AND

(2) ADMINISTERING AND ENFORCING THIS DIVISION TITLE.

(B) IF FEES ARE IMPOSED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL DEPOSIT THE FEES COLLECTED IN THE
CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 36–206
OF THIS SUBTITLE.

36–206.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND
ENFORCEMENT FUND.

(B) THERE IS A CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT FUND.

– 38 –
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDS TO COVER THE
COSTS OF:

(1) THE OPERATION OF THE DIVISION AND THE COMMISSION
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(2) ADMINISTERING AND ENFORCING THIS DIVISION TITLE.

(D) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND AT THE DIRECTION
OF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) FEES DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND UNDER § 36–205 OF THIS
SUBTITLE;

(2) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND UNDER § 2–1302.2 OF THE
TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ANY CONDITIONS ADOPTED BY
THE COMMISSION FOR THE ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS OR GIFTS TO THE FUND.

(G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR CARRYING OUT THIS DIVISION
TITLE.

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(I) THE FUND IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE
AUDITS AS PROVIDED FOR IN § 2–1220 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

– 39 –
END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(J) (1) ON OR BEFORE MARCH 15 EACH YEAR, THE COMPTROLLER
SHALL PUBLISH ON ITS WEBSITE A DETAILED REPORT ON REVENUE DISTRIBUTED
TO AND EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND.

(2) THE REPORT SHALL ALSO BE SUBMITTED TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

SUBTITLE 3. MEDICAL USE OF CANNABIS.

36–301.

(A) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL REGISTER AS A CERTIFYING
PROVIDER AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) SUBMITS THE REQUIRED APPLICATION TO THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

(B) TO BE REGISTERED AS A CERTIFYING PROVIDER, A PROVIDER SHALL
SUBMIT AN APPLICATION TO THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION THAT INCLUDES:

(1) THE REASONS FOR INCLUDING A PATIENT UNDER THE CARE OF
THE PROVIDER FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING THE PATIENT’S
QUALIFYING MEDICAL CONDITIONS;

(2) AN ATTESTATION THAT A STANDARD PATIENT EVALUATION WILL
BE COMPLETED, INCLUDING A HISTORY, A PHYSICAL EXAMINATION, A REVIEW OF
SYMPTOMS, AND OTHER RELEVANT MEDICAL INFORMATION; AND

(3) THE PROVIDER’S PLAN FOR THE ONGOING ASSESSMENT AND
FOLLOW–UP CARE OF A PATIENT AND FOR COLLECTING AND ANALYZING DATA.

(C) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION IS ENCOURAGED TO APPROVE
PROVIDER APPLICATIONS FOR THE FOLLOWING:

(1) A CHRONIC OR DEBILITATING DISEASE OR MEDICAL CONDITION
THAT RESULTS IN A PATIENT BEING ADMITTED INTO HOSPICE OR RECEIVING
PALLIATIVE CARE;

(2) A CHRONIC OR DEBILITATING DISEASE OR MEDICAL CONDITION
OR THE TREATMENT OF A CHRONIC OR DEBILITATING DISEASE OR MEDICAL
CONDITION THAT PRODUCES:

– 40 –
END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(I) CACHEXIA, ANOREXIA, OR WASTING SYNDROME;

(II) SEVERE OR CHRONIC PAIN;

(III) SEVERE NAUSEA;

(IV) SEIZURES; OR

(V) SEVERE OR PERSISTENT MUSCLE SPASMS;

(3) GLAUCOMA; OR

(4) POST–TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.

(D) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT LIMIT TREATMENT OF A
PARTICULAR MEDICAL CONDITION TO ONE CLASS OF PROVIDERS.

(E) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY APPROVE APPLICATIONS THAT
INCLUDE ANY OTHER CONDITION THAT IS SEVERE AND FOR WHICH OTHER MEDICAL
TREATMENTS HAVE BEEN INEFFECTIVE IF THE SYMPTOMS REASONABLY CAN BE
EXPECTED TO BE RELIEVED BY THE MEDICAL USE OF CANNABIS.

(F) A CERTIFYING PROVIDER OR THE SPOUSE OF A CERTIFYING PROVIDER
MAY NOT:

(1) RECEIVE ANY GIFT FROM A CANNABIS LICENSEE;

(2) HOLD AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN A CANNABIS LICENSEE OR A
BUSINESS THAT CONTROLS A CANNABIS LICENSEE; OR

(3) RECEIVE ANY COMPENSATION FROM A CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(G) A CERTIFYING PROVIDER SHALL ISSUE EACH WRITTEN CERTIFICATION
IN THE FORM REQUIRED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(H) A CERTIFYING PROVIDER MAY DISCUSS MEDICAL CANNABIS WITH A
PATIENT.

(I) (1) A CERTIFYING PROVIDER REGISTRATION IS VALID FOR 2 YEARS.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL GRANT OR DENY A
RENEWAL OF A REGISTRATION BASED ON THE PROVIDER’S PERFORMANCE IN
COMPLYING WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

– 41 –
END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

36–302.

(A) A QUALIFYING PATIENT OR CAREGIVER MAY OBTAIN MEDICAL
CANNABIS FROM A DISPENSARY LICENSED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(B) (1) A QUALIFYING PATIENT WHO IS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD MAY NOT
CULTIVATE MORE THAN FOUR CANNABIS PLANTS.

(2) IF TWO OR MORE QUALIFYING PATIENTS WHO ARE AT LEAST 21
YEARS OLD RESIDE AT THE SAME RESIDENCE, NOT MORE THAN FOUR CANNABIS
PLANTS MAY BE CULTIVATED AT THAT RESIDENCE.

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A QUALIFYING PATIENT SHALL COMPLY WITH THE CANNABIS
CULTIVATION REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–601.2 OF THE CRIMINAL
LAW ARTICLE.

(C) A QUALIFYING PATIENT UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS MAY OBTAIN
MEDICAL CANNABIS ONLY THROUGH:

(1) THE QUALIFYING PATIENT’S CAREGIVER; OR

(2) ANY DESIGNATED SCHOOL PERSONNEL AUTHORIZED TO
ADMINISTER MEDICAL CANNABIS TO A STUDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–446 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(D) A CAREGIVER MAY SERVE NOT MORE THAN FIVE QUALIFYING PATIENTS
AT ANY TIME.

(E) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
QUALIFYING PATIENT MAY HAVE NOT MORE THAN TWO CAREGIVERS.

(2) A QUALIFYING PATIENT UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS MAY HAVE
NOT MORE THAN FOUR CAREGIVERS.

(F) A SALE OF CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS TO A QUALIFYING
PATIENT IS NOT SUBJECT TO TAXES IMPOSED ON THE SALE OF CANNABIS OR
CANNABIS PRODUCTS UNDER § 11–104(K) OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(G) A QUALIFYING PATIENT MAY POSSESS UP TO:

(1) 120 GRAMS OF USABLE CANNABIS; OR

– 42 –
END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) 36 GRAMS OF DELTA–9–TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) IN THE
CASE OF A CANNABIS–INFUSED PRODUCT.

(H) DESIGNATED SCHOOL PERSONNEL DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (C)(2)
OF THIS SECTION:

(1) MAY ADMINISTER TO A STUDENT ONLY MEDICAL CANNABIS:

(I) THAT IS OBTAINED THROUGH THE STUDENT’S CAREGIVER;
AND

(II) IN ACCORDANCE WITH DOSING, TIMING, AND DELIVERY
ROUTE INSTRUCTIONS AS PROVIDED BY THE CERTIFYING PROVIDER’S WRITTEN
INSTRUCTIONS; AND

(2) ARE NOT REQUIRED TO REGISTER WITH THE COMMISSION
ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(I) A CAREGIVER MAY ADMINISTER MEDICAL CANNABIS TO A STUDENT
WHO IS A QUALIFYING PATIENT OF THE CAREGIVER ON SCHOOL PROPERTY, DURING
SCHOOL–SPONSORED ACTIVITIES, AND WHILE ON A SCHOOL BUS.

SUBTITLE 4. CANNABIS LICENSING.

36–401.

(A) (1) A PERSON MUST OBTAIN A CANNABIS LICENSE ISSUED BY THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO OPERATE A CANNABIS BUSINESS.

(2) A CANNABIS LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE:

(I) AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER OF THE LICENSE TO OPERATE A
MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS BUSINESS;

(II) IS VALID FOR 5 YEARS ON INITIAL LICENSURE AND 5 YEARS
ON RENEWAL; AND

(III) MAY BE TRANSFERRED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS TITLE.

(B) (1) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

– 43 –
END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) ISSUE STANDARD LICENSES, MICRO LICENSES, INCUBATOR
SPACE LICENSES, AND ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS TITLE;

(II) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, CONVERT LICENSES THAT
WERE ISSUED TO MEDICAL CANNABIS GROWERS, PROCESSORS, AND DISPENSARIES,
INCLUDING THOSE BUSINESSES PREAPPROVED FOR LICENSURE, TO LICENSES TO
OPERATE A MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS BUSINESS IF:

1. A CONVERSION FEE IS PAID IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
36–403 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

2. THE BUSINESS COMPLIES WITH THE OWNERSHIP
RESTRICTIONS UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION;

(III) SET PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, SALES, AND OTHER
LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL LICENSE TYPES;

(IV) ISSUE DISPENSARY LICENSES IN A MANNER THAT
ENCOURAGES A BALANCED GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION BASED ON POPULATION
AND MARKET DEMAND WITHIN A SPECIFIC COUNTY, AS WELL AS
CROSS–JURISDICTIONAL MARKET DEMAND; AND

(V) CONSIDER MARKET DEMAND IN THE ISSUANCE OF ALL
LICENSE TYPES; AND

(VI) (V) ADOPT REGULATIONS REQUIRING LICENSEES WHOSE
LICENSES WERE CONVERTED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION UNDER ITEM (II)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH TO RESERVE A SPECIFIED AMOUNT OF CANNABIS FOR SOCIAL
EQUITY LICENSEES.

(2) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION MAY:

(I) INSPECT A CANNABIS LICENSEE TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
WITH THIS TITLE AND THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE;

(II) REVOKE A CANNABIS LICENSE IF GOOD FAITH EFFORTS
HAVE NOT BEEN MADE BY THE CANNABIS LICENSEE TO ESTABLISH A CANNABIS
BUSINESS WITHIN 18 MONTHS AFTER THE LICENSE WAS AWARDED;

(III) IMPOSE PENALTIES OR RESCIND THE LICENSE OF A
CANNABIS LICENSEE THAT DOES NOT MEET THE STANDARDS FOR LICENSURE

– 44 –
END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS TITLE OR REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE;
AND

(IV) CONDITIONALLY AWARD CANNABIS LICENSES.

(C) (1) A STANDARD LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER OF THE
LICENSE:

(I) FOR GROWERS, TO OPERATE MORE THAN 10,000 SQUARE
FEET, BUT NOT MORE THAN 300,000 SQUARE FEET, OF INDOOR CANOPY OR ITS
EQUIVALENT, AS CALCULATED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION;

(II) FOR PROCESSORS, TO PROCESS MORE THAN 1,000 POUNDS
OF CANNABIS PER YEAR, AS CALCULATED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION; AND

(III) FOR DISPENSARIES, TO OPERATE A STORE AT A PHYSICAL
LOCATION THAT SELLS CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

(2) A MICRO LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER OF THE LICENSE:

(I) FOR GROWERS, TO OPERATE NOT MORE THAN 10,000
SQUARE FEET OF INDOOR CANOPY OR ITS EQUIVALENT, AS CALCULATED BY THE
~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION;

(II) FOR PROCESSORS, TO PROCESS NOT MORE THAN 1,000
POUNDS OF CANNABIS PER YEAR, AS CALCULATED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(III) FOR DISPENSARIES, TO OPERATE A DELIVERY SERVICE
THAT SELLS CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS WITHOUT A PHYSICAL
STOREFRONT, PROVIDED THAT THE LICENSEE EMPLOYS NOT MORE THAN 10
EMPLOYEES.

(3) AN INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER OF
THE LICENSE TO OPERATE A FACILITY WITHIN WHICH A MICRO LICENSEE MAY
OPERATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–406 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER
OF THE LICENSE TO OPERATE A FACILITY ~~IN~~ ON THE PREMISES OF WHICH
INDIVIDUALS CAN SMOKE OUTDOORS, VAPE, OR CONSUME CANNABIS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–407 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 45 –
END OF PAGE 45

START OF PAGE 46
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT ISSUE MORE THAN THE
FOLLOWING NUMBER OF LICENSES PER TYPE, INCLUDING LICENSES CONVERTED
UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION:

(1) FOR STANDARD LICENSES:

(I) 75 GROWER LICENSES;

(II) 100 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

(III) 300 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(2) FOR MICRO LICENSES:

(I) 100 GROWER LICENSES;

(II) 100 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

(III) 200 10 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(3) FOR INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSES, 10 LICENSES; AND

(4) FOR ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSES, 50 LICENSES.

(E) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO ALL LICENSES, INCLUDING
LICENSES CONVERTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PERSON
MAY HAVE AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN OR CONTROL OF, INCLUDING THE POWER TO
MANAGE AND OPERATE, ONLY:

(I) FOR STANDARD LICENSES AND MICRO LICENSES:

1. ONE GROWER LICENSEE;

2. ONE PROCESSOR LICENSEE; AND

3. NOT MORE THAN TWO FOUR DISPENSARY LICENSEES;

(II) FOR INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSES, NOT MORE THAN TWO
LICENSEES; AND

(III) FOR ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSES, NOT MORE THAN
TWO LICENSEES.

– 46 –
END OF PAGE 46

START OF PAGE 47
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(3) (I) A PERSON WHO OWNS OR CONTROLS AN INCUBATOR SPACE
LICENSEE OR AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSEE MAY NOT OWN OR CONTROL ANY
OTHER CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(II) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS LIMITING A PERSON OR FUND FROM ACQUIRING A NONMAJORITY
OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN MULTIPLE CANNABIS BUSINESSES BEYOND THE
LIMITATIONS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(4) THE RESTRICTIONS IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION DO
NOT APPLY TO A PERSON OR AN ENTITY WHO HOLDS AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST ONLY
AS A PASSIVE INVESTOR.

(F) (1) THE HOLDER OF A CANNABIS LICENSE MAY NOT SURRENDER THE
LICENSE AND APPLY FOR A NEW LICENSE IN THE SAME OR A SIMILAR CATEGORY.

(2) THE LIMITATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
APPLIES TO:

(I) AFFILIATES, HOLDING COMPANIES, PARENT COMPANIES,
OR OTHER RELATED ENTITIES;

(II) INDIVIDUALS AND FIRMS WITH IDENTICAL OR
SUBSTANTIALLY IDENTICAL BUSINESS OR ECONOMIC INTERESTS;

(III) PERSONS WITH COMMON INVESTMENTS; AND

(IV) FIRMS THAT ARE ECONOMICALLY DEPENDENT ON EACH
OTHER THROUGH CONTRACTUAL OR OTHER RELATIONSHIPS.

(G) A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS TITLE:

(1) IS NOT PROPERTY AND DOES NOT CONFER PROPERTY RIGHTS;
~~AND~~

(2) IS SUBJECT TO:

(I) SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND RESTRICTIONS
AUTHORIZED BY LAW; AND

(II) REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

– 47 –
END OF PAGE 47

START OF PAGE 48
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) (1) ON AND AFTER JULY 1, 2023, THE HOLDER OF A LICENSE ISSUED
BY THE NATALIE M. LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION WHO DOES NOT
CONVERT THE LICENSE:

(I) MAY NOT:

1. OPERATE UNDER THE LICENSE; OR

2. RENEW THE LICENSE; BUT

(II) MAY CONTINUE TO HOLD THE LICENSE FOR RESALE TO
ANOTHER PERSON FOR CONVERSION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE PURCHASER OF A LICENSE SOLD BY A LICENSE HOLDER WHO
DOES NOT CONVERT A LICENSE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYING THE ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE UNDER § 36–403 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(G) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE, THE HOLDER OF A
DISPENSARY LICENSE ISSUED BY THE NATALIE M. LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS
COMMISSION WHO CONVERTS THE LICENSE OR A REGISTRANT WITH THE NATALIE
M. LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION MAY CONTINUE TO DELIVER
MEDICAL CANNABIS UNTIL JULY 1, 2024.

(H) A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS TITLE:

(1) IS NOT PROPERTY AND DOES NOT CONFER PROPERTY RIGHTS; AND

(2) IS SUBJECT TO:

(I) SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND RESTRICTIONS
AUTHORIZED BY LAW; AND

(II) REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

(I) (1) ON AND AFTER JULY 1, 2023, THE HOLDER OF A LICENSE ISSUED
BY THE NATALIE M. LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION WHO DOES NOT
CONVERT THE LICENSE:

(I) MAY NOT:

1. OPERATE UNDER THE LICENSE; OR

2. RENEW THE LICENSE; BUT

– 48 –
END OF PAGE 48

START OF PAGE 49
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(II) MAY CONTINUE TO HOLD THE LICENSE FOR RESALE TO
ANOTHER PERSON FOR CONVERSION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE PURCHASER OF A LICENSE SOLD BY A LICENSE HOLDER WHO
DOES NOT CONVERT A LICENSE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYING THE ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE UNDER § 36–403 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

36–402.

(A) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO PRESERVE
PRODUCTION AVAILABILITY FOR NEW ADULT–USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION
LICENSES ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) IF THE LICENSE OF A CANNABIS LICENSEE IS CONVERTED BY THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION UNDER § 36–401(B)(1)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
CANNABIS LICENSEE SHALL:

(I) IF THE LICENSEE IS A GROWER, ADHERE TO THE EXPANSION
LIMITATIONS SPECIFIED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(II) PAY THE CONVERSION FEE REQUIRED UNDER § 36–403 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH AND SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, ON OR
BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026, AN OPERATIONAL BUSINESS THAT HOLDS A GROWER
LICENSE ISSUED BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022 DECEMBER 31, 2022, MAY EXPAND THE
CANOPY OF ITS OPERATIONS AS IT EXISTED ON OCTOBER 1, 2022 DECEMBER 31,
2022, AND BASED ON FACILITY SQUARE FOOTAGE OF INDOOR CANOPY SPACE OR ITS
EQUIVALENT, AS CALCULATED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION IN ACCORDANCE
WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, ONLY AS FOLLOWS:

1. IF THE CANOPY IS UNDER 25,000 SQUARE FEET, TO
25,000 SQUARE FEET OR BY 25% 20%, WHICHEVER IS GREATER;

2. IF THE CANOPY IS AT OR ABOVE 25,000 SQUARE FEET,
BY 25% 20%; OR

3. IF THE CANNABIS LICENSEE HAS A SQUARE FOOTAGE
EXPANSION THAT WAS PREAPPROVED BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022 DECEMBER 31,
2022, THE PREAPPROVED EXPANSION OR 25% 20%, WHICHEVER IS GREATER.

– 49 –
END OF PAGE 49

START OF PAGE 50
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND AN OPERATIONAL
BUSINESS DESCRIBED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH ARE UNABLE
TO AGREE AS TO THE SQUARE FOOTAGE OF THE CANOPY EXPANSION OF THE
LICENSEE’S OPERATIONS AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE SQUARE FOOTAGE OF THE CANOPY EXPANSION SHALL BE
CALCULATED BASED ON THE LICENSEE’S AVERAGE CANNABIS PRODUCTION IN
CALENDAR YEARS 2021 AND 2022.

(III) AN OPERATIONAL BUSINESS DESCRIBED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY BEGIN TO EXPAND ITS CANOPY OF
OPERATIONS:

1. BY NOT MORE THAN 50% OF THE TOTAL SQUARE
FOOTAGE AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OR (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH ON
OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2024; AND

2. FOR THE REMAINING TOTAL SQUARE FOOTAGE
AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OR (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH ON OR AFTER
MAY 1, 2024.

(IV) A GROWER LICENSEE MAY NOT OPERATE AN INDOOR
CANOPY THAT EXCEEDS 300,000 SQUARE FEET OR ITS EQUIVALENT, AS
CALCULATED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, IF THE GROWER LICENSEE:

1. HELD A STAGE ONE PREAPPROVAL FOR A LICENSE
BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022; AND

2. WAS NOT OPERATIONAL BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022.

(C) A BUSINESS THAT IS ISSUED A NEW CANNABIS LICENSE UNDER § 36–401
OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT OPERATE AN INDOOR CANOPY THAT EXCEEDS 300,000
SQUARE FEET FOR INDOOR CANOPIES OR ITS EQUIVALENT, AS CALCULATED BY THE
~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION.

(D) (1) (I) THIS PARAGRAPH APPLIES TO ALL LICENSED GROWERS.

(II) A LICENSED GROWER SHALL ACCURATELY CALCULATE AND
REPORT ANNUALLY TO THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION ITS FLOWERING CANNABIS
PLANT CANOPY AREA.

(III) THE CANOPY AREA IS MEASURED USING THE OUTSIDE
~~BOUNDARIES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~AREA~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~INCLUDES~~ ~~FLOWERING~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~PLANTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ALL~~

– 50 –
END OF PAGE 50

START OF PAGE 51
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SPACE~~ ~~WITHIN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BOUNDARIES~~ IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE DEFINITION OF
“CANOPY” ESTABLISHED UNDER § 36–101 OF THIS TITLE.

(IV) FOR THE PURPOSE OF MEASURING CANOPY, 1 SQUARE
FOOT OF INDOOR CANOPY IS EQUAL TO 4 SQUARE FEET OF OUTDOOR CANOPY.

(V) THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF SPACE FOR CANNABIS
PRODUCTION MAY NOT EXCEED THE CANOPY AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(VI) IF THE AMOUNT OF SQUARE FEET OF PRODUCTION FOR A
LICENSED GROWER EXCEEDS THE CANOPY AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION AND
§ 36–401 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE COMMISSION MAY:

1. REDUCE THE CANOPY OF THE LICENSED GROWER BY
THE SAME PERCENTAGE AS IT EXCEEDS THE AUTHORIZED CANOPY; AND

2. SEIZE, DESTROY, CONFISCATE, OR PLACE AN
ADMINISTRATIVE HOLD ON ANY FLOWERING CANNABIS PLANTS PRODUCED IN
EXCESS OF THE CANOPY.

(VII) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ANNUALLY REPORT TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE AMOUNT OF CANOPY AREA REPORTED TO THE ADMINISTRATION BY
LICENSED GROWERS UNDER ITEM (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF CANOPY FOR AN OPERATIONAL
BUSINESS THAT HOLDS A LICENSE ISSUED BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022, SHALL BE
CALCULATED BASED ON THE MAXIMUM CANOPY OF THE LICENSEE AS
SELF–REPORTED BY THE LICENSEE AND RECORDED BY THE DIVISION NATALIE M.
LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2022.

(E) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
SHALL ADOPT MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LICENSED GROWERS TO PROTECT THE
RIGHTS OF THE GROWERS AND EMPLOYEES CONCERNING GRIEVANCES, LABOR
DISPUTES, WAGES, RATES OF PAY, HOURS, OR OTHER TERMS OR CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT.

(2) THE STANDARDS SHALL, AT A MINIMUM, PROTECT THE STATE’S
INTERESTS BY PROHIBITING A LABOR ORGANIZATION FROM ENGAGING IN
PICKETING, WORK STOPPAGES, BOYCOTTS, OR ANY OTHER ECONOMIC
INTERFERENCE WITH THE OPERATION OF THE LICENSED GROWER.

(3) AS A CONDITION OF LICENSURE, THE LICENSED GROWER SHALL:

– 51 –
END OF PAGE 51

START OF PAGE 52
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) COMPLY WITH THE STANDARDS ADOPTED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(II) NEGOTIATE IN GOOD FAITH WITH EMPLOYEES AND ANY
LEGITIMATE LABOR ORGANIZATION RECOGNIZED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

36–403.

(A) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A BUSINESS THAT HOLDS A
CANNABIS LICENSE AND WAS PHYSICALLY AND ACTIVELY ENGAGED IN THE
CULTIVATION OR PROCESSING OF MEDICAL CANNABIS BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022.

(2) EACH SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION, EACH
GROWER OR PROCESSOR SHALL PAY THE FOLLOWING ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE
BASED ON THE TOTAL GROSS REVENUE OF THE GROWER OR PROCESSOR IN 2022:

(I) $100,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS LESS THAN
~~$1,000,000;~~

(II) $500,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS AT LEAST
$1,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $5,000,000;

(III) $1,000,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
$5,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $10,000,000;

(IV) $1,500,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
$10,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $15,000,000;

(V) $2,000,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
$15,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $20,000,000; OR

(VI) $2,500,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
~~$20,000,000.~~

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION AND EXCEPT
AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH:

1. EACH GROWER AND PROCESSOR SHALL PAY A
ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE OF 10% OF THE TOTAL GROSS REVENUE OF THE
GROWER OR PROCESSOR IN 2022, BUT NOT MORE THAN $2,000,000; AND

– 52 –
END OF PAGE 52

START OF PAGE 53
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

2. EACH DISPENSARY SHALL PAY A ONE–TIME
CONVERSION FEE OF 8% OF THE TOTAL GROSS REVENUE OF THE DISPENSARY IN
2022, BUT NOT MORE THAN $2,000,000.

(II) THE AMOUNT OF THE CONVERSION FEES IN SUBPARAGRAPH
(I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY NOT BE LESS THAN $100,000.

(3) IF A BUSINESS HOLDS A GROWER AND PROCESSOR LICENSE, THE
FEE SHALL BE BASED ON TOTAL GROSS REVENUE FROM BOTH LICENSE TYPES.

(B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A BUSINESS THAT HOLDS A
~~CANNABIS~~ ~~LICENSE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~PHYSICALLY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ACTIVELY~~ ~~ENGAGED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
DISPENSING OF MEDICAL CANNABIS BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022.

(2) EACH SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION, EACH
DISPENSARY SHALL PAY THE FOLLOWING ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE BASED ON
THE GROSS REVENUE OF THE DISPENSARY IN 2022:

(I) $100,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS LESS THAN
~~$1,000,000;~~

(II) $250,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS AT LEAST
$1,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $5,000,000;

(III) $500,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
$5,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $10,000,000;

(IV) $1,000,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
$10,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $15,000,000;

(V) $1,500,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
$15,000,000, BUT NOT MORE THAN $20,000,000; OR

(VI) $2,000,000 IF THE GROSS REVENUE WAS MORE THAN
~~$20,000,000.~~

(C) (B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A BUSINESS THAT:

(I) HELD A STAGE ONE PREAPPROVAL FOR A LICENSE BEFORE
OCTOBER 1, 2022; AND

(II) WAS NOT OPERATIONAL BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022.

– 53 –
END OF PAGE 53

START OF PAGE 54
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (F) (E) OF THIS SECTION, A GROWER
OR PROCESSOR SHALL PAY A ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE OF $50,000.

(3) A SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (F) (E) OF THIS SECTION, A
DISPENSARY SHALL PAY A ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEE OF $25,000.

(D) (C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO AN APPLICANT
APPLYING FOR A CANNABIS LICENSE UNDER § 36–404 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) AN APPLICANT FOR A STANDARD LICENSE, AN INCUBATOR SPACE
LICENSE, OR AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSE SHALL PAY AN APPLICATION FEE
OF $5,000.

(3) AN APPLICANT FOR A MICRO LICENSE SHALL PAY AN
APPLICATION FEE OF $1,000.

(E) (D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DIVISION PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE ADMINISTRATION
SHALL ESTABLISH LICENSING AND RENEWAL FEES FOR ALL CANNABIS LICENSES.

(2) THE RENEWAL FEES ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT EXCEED 10% OF THE CANNABIS LICENSEE’S ANNUAL
GROSS REVENUE.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE LICENSING AND RENEWAL FEES ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION FOR STANDARD CANNABIS LICENSEES MAY NOT EXCEED:

(I) FOR INITIAL LICENSE FEES, $50,000; AND

(II) FOR RENEWAL LICENSE FEES, THE LESSER OF 10% OF THE
STANDARD CANNABIS LICENSEE’S ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE OR $50,000.

(3) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL REDUCE LICENSING AND RENEWAL
FEES BY AT LEAST 50% FOR SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSES, MICRO LICENSES, INCUBATOR
SPACE LICENSES, AND ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSES.

(F) (E) (1) THE ONE–TIME CONVERSION FEES UNDER THIS SECTION:

(I) MAY BE PAID IN SEPARATE INSTALLMENTS; AND

(II) SHALL BE PAID IN FULL ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025.

– 54 –
END OF PAGE 54

START OF PAGE 55
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) THE AMOUNT OF ANY LICENSING OR RENEWAL FEE PAID BY A
BUSINESS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023 TO THE NATALIE M. LAPRADE MEDICAL
CANNABIS COMMISSION SHALL BE CREDITED AGAINST THE ONE–TIME CONVERSION
FEE ASSESSED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(G) (F) ALL FEES COLLECTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE PAID TO
THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

36–404.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2024, THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION SHALL BEGIN ISSUING FIRST ROUND LICENSES IN ACCORDANCE
WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) ON OR AFTER MAY 1, 2024, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
SHALL BEGIN ISSUING SECOND ROUND LICENSES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTIONS (E) OR (F) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY ISSUE LICENSES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION.

(B) (1) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

(I) CONDUCT EXTENSIVE OUTREACH TO SMALL, MINORITY,
AND WOMEN BUSINESS OWNERS AND ENTREPRENEURS WHO MAY HAVE AN INTEREST
IN APPLYING FOR A CANNABIS LICENSE BEFORE ACCEPTING AND PROCESSING
CANNABIS LICENSE APPLICATIONS;

(II) CONNECT POTENTIAL SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANTS WITH
THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL EQUITY;

(III) ACCEPT AND PROCESS APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:

1. IN RESPONSE TO A REQUEST FOR APPLICATIONS
ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION;

2. FOR A PERIOD OF 30 CALENDAR DAYS; AND

3. BEGINNING ON A DATE THAT IS AT LEAST 60
CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
ISSUED THE REQUEST FOR APPLICATIONS;

– 55 –
END OF PAGE 55

START OF PAGE 56
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) AWARD CANNABIS LICENSES IN AT LEAST TWO SEPARATE
ROUNDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION; AND

(V) RESERVE A REASONABLE NUMBER OF LICENSES TO ALLOW
MICRO LICENSES TO TRANSITION TO STANDARD LICENSES, AS DETERMINED IN
REGULATIONS BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY SUSPEND, FINE, RESTRICT,
OR REVOKE A CANNABIS LICENSE IF IT IS DETERMINED THAT A CANNABIS LICENSEE
HAS NOT COMPLIED WITH STATEMENTS IN THE APPLICATION, INCLUDING
STATEMENTS ABOUT STANDARDS OF OPERATION OR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
RELATED TO DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION.

(3) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT:

(I) ACCEPT MORE THAN ONE APPLICATION PER LICENSE TYPE
FROM AN APPLICANT IN ANY ROUND;

(II) ACCEPT MORE THAN TWO APPLICATIONS FROM AN
APPLICANT IN ANY ROUND;

(III) REQUIRE THAT AN APPLICANT POSSESS OR OWN A
PROPERTY OR FACILITY TO OPERATE A CANNABIS BUSINESS AT THE TIME OF
APPLICATION; OR

(IV) REGARDLESS OF THE NUMBER OF LICENSE AWARDS
AUTHORIZED IN EACH ROUND, AWARD MORE LICENSES THAN THE TOTAL NUMBER
OF LICENSES AUTHORIZED UNDER § 36–401(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(V) CONDUCT A MARKET DEMAND STUDY BEFORE THE FIRST
ROUND LICENSES ARE ISSUED.

(4) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS
CONCERNING THE EQUITY AND FAIRNESS OF THE POOL OF APPLICANTS
THROUGHOUT THE APPLICATION PROCESS.

(C) TO BE LICENSED, AN APPLICANT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION:

(1) AN APPLICATION FEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–403 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

– 56 –
END OF PAGE 56

START OF PAGE 57
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) AN APPLICATION DEVELOPED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
UNDER THIS TITLE.

(D) (1) FOR THE FIRST ROUND, SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF
THIS SUBSECTION, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ENTER EACH SOCIAL
EQUITY APPLICANT THAT MEETS THE MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS ESTABLISHED BY
THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION INTO A LOTTERY AND ISSUE TO SOCIAL EQUITY
APPLICANTS NOT MORE THAN:

(I) FOR STANDARD LICENSES:

1. 20 GROWER LICENSES;

2. 40 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

3. 80 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(II) FOR MICRO LICENSES:

1. 30 GROWER LICENSES;

2. 30 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

3. 75 10 DISPENSARY LICENSES; AND

(III) 10 INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSES.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER
AN APPLICATION MEETS THE MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE LOTTERY ON A
PASS–FAIL BASIS, AS DETERMINED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, AFTER
EVALUATING:

(I) A DETAILED OPERATIONAL PLAN FOR THE SAFE, SECURE,
AND EFFECTIVE CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURE, OR DISPENSING OF CANNABIS;

(II) A BUSINESS PLAN DEMONSTRATING A LIKELIHOOD OF
SUCCESS AND SUFFICIENT BUSINESS ABILITY AND EXPERIENCE ON THE PART OF
THE APPLICANT, AND PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATE EMPLOYEE WORKING
CONDITIONS; AND

(III) A DETAILED DIVERSITY PLAN.

(3) (I) IF AN APPLICANT SEEKING SOCIAL EQUITY STATUS IS FROM
OUT–OF–STATE, THE APPLICANT MUST SUBMIT WITH THE APPLICATION EVIDENCE

– 57 –
END OF PAGE 57

START OF PAGE 58
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THAT THE APPLICANT MEETS THE CRITERIA FOR A SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANT
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS TITLE BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATION MAY CONSIDER
THE APPLICATION.

(II) FIRST ROUND APPLICATION SUBMISSIONS FOR ALL
LICENSE TYPES ARE LIMITED TO SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANTS.

(4) (I) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2024, THE ADMINISTRATION
SHALL SUBMIT AN INTERIM REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE ABILITY OF MICRO
DISPENSARY LICENSEES TO SAFELY AND SECURELY DISPENSE CANNABIS.

(II) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2024, THE ADMINISTRATION
SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE ABILITY OF MICRO
DISPENSARY LICENSEES TO SAFELY AND SECURELY DISPENSE CANNABIS.

(E) FOR THE SECOND ROUND OF LICENSING, THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION SHALL ISSUE LICENSES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (F)
OR (G) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) (F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE CERTIFICATION AGENCY
DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS UNDER § 14–303(B) OF THE STATE
FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF SMALL,
MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS AFFAIRS, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, AND THE
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, DETERMINES THAT THE APPLICANTS
AWARDED A LICENSE UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION ARE NOT DIVERSE
~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~DISPARITY~~ ~~STUDY~~ ~~DETERMINES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THERE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~A~~ ~~COMPELLING~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~TO~~
~~IMPLEMENT~~ ~~REMEDIAL~~ ~~MEASURES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ASSIST~~ ~~MINORITIES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~WOMEN~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
~~CANNABIS~~ ~~INDUSTRY~~ A DISPARITY STUDY DEMONSTRATES A STRONG BASIS IN
EVIDENCE OF BUSINESS DISCRIMINATION AGAINST FIRMS OWNED BY MINORITIES
AND WOMEN IN THE MARYLAND CANNABIS MARKET, THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION SHALL ENTER EACH APPLICANT THAT MEETS THE MINIMUM
QUALIFICATIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE DIVISION INTO A LOTTERY AND ISSUE TO
THE APPLICANTS A SECOND ROUND OF LICENSES, APPLYING MINIMUM LICENSING
QUALIFICATIONS AND EMPLOYING REMEDIAL MEASURES CONSISTENT WITH
CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS, FOR NOT MORE THAN:

(I) FOR STANDARD LICENSES:

1. 25 GROWER LICENSES;

– 58 –
END OF PAGE 58

START OF PAGE 59
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

2. 25 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

3. 120 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(II) FOR MICRO LICENSES:

1. 70 GROWER LICENSES; AND

2. 70 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

3. 125 190 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(III) 10 INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSES; AND

(IV) 15 ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSES.

(2) THE DIVISION SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER AN APPLICATION
MEETS THE MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR A LOTTERY BASED ON A PASS–FAIL
BASIS, AS DETERMINED BY THE DIVISION, AFTER EVALUATING:

(I) A DETAILED OPERATIONAL PLAN FOR THE SAFE, SECURE,
AND EFFECTIVE CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURE, OR DISPENSING OF CANNABIS;

(II) A BUSINESS PLAN DEMONSTRATING A LIKELIHOOD OF
~~SUCCESS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SUFFICIENT~~ ~~BUSINESS~~ ~~ABILITY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~EXPERIENCE~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PART~~ ~~OF~~
THE APPLICANT, AND PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATE EMPLOYEE WORKING
~~CONDITIONS;~~

(III) A DETAILED DIVERSITY PLAN; AND

(IV) REMEDIAL MEASURES ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH A DISPARITY STUDY.

(2) IF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
CERTIFICATION AGENCY DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS UNDER §
14–303(B) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS AFFAIRS, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, AND THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, DETERMINES
THAT A LOTTERY SYSTEM EMPLOYING REMEDIAL MEASURES ESTABLISHED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH A DISPARITY STUDY CAN BE CONDUCTED CONSISTENT WITH
CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL AWARD
LICENSES UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION THROUGH A LOTTERY
PROCESS THAT EMPLOYS REMEDIAL MEASURES.

– 59 –
END OF PAGE 59

START OF PAGE 60
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) (G) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, IF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
CERTIFICATION AGENCY DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS UNDER §
14–303(B) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS AFFAIRS, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, AND THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, DETERMINES
THAT THE APPLICANTS AWARDED A LICENSE UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS
~~SECTION~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~DIVERSE~~ ~~REGARDLESS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESULTS~~ ~~OF~~ A DISPARITY STUDY DOES
NOT DEMONSTRATE A STRONG BASIS IN EVIDENCE OF BUSINESS DISCRIMINATION
AGAINST FIRMS OWNED BY MINORITIES AND WOMEN IN THE MARYLAND CANNABIS
MARKET, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ENTER EACH APPLICANT THAT
MEETS THE MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION INTO A LOTTERY AND ISSUE TO THE APPLICANTS NOT MORE
THAN:

(I) FOR STANDARD LICENSES:

1. 25 GROWER LICENSES;

2. 25 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

3. 120 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(II) FOR MICRO LICENSES:

1. 70 GROWER LICENSES; AND

2. 70 PROCESSOR LICENSES; AND

3. 125 190 DISPENSARY LICENSES;

(III) 10 INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSES; AND

(IV) 15 ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSES.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER
AN APPLICATION MEETS THE MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR A LOTTERY BASED ON
A PASS–FAIL BASIS, AS DETERMINED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, AFTER
EVALUATING:

(I) A DETAILED OPERATIONAL PLAN FOR THE SAFE, SECURE,
AND EFFECTIVE CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURE, OR DISPENSING OF CANNABIS;

– 60 –
END OF PAGE 60

START OF PAGE 61
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(II) A BUSINESS PLAN DEMONSTRATING A LIKELIHOOD OF
SUCCESS AND SUFFICIENT BUSINESS ABILITY AND EXPERIENCE ON THE PART OF
THE APPLICANT, AND PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATE EMPLOYEE WORKING
CONDITIONS;

(III) A DETAILED DIVERSITY PLAN; AND

(IV) FOR ALL LICENSE TYPES EXCEPT MICRO LICENSES,
WHETHER OR NOT THE APPLICANT QUALIFIES AS A SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANT.

(3) SECOND ROUND APPLICATION APPLICATION SUBMISSIONS FOR
MICRO LICENSES UNDER THIS SUBSECTION ARE LIMITED TO SOCIAL EQUITY
APPLICANTS.

(G) (H) (1) FOR CANNABIS LICENSE AWARDS SUBSEQUENT TO THE
ROUND SPECIFIED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) SUBSECTION (F) OR (G) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SECTION, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL AWARD LICENSES IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL AWARD LICENSES AS
NEEDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH A MARKET DEMAND STUDY.

~~(2)~~ (3) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION MAY:

(I) SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER AN APPLICATION MEETS THE
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR A LOTTERY BASED ON FACTORS THAT IT DEVELOPS;
~~AND~~

(II) MAY LIMIT SOME OR ALL OF THE LICENSES ISSUED UNDER
THIS PARAGRAPH TO SOCIAL EQUITY APPLICANTS ~~OR~~ ~~MINORITY~~ ~~BUSINESS~~
APPLICANTS, IF DOING SO IS NEEDED TO ENSURE DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION IN THE
INDUSTRY, AS WARRANTED BY THE DISPARITY STUDY; AND

(II) EMPLOY REMEDIAL MEASURES, CONSISTENT WITH
CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS, IF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE CERTIFICATION AGENCY DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD OF
PUBLIC WORKS UNDER § 14–303(B) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE, THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS
AFFAIRS, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, AND THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, DETERMINES THAT A DISPARITY STUDY DEMONSTRATES A STRONG BASIS
IN EVIDENCE OF BUSINESS DISCRIMINATION AGAINST FIRMS OWNED BY MINORITIES
AND WOMEN IN THE MARYLAND CANNABIS MARKET.

– 61 –
END OF PAGE 61

START OF PAGE 62
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) (1) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND AUTHORIZED BY THE U.S.
CONSTITUTION, A CANNABIS LICENSEE SHALL COMPLY WITH THE STATE’S
MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM.

(2) THE ADMINISTRATION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
CERTIFICATION AGENCY DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS UNDER §
14–303(B) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, THE GOVERNOR’S
OFFICE OF SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS AFFAIRS, THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, AND THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, SHALL REVIEW THE
DISPARITY STUDY REQUIRED BY CHAPTER 26 OF THE ACTS OF 2022 TO EVALUATE
WHETHER APPLICATION OF THE STATE’S MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
PROGRAM TO CANNABIS LICENSES WOULD COMPLY WITH THE CITY OF RICHMOND V.
J.A. CROSON CO., 488 U.S. 469, AND ANY SUBSEQUENT FEDERAL OR
CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS.

(3) ON OR BEFORE 6 MONTHS AFTER THE ISSUANCE OF A CANNABIS
LICENSE UNDER § 36–401 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE,
THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS AFFAIRS,
IN CONSULTATION WITH THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE OFFICE
OF SOCIAL EQUITY WITHIN THE ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND CANNABIS COMMISSION
AND THE CANNABIS LICENSEE, SHALL ESTABLISH A CLEAR PLAN FOR SETTING
REASONABLE AND APPROPRIATE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION
GOALS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES
RELATED TO CANNABIS, INCLUDING THE CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURING, AND
DISPENSING OF CANNABIS.

(4) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE GOALS AND PROCEDURES
SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE BASED ON THE
REQUIREMENTS OF TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE AND THE REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING THAT SUBTITLE.

36–405.

(A) A LOCAL JURISDICTION POLITICAL SUBDIVISION MAY:

(1) ESTABLISH REASONABLE ZONING REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS
BUSINESSES; AND

(2) DECIDE HOW TO DISTRIBUTE ITS ALLOCATION OF REVENUE
UNDER § 2–1302.2 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(B) A LOCAL JURISDICTION POLITICAL SUBDIVISION MAY NOT:

– 62 –
END OF PAGE 62

START OF PAGE 63
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(1) IMPOSE A TAX ON CANNABIS;

(2) (1) ESTABLISH ZONING OR OTHER REQUIREMENTS THAT
UNDULY BURDEN A CANNABIS LICENSEE;

(3) (2) IMPOSE LICENSING, OPERATING, OR OTHER FEES OR
REQUIREMENTS ON A CANNABIS LICENSEE THAT ARE DISPROPORTIONATELY
GREATER OR MORE BURDENSOME THAN THOSE IMPOSED ON OTHER BUSINESSES
WITH A SIMILAR IMPACT ON THE AREA WHERE THE CANNABIS LICENSEE IS
LOCATED;

(3) PROHIBIT TRANSPORTATION THROUGH OR DELIVERIES WITHIN
THE ~~LOCAL~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ POLITICAL SUBDIVISION BY CANNABIS ~~ESTABLISHMENTS~~
BUSINESSES LOCATED IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS;

(4) PREVENT AN ENTITY WHOSE LICENSE MAY BE CONVERTED UNDER
§ 36–401(B)(1)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND THAT IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH ALL
RELEVANT MEDICAL CANNABIS REGULATIONS FROM BEING GRANTED THE LICENSE
CONVERSION; OR

(5) NEGOTIATE OR ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT WITH A CANNABIS
~~ESTABLISHMENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~ESTABLISHMENT~~ ~~APPLICANT~~ LICENSEE OR AN
APPLICANT FOR A CANNABIS LICENSE REQUIRING THAT THE CANNABIS
ESTABLISHMENT LICENSEE OR APPLICANT PROVIDE MONEY, DONATIONS,
IN–KIND CONTRIBUTIONS, SERVICES, OR ANYTHING OF VALUE TO THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.

(C) THE USE OF A FACILITY BY A CANNABIS LICENSEE IS NOT REQUIRED TO
BE SUBMITTED TO, OR APPROVED BY, A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL ZONING BOARD,
AUTHORITY, OR UNIT IF IT THE FACILITY:

(1) WAS PROPERLY ZONED AND OPERATING ON OR BEFORE JANUARY
1, 2023; OR

(2) IS USED BY A GROWER, PROCESSOR, OR DISPENSARY THAT:

(I) HELD A STAGE ONE PREAPPROVAL FOR A LICENSE BEFORE
OCTOBER 1, 2022; AND

(II) WAS NOT OPERATIONAL BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2022.

(D) A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICT MAY NOT
IMPOSE A TAX ON CANNABIS.

– 63 –
END OF PAGE 63

START OF PAGE 64
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

36–406.

(A) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY ISSUE INCUBATOR SPACE
LICENSES AUTHORIZING ~~AN~~ A NONPROFIT ENTITY TO OPERATE A LICENSED
PREMISES IN WHICH MICRO LICENSEES MAY OPERATE A CANNABIS BUSINESS.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE MARYLAND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION, SHALL ACQUIRE AND CONSTRUCT OR REFURBISH AT LEAST ONE
FACILITY TO OPERATE AN INCUBATOR SPACE.

(C) THE MARYLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION MAY ENTER
~~INTO~~ ~~A~~ ~~MEMORANDUM~~ ~~OF~~ ~~UNDERSTANDING~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~TO~~
OPERATE A FACILITY UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IF THE DIVISION
AND THE CORPORATION PROVIDE OVERSIGHT OF THE FACILITY.

(C) AFTER THE COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION OR REFURBISHMENT
OF A FACILITY ACQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, OWNERSHIP OF
THE FACILITIES SHALL BE TRANSFERRED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL
SERVICES.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SHALL CONTRACT WITH A
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION TO OPERATE A FACILITY UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
THIS SECTION.

(D) (E) AN INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSEE MAY PURCHASE EQUIPMENT TO
BE USED BY OTHER INCUBATOR SPACE LICENSEES IN THE SAME INCUBATOR SPACE.

(D) (E) (F) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO
ESTABLISH A MARYLAND INCUBATOR PROGRAM BASED ON THE BEST PRACTICES IN
OTHER STATES.

36–407.

(A) (1) A PERSON SHALL OBTAIN AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSE
FROM THE ADMINISTRATION BEFORE OPERATING A PREMISES WHERE CANNABIS
MAY BE CONSUMED.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY ISSUE ON–SITE
CONSUMPTION LICENSES AUTHORIZING AN ENTITY TO OPERATE A LICENSED
PREMISES IN WHICH CANNABIS MAY BE CONSUMED, BUT NOT SMOKED INDOORS, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE AND ANY REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS
TITLE.

– 64 –
END OF PAGE 64

START OF PAGE 65
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) (3) AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT MAY OPERATE
ONLY IF THE COUNTY AND, IF APPLICABLE, THE MUNICIPALITY, WHERE THE
BUSINESS IS LOCATED HAVE ISSUED A PERMIT OR LICENSE THAT EXPRESSLY
ALLOWS THE OPERATION OF THE ON–SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT.

(B) SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS IN § 36–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A
COUNTY AND, IF APPLICABLE, A MUNICIPALITY MAY:

(1) PROHIBIT THE OPERATION OF ON–SITE CONSUMPTION
ESTABLISHMENTS;

(2) PROHIBIT OR RESTRICT THE SMOKING OR VAPING OF CANNABIS
AT ON–SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENTS; OR

(3) ADOPT ZONING AND PLANNING REQUIREMENTS FOR ON–SITE
CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENTS.

(C) (1) AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSE AUTHORIZES AN ENTITY TO
DISTRIBUTE CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS FOR ON–SITE CONSUMPTION.

(2) AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION LICENSE DOES NOT AUTHORIZE THE
HOLDER OF THE LICENSE TO:

(I) CULTIVATE CANNABIS;

(II) PROCESS CANNABIS OR CANNABIS–INFUSED PRODUCTS; OR

(III) ADD CANNABIS TO FOOD PREPARED OR SERVED ON THE
PREMISES.

(D) A FOOD SERVICE FACILITY, AS DEFINED IN § 21–301 OF THE HEALTH –
GENERAL ARTICLE, MAY APPLY FOR A LICENSE TO OPERATE AN ON–SITE
CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT.

~~(E)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DIVISION~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(D) A BUSINESS THAT HAS AVERAGE DAILY RECEIPTS FROM THE SALE OF
BAKERY GOODS THAT ARE AT LEAST 50% OF THE AVERAGE DAILY RECEIPTS OF THE
BUSINESS MAY APPLY FOR A LICENSE TO OPERATE AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION
ESTABLISHMENT.

(E) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

– 65 –
END OF PAGE 65

START OF PAGE 66
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) MAINTAIN A LIST OF ALL ON–SITE CONSUMPTION
ESTABLISHMENTS IN THE STATE; AND

(2) MAKE THE LIST AVAILABLE ON ITS WEBSITE.

(F) AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT MAY NOT:

(1) ALLOW ON–DUTY EMPLOYEES OF THE BUSINESS TO CONSUME
CANNABIS ON THE LICENSED PREMISES;

(2) DISTRIBUTE OR ALLOW THE DISTRIBUTION OF FREE SAMPLES OF
CANNABIS ON THE LICENSED PREMISES;

(3) ALLOW THE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL ON THE LICENSED
PREMISES;

(4) ALLOW THE SMOKING OR VAPING OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO
PRODUCTS ON THE LICENSED PREMISES;

(5) ALLOW AN ACTIVITY ON THE LICENSED PREMISES THAT WOULD
REQUIRE AN ADDITIONAL LICENSE UNDER THIS TITLE, INCLUDING GROWING,
PROCESSING, OR DISPENSING;

(6) ALLOW THE INDOOR SMOKING OF CANNABIS OR CANNABIS
PRODUCTS ON THE LICENSED PREMISES;

(7) ALLOW THE USE OR CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS BY A PATRON
WHO DISPLAYS ANY VISIBLE SIGNS OF INTOXICATION; OR

(7) (8) ADMIT ONTO THE LICENSED PREMISES AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
IS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS.

(G) AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT SHALL:

(1) REQUIRE ALL EMPLOYEES TO SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE AN
ANNUAL RESPONSIBLE VENDOR TRAINING PROGRAM AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
TITLE; AND

(2) ENSURE THAT THE DISPLAY AND CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS OR
CANNABIS PRODUCTS ARE NOT VISIBLE FROM OUTSIDE OF THE LICENSED
PREMISES.

– 66 –
END OF PAGE 66

START OF PAGE 67
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(H) (1) AN ON–SITE CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT SHALL EDUCATE
CONSUMERS BY PROVIDING INFORMATIONAL MATERIALS REGARDING THE SAFE
CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS.

(2) THE EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MUST BE BASED ON THE REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY
THE CANNABIS PUBLIC HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL ESTABLISHED UNDER §
13–4502 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(I) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY FROM
ADOPTING ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR EDUCATION ON THE SAFE
CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS ON THE PREMISES OF A LICENSED ON–SITE
CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT.

(J) A PERSON MAY HAVE AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN OR CONTROL OF,
INCLUDING THE POWER TO MANAGE AND OPERATE, TWO ON–SITE CONSUMPTION
ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSED UNDER THIS SECTION.

36–408.

(A) (1) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL REGISTER AT LEAST ONE
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY TO TEST CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS
THAT ARE TO BE SOLD IN THE STATE.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL HOLD MEDICAL AND
ADULT–USE CANNABIS TESTING TO THE SAME STANDARDS.

(B) TO BE REGISTERED AS AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY, A
LABORATORY MUST:

(1) MEET THE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY THE
~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION;

(2) PAY AN APPLICATION FEE DETERMINED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(3) MEET THE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
ACCREDITATION, INSPECTION, AND TESTING ESTABLISHED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

(C) (1) AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY LICENSE IS VALID FOR
2 YEARS ON INITIAL LICENSURE.

– 67 –
END OF PAGE 67

START OF PAGE 68
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY LICENSE IS VALID FOR
2 YEARS ON RENEWAL.

(D) A REGISTERED INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY IS AUTHORIZED
TO TEST AND TRANSPORT CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS ON BEHALF OF
CANNABIS LICENSEES.

(E) (1) A LABORATORY AGENT OR AN EMPLOYEE OF AN INDEPENDENT
TESTING LABORATORY MAY NOT RECEIVE DIRECT OR INDIRECT FINANCIAL
COMPENSATION, OTHER THAN REASONABLE CONTRACTUAL FEES TO CONDUCT
TESTING, FROM ANY ENTITY FOR WHICH IT IS CONDUCTING TESTING UNDER THIS
TITLE.

(2) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO POSSESSES AN INTEREST IN OR IS A
LABORATORY AGENT EMPLOYED BY AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY, OR
AN IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER OF THE INDIVIDUAL, MAY NOT POSSESS AN
INTEREST IN OR BE EMPLOYED BY A CANNABIS LICENSEE.

(F) CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS MAY NOT BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE
MARKETED UNDER THIS TITLE IF THE CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCT HAS NOT
BEEN TESTED BY AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY AND DETERMINED TO
MEET THE DIVISION’S ADMINISTRATION’S TESTING PROTOCOLS.

(G) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT
ESTABLISH:

(1) THE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS TO BE MET BY AN
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY TO OBTAIN A REGISTRATION;

(2) THE STANDARDS OF CARE TO BE FOLLOWED BY AN INDEPENDENT
TESTING LABORATORY; AND

(3) THE BASIS AND PROCESSES FOR DENIAL, REVOCATION, AND
SUSPENSION OF A REGISTRATION OF AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY.

(H) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY INSPECT AN INDEPENDENT
TESTING LABORATORY REGISTERED UNDER THIS SECTION TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
WITH THIS TITLE AND ANY REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE.

(I) (1) ANY REGISTRATION TO OPERATE AN INDEPENDENT TESTING
LABORATORY ISSUED BY THE NATALIE M. LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS
COMMISSION ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, SHALL BE VALID UNDER THIS TITLE AND

– 68 –
END OF PAGE 68

START OF PAGE 69
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

SHALL AUTHORIZE AN INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY TO PERFORM TESTING
ON MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL CONVERT ALL
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY REGISTRATIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SUBSECTION.

36–409.

(A) THE FOLLOWING BUSINESSES SHALL REGISTER WITH THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION IN ORDER TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO A CANNABIS LICENSEE:

(1) A TRANSPORTER;

(2) A SECURITY GUARD AGENCY;

(3) A WASTE DISPOSAL COMPANY; AND

(4) ANY OTHER TYPE OF CANNABIS BUSINESS THAT IS AUTHORIZED
BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE PLANT OR PRODUCT–TOUCHING
SERVICES TO CANNABIS LICENSEES.

(B) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT
ESTABLISH:

(1) THE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS TO BE MET BY AN ENTITY
TO OBTAIN A REGISTRATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) THE BASIS AND PROCESSES FOR APPROVAL, DENIAL,
REVOCATION, AND SUSPENSION OF THE CANNABIS REGISTRATION.

(C) A REGISTRATION TO OPERATE A TRANSPORTER, SECURITY GUARD
AGENCY, OR WASTE DISPOSAL COMPANY ISSUED BY THE DIVISION NATALIE M.
LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, SHALL
BE VALID UNDER THIS TITLE AND AUTHORIZE A TRANSPORTER, SECURITY GUARD
AGENCY, OR WASTE DISPOSAL COMPANY TO HANDLE MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE
CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

36–410.

(A) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2023, A CANNABIS LICENSEE THAT IS OPERATING A
DISPENSARY SHALL:

– 69 –
END OF PAGE 69

START OF PAGE 70
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ENSURE THAT IT HAS ADEQUATE SUPPLY FOR QUALIFYING
PATIENTS AND CAREGIVERS; AND

(2) SET ASIDE OPERATING HOURS OR DEDICATED SERVICE LINES TO
SERVE ONLY QUALIFYING PATIENTS AND CAREGIVERS; AND

(3) ENSURE THAT SHELF SPACE AT LEAST 25% OF CANNABIS AND
CANNABIS PRODUCTS IN THE DISPENSARY ~~IS~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~AND~~
~~CANNABIS~~ ~~PRODUCTS~~ ARE FROM SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEES AND GROWERS AND
PROCESSORS THAT DO NOT SHARE COMMON OWNERSHIP WITH THE DISPENSARY.

(B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A LICENSED
DISPENSARY MAY NOT LOCATE WITHIN:

(1) 500 FEET OF:

(I) A PRE–EXISTING PRIMARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL IN THE
STATE, OR A LICENSED CHILD CARE CENTER OR REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE
HOME UNDER TITLE 9.5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE; OR

(II) A PLAYGROUND, RECREATION CENTER, LIBRARY, OR PUBLIC
PARK; OR

(2) 1,000 FEET OF ANOTHER DISPENSARY UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION MAY ADOPT AN ORDINANCE REDUCING THE
DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) THE DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION DO NOT APPLY TO A DISPENSARY LICENSE THAT WAS:

(1) CONVERTED UNDER § 36–401(B)(1)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) PROPERLY ZONED AND OPERATING BEFORE JULY 1, 2023.

SUBTITLE 5. AGENT, OWNER, AND LICENSE TRANSFER REQUIREMENTS.

36–501.

(A) EACH A CANNABIS AGENT SHALL BE REGISTERED WITH THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION BEFORE THE AGENT MAY VOLUNTEER OR WORK FOR A CANNABIS
LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT.

(B) A CANNABIS AGENT REGISTRATION IS VALID FOR 2 YEARS.

– 70 –
END OF PAGE 70

START OF PAGE 71
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(C) TO BE ELIGIBLE TO REGISTER AS A CANNABIS AGENT WITH THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION, A CANNABIS AGENT AN INDIVIDUAL MUST:

(1) BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD; AND

(2) IF THE RECORDS ARE LEGALLY ACCESSIBLE, OBTAIN A STATE AND
NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–505 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT REGISTER AS A CANNABIS
AGENT AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) DOES NOT MEET THE CRITERIA ESTABLISHED UNDER
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION; OR

(2) HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF OR PLEADED NOLO CONTENDERE TO A
CRIME INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE, WHETHER OR NOT ANY APPEAL OR OTHER
PROCEEDING IS PENDING TO HAVE THE CONVICTION OR PLEA SET ASIDE.

(E) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT DENY A CANNABIS AGENT
REGISTRATION BASED ON ANY CANNABIS–RELATED OFFENSES OCCURRING BEFORE
~~JANUARY~~ JULY 1, 2023.

(F) A CANNABIS LICENSEE SHALL REQUIRE EACH REGISTERED CANNABIS
AGENT TO COMPLETE AN ANNUAL RESPONSIBLE VENDOR TRAINING PROGRAM
AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS TITLE.

(G) A REGISTRATION OF A CANNABIS AGENT ISSUED BY THE NATALIE M.
LAPRADE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMMISSION ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, SHALL:

(1) BE VALID UNDER THIS TITLE; AND

(2) AUTHORIZE THE CANNABIS AGENT TO BE EMPLOYED BY OR
VOLUNTEER WITH A LICENSED CANNABIS BUSINESS.

36–502.

(A) AN INDIVIDUAL A PERSON WISHING TO HOLD AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST
OF 5% OR GREATER IN, OR CONTROL OF, A CANNABIS LICENSEE SHALL SUBMIT TO
THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION:

(1) AN APPLICATION THAT INCLUDES THE NAME, ADDRESS, AND DATE
OF BIRTH OF THE APPLICANT;

– 71 –
END OF PAGE 71

START OF PAGE 72
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A STATEMENT SIGNED BY THE APPLICANT ASSERTING THAT THE
APPLICANT HAS NOT PREVIOUSLY HAD A CANNABIS LICENSE OR CANNABIS
REGISTRATION SUSPENDED OR REVOKED;

(3) A STATE AND NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–505 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(4) ANY INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION TO COMPLETE AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE BACKGROUND OF
THE APPLICANT, INCLUDING FINANCIAL RECORDS AND OTHER INFORMATION
RELATING TO THE BUSINESS AFFAIRS OF THE APPLICANT; AND

(5) AN APPLICATION FEE IN AN AMOUNT TO BE DETERMINED BY THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY DENY AN APPLICATION IF:

(1) THE APPLICANT:

(I) FAILS TO SUBMIT THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION; OR

(II) HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF OR PLEADED NOLO CONTENDERE
TO A CRIME INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE, WHETHER OR NOT ANY APPEAL OR
OTHER PROCEEDING IS PENDING TO HAVE THE CONVICTION OR PLEA SET ASIDE; OR

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION FINDS A SUBSTANTIAL REASON
TO DENY THE REGISTRATION.

36–503.

(A) A CANNABIS LICENSE GRANTED UNDER THIS TITLE IS NOT
TRANSFERABLE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION.

(B) TO TRANSFER OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER
THIS TITLE, A LICENSEE:

(1) SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION:

(I) AN APPLICATION FEE IN AN AMOUNT TO BE DETERMINED BY
THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE; AND

– 72 –
END OF PAGE 72

START OF PAGE 73
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(II) AN APPLICATION DEVELOPED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(2) MUST MEET THE REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP
OR CONTROL ESTABLISHED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) (1) A CANNABIS LICENSEE, INCLUDING A CANNABIS LICENSEE WHOSE
LICENSE WAS CONVERTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 36–401 OF THIS TITLE, MAY NOT
TRANSFER OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF THE LICENSE FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 5
YEARS FOLLOWING LICENSURE.

(2) THE 5–YEAR PERIOD SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION DOES NOT INCLUDE THE TIME PERIOD THAT A BUSINESS IS
CONSIDERED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO BE IN A PREAPPROVED
LICENSURE STATUS.

(3) THE LIMITATIONS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION DO NOT APPLY TO
TRANSFERS AS A RESULT OF THE DISABILITY, INCAPACITY, OR DEATH OF THE
OWNER OF A CANNABIS LICENSE, THE BANKRUPTCY OR RECEIVERSHIP IN
ACCORDANCE WITH A LENDING AGREEMENT OF A CANNABIS LICENSEE, OR COURT
ORDER.

(4) THE LIMITATIONS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION DO NOT APPLY TO A
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP THAT IS THE SUBJECT OF A LEGALLY BINDING
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT RESULTING FROM LITIGATION COMMENCED ON OR
BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2023.

36–504.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “OWNER” INCLUDES ANY TYPE OF OWNER OR
BENEFICIARY OF A BUSINESS ENTITY, INCLUDING A PRINCIPAL OFFICER, A
DIRECTOR, A PRINCIPAL EMPLOYEE, A PARTNER, AN INVESTOR, A STOCKHOLDER,
OR A BENEFICIAL OWNER OF THE BUSINESS ENTITY AND, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY
OTHER PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE, A PERSON HAVING ANY OWNERSHIP
INTEREST REGARDLESS OF THE PERCENTAGE OF OWNERSHIP INTEREST.

(2) “OWNER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A STOCKHOLDER.

(B) THE PROVISIONS IN THIS SECTION ARE IN ADDITION TO THE CONFLICT
OF INTEREST PROVISIONS IN TITLE 5 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE.

– 73 –
END OF PAGE 73

START OF PAGE 74
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) (D) OF THIS SECTION, A
CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICER OR A SECRETARY OF A PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT OF THE
EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT MAY NOT:

(1) BE AN OWNER OR AN EMPLOYEE OF A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
HOLDS A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE; OR

(2) HAVE AN OFFICIAL RELATIONSHIP WITH A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
HOLDS A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) (D) A SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 5 OF THE GENERAL
PROVISIONS ARTICLE, A CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICER OR A SECRETARY OF A
PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
MAY REMAIN AN OWNER OR AN EMPLOYEE OF A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT HOLDS A
LICENSE UNDER THIS TITLE IF THE CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICER OR SECRETARY WAS
AN OWNER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE BUSINESS ENTITY BEFORE THE CONSTITUTIONAL
OFFICER’S ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT OR THE SECRETARY’S APPOINTMENT.

(D) (E) A MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY MAY NOT:

(1) BE AN OWNER OR AN EMPLOYEE OF A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
HOLDS A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE; OR

(2) HAVE AN OFFICIAL RELATIONSHIP WITH A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
HOLDS A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE.

(E) (F) A FORMER MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, FOR THE
1–YEAR PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE MEMBER LEAVES OFFICE, MAY NOT:

(1) BE AN OWNER OR AN EMPLOYEE OF A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
HOLDS A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE; OR

(2) HAVE AN OFFICIAL RELATIONSHIP WITH A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
HOLDS A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE.

(F) (G) AN EMPLOYEE OF THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT:

(1) HAVE A DIRECT OR INDIRECT FINANCIAL, OWNERSHIP, OR
MANAGEMENT INTEREST, INCLUDING OWNERSHIP OF ANY STOCKS, BONDS, OR
OTHER SIMILAR FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, IN ANY CANNABIS LICENSEE;

(2) HAVE AN OFFICIAL RELATIONSHIP WITH A PERSON WHO HOLDS A
LICENSE OR REGISTRATION UNDER THIS TITLE;

– 74 –
END OF PAGE 74

START OF PAGE 75
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(3) BE AN ELECTED OFFICIAL OF STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT;

(4) RECEIVE OR SHARE IN, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, THE RECEIPTS
OR PROCEEDS OF A CANNABIS LICENSEE; OR

(5) HAVE A BENEFICIAL INTEREST IN A CONTRACT FOR THE
MANUFACTURE OR SALE OF CANNABIS OR THE PROVISION OF INDEPENDENT
CONSULTING SERVICES IN CONNECTION WITH A CANNABIS LICENSE.

36–505.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “CENTRAL REPOSITORY” MEANS THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE INFORMATION SYSTEM CENTRAL REPOSITORY IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

(B) AS PART OF AN APPLICATION TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY FOR A
STATE AND NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK, AN APPLICANT SHALL
SUBMIT TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY:

(1) TWO COMPLETE SETS OF LEGIBLE FINGERPRINTS TAKEN ON
FORMS APPROVED BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AND THE
DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION;

(2) THE FEE AUTHORIZED UNDER § 10–221(B)(7) OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE FOR ACCESS TO STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS; AND

(3) THE PROCESSING FEE REQUIRED BY THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION FOR A NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

(C) IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 10–201 THROUGH 10–228 OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE, THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY SHALL FORWARD TO THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND TO THE APPLICANT THE APPLICANT’S CRIMINAL
HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION.

(D) IF AN APPLICANT HAS MADE TWO OR MORE UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPTS
AT SECURING LEGIBLE FINGERPRINTS, THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY
ACCEPT AN ALTERNATE METHOD OF A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK AS
PERMITTED BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AND THE DIRECTOR
OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

(E) INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY UNDER
THIS SECTION SHALL BE:

– 75 –
END OF PAGE 75

START OF PAGE 76
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) CONFIDENTIAL AND MAY NOT BE REDISSEMINATED; AND

(2) USED ONLY FOR THE PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION UNDER THIS
TITLE.

(F) THE SUBJECT OF A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK UNDER THIS
SECTION MAY CONTEST THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION
DISSEMINATED BY THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY, AS PROVIDED IN § 10–223 OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

SUBTITLE 6. MEDICAL CANNABIS COMPASSIONATE USE FUND AND PROGRAM.

36–601.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE MEDICAL CANNABIS
COMPASSIONATE USE FUND.

(B) THERE IS A MEDICAL CANNABIS COMPASSIONATE USE FUND.

~~(B)~~ (C) (1) THE ~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

(I) ADMINISTER THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND; AND

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
ESTABLISH FEES IN AN AMOUNT NECESSARY TO PROVIDE REVENUES FOR THE
PURPOSES OF THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND.

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT IMPOSE THE FEES
ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON A LICENSED
MEDICAL CANNABIS GROWER, PROCESSOR, OR DISPENSARY DURING THE 2–YEAR
~~PERIOD~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~ ~~FOLLOWING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ISSUANCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSE~~ BEFORE THE
GROWER, PROCESSOR, OR DISPENSARY IS AN OPERATIONAL CANNABIS LICENSEE
UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) (D) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND IS TO
PROVIDE ACCESS TO CANNABIS FOR INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED IN THE MARYLAND
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM OR IN THE VETERANS AFFAIRS MARYLAND
HEALTH CARE SYSTEM, INCLUDING ACCESS TO, AT A REDUCED COST:

(1) AN ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT’S MEDICAL HISTORY AND
CURRENT MEDICAL CONDITION; AND

(2) MEDICAL CANNABIS FROM A LICENSED DISPENSARY.

– 76 –
END OF PAGE 76

START OF PAGE 77
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(D) (E) (1) THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND IS A SPECIAL,
NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE COMPASSIONATE USE
FUND SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE
~~COMPASSIONATE~~ ~~USE~~ FUND.

(3) THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND SHALL BE INVESTED AND
REINVESTED IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE FUNDS, AND ANY INVESTMENT
EARNINGS SHALL BE RETAINED TO THE CREDIT OF THE COMPASSIONATE USE
~~FUND.~~

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) FEES ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1)(II) OF THIS
SECTION;

(2) FINES ASSESSED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS
TITLE;

(3) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(4) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(5) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(4) (H) THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND SHALL BE SUBJECT TO AN
AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS AS PROVIDED FOR IN § 2–1220 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(5) (I) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL PAY OUT MONEY FROM THE
COMPASSIONATE USE FUND AS DIRECTED BY THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(E) (J) NO PART OF THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND MAY REVERT OR BE
CREDITED TO:

– 77 –
END OF PAGE 77

START OF PAGE 78
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE; OR

(2) ANY OTHER SPECIAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(F) (K) EXPENDITURES FROM THE COMPASSIONATE USE FUND MAY BE
MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(G) (L) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO
CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

SUBTITLE 7. CANNABIS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.

36–701.

(A) (1) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION, A RELATED MEDICAL
FACILITY, OR AN AFFILIATED BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FIRM MAY REGISTER WITH
THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION TO PURCHASE CANNABIS FOR THE PURPOSE OF
CONDUCTING A BONA FIDE RESEARCH PROJECT RELATING TO THE USES,
PROPERTIES, OR COMPOSITION OF CANNABIS.

(2) A REGISTRATION FILED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE NAME OF THE PRIMARY RESEARCHER;

(II) THE EXPECTED DURATION OF THE RESEARCH PROJECT;
AND

(III) THE PRIMARY OBJECTIVES OF THE RESEARCH PROJECT.

(3) A REGISTRATION FILED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL REMAIN VALID UNTIL THERE IS A CHANGE IN THE RESEARCH
PROJECT OR A WITHDRAWAL OF THE REGISTRATION.

(B) AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH REPRESENTATIVE MAY PURCHASE CANNABIS
FROM A LICENSED DISPENSARY OR A SUPPLIER OF CANNABIS THAT IS LICENSED BY
ANY FEDERAL AGENCY TO SUPPLY CANNABIS TO RESEARCHERS.

(C) AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH REPRESENTATIVE MAY NOT BE PENALIZED OR
ARRESTED UNDER STATE LAW FOR ACQUIRING, POSSESSING, OR DISPENSING
CANNABIS, PRODUCTS CONTAINING CANNABIS, RELATED SUPPLIES, OR
EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS FOR USE IN A BONA FIDE RESEARCH PROJECT RELATING
TO THE USES, PROPERTIES, OR COMPOSITION OF CANNABIS.

– 78 –
END OF PAGE 78

START OF PAGE 79
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(D) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO
IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.

36–702.

(A) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY REGISTER AN ENTITY TO GROW,
PROCESS, TEST, AND TRANSFER CANNABIS FOR THE PURPOSES OF RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(B) A REGISTRATION ISSUED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
AUTHORIZES THE REGISTRANT ONLY TO:

(1) TEST CHEMICAL POTENCY AND COMPOSITION LEVELS;

(2) CONDUCT CLINICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF CANNABIS–DERIVED
MEDICINAL PRODUCTS;

(3) CONDUCT RESEARCH ON THE EFFICACY AND SAFETY OF
ADMINISTERING CANNABIS AS PART OF MEDICAL TREATMENT;

(4) CONDUCT GENOMIC, HORTICULTURAL, OR AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH; AND

(5) CONDUCT RESEARCH ON CANNABIS–AFFILIATED PRODUCTS OR
SYSTEMS.

(C) TO OBTAIN A RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRATION, AN
APPLICANT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION:

(1) AN APPLICATION FEE IN AN AMOUNT TO BE DETERMINED BY THE
DIVISION ADMINISTRATION; AND

(2) AN APPLICATION DEVELOPED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION.

(D) AN APPLICANT FOR A RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRATION
MUST MEET THE REGISTRATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY
THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

(E) (1) A RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRATION IS VALID FOR AN
INITIAL TERM OF 2 YEARS.

(2) A RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRATION IS VALID FOR 2
YEARS ON RENEWAL.

– 79 –
END OF PAGE 79

START OF PAGE 80
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) A RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRANT MAY TRANSFER, BY SALE
OR DONATION, CANNABIS GROWN WITHIN ITS OPERATION ONLY TO OTHER
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRANTS.

(G) A RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRANT MAY CONTRACT TO
PERFORM RESEARCH IN CONJUNCTION WITH A PUBLIC HIGHER EDUCATION
RESEARCH INSTITUTION OR ANOTHER RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGISTRANT.

SUBTITLE 8. REPORTS.

36–801.

(A) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30 EACH YEAR, EACH ENTITY LICENSED OR
~~REGISTERED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~TITLE~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~LICENSEE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~REGISTRANT~~
SHALL REPORT TO THE DIVISION ON:

(A) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 1 EACH YEAR, EACH CANNABIS LICENSEE AND
CANNABIS REGISTRANT SHALL REPORT TO THE ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION
DETERMINED BY THE ADMINISTRATION TO BE NECESSARY TO CONTINUE TO ASSESS
THE NEED FOR REMEDIAL MEASURES IN THE CANNABIS INDUSTRY AND MARKET,
INCLUDING:

(1) THE NUMBER OF MINORITY AND WOMEN OWNERS OF THE
CANNABIS LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT;

(2) THE OWNERSHIP INTEREST OF ANY MINORITY AND WOMEN
OWNERS OF THE CANNABIS LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT; AND

(3) THE NUMBER OF MINORITY AND WOMEN EMPLOYEES OF THE
CANNABIS LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT;

(4) A LIST OF THE CANNABIS LICENSEE’S OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT’S
EXPENDITURES FOR THE PRIOR STATE FISCAL YEAR; AND

(5) FOR EACH EXPENDITURE:

(I) A DESCRIPTION OF THE WORK PERFORMED;

(II) THE DOLLAR VALUE OF THE EXPENDITURE;

(III) WHETHER THE WORK WAS PERFORMED BY THE CANNABIS
LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT OR A CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR; AND

– 80 –
END OF PAGE 80

START OF PAGE 81
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(IV) IF THE WORK WAS PERFORMED BY A CONTRACTOR OR
SUBCONTRACTOR, THE NAME OF THE ENTITY THAT PERFORMED THE WORK.

(B) ALL DATA PROVIDED BY A CANNABIS LICENSEE OR CANNABIS
REGISTRANT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(4) AND (5) OF THIS SECTION:

(1) SHALL CONSTITUTE CONFIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL AND FINANCIAL
INFORMATION AND BE TREATED AS CONFIDENTIAL BY THE ADMINISTRATION AND
THE STATE; AND

(2) MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE PURPOSES AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
SECTION AND MAY ONLY BE DISCLOSED TO THE PUBLIC IN AN ANONYMIZED OR
AGGREGATED FORMAT.

(C) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 15 EACH YEAR, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL
PROVIDE THE DATA COLLECTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
CERTIFICATION AGENCY DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS UNDER §
14–303(B) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(B) (D) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE INFORMATION
REPORTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) (A)(1) THROUGH (3) OF THIS SECTION.

36–802.

ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH ODD–NUMBERED YEAR, THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON:

(1) THE AMOUNT OF CANNABIS CULTIVATED, PROCESSED, AND
DISPENSED BY STANDARD AND MICRO LICENSEES; AND

(2) WHETHER THE SUPPLY OF CANNABIS IS ADEQUATE TO MEET THE
DEMAND FOR CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

36–803.

THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL PUBLISH THE FOLLOWING DATA,
ORGANIZED BY MONTH, ON A ROLLING BASIS AND ON A PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE PART
OF THE COMMISSION’S ADMINISTRATION’S WEBSITE:

– 81 –
END OF PAGE 81

START OF PAGE 82
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE NUMBER OF PATIENTS, CAREGIVERS, AND PROVIDERS
CERTIFIED UNDER THIS TITLE;

(2) THE WHOLESALE AND RETAIL SALES OF MEDICAL AND ADULT–USE
CANNABIS, MEASURED BY REVENUE AND VOLUME; AND

(3) THE MEDIAN CONSUMER PRICE FOR CANNABIS AND CANNABIS
PRODUCTS.

SUBTITLE 9. ADVERTISING.

36–901.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE, “ADVERTISEMENT” MEANS THE PUBLICATION,
DISSEMINATION, OR CIRCULATION OF ANY AUDITORY, VISUAL, DIGITAL, ORAL, OR
WRITTEN MATTER WHICH IS DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY CALCULATED TO INDUCE THE
SALE OF CANNABIS OR ANY CANNABIS–RELATED PRODUCT OR SERVICE.

(B) “ADVERTISEMENT” DOES NOT INCLUDE PACKAGING OR LABELING.

36–902.

(A) ADVERTISEMENTS AN ADVERTISEMENT FOR MEDICAL CANNABIS AND
MEDICAL CANNABIS PRODUCTS OR MEDICAL CANNABIS–RELATED SERVICES THAT
MAKE MAKES THERAPEUTIC OR MEDICAL CLAIMS SHALL:

(1) BE SUPPORTED BY SUBSTANTIAL CLINICAL EVIDENCE OR
SUBSTANTIAL CLINICAL DATA COMPETENT AND RELIABLE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE;
AND

(2) INCLUDE INFORMATION ON THE MOST SIGNIFICANT SERIOUS AND
MOST COMMON SIDE EFFECTS OR RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF CANNABIS.

(B) ADVERTISEMENTS AN ADVERTISEMENT FOR MEDICAL CANNABIS OR
~~MEDICAL~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~PRODUCTS~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~INCLUDE~~ ~~A~~ ~~STATEMENT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~
IS FOR USE ONLY BY A QUALIFYING PATIENT.

~~36–902.~~ 36–903.

(A) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN ADVERTISEMENT
PLACED ON PROPERTY OWNED OR LEASED BY A DISPENSARY, GROWER, OR
PROCESSOR.

– 82 –
END OF PAGE 82

START OF PAGE 83
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) AN ADVERTISEMENT FOR A CANNABIS LICENSEE, CANNABIS
PRODUCT, OR CANNABIS–RELATED SERVICE MAY NOT:

(1) MAKE A STATEMENT THAT IS FALSE OR MISLEADING IN A
MATERIAL WAY OR IS OTHERWISE A VIOLATION OF TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE
~~COMMERCIAL~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~ARTICLE;~~

(I) VIOLATE TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW
ARTICLE;

(II) DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY TARGET INDIVIDUALS UNDER
THE AGE OF 21 YEARS;

(2) (III) CONTAIN A DESIGN, AN ILLUSTRATION, A PICTURE, OR A
REPRESENTATION THAT:

(I) 1. TARGETS OR IS ATTRACTIVE TO MINORS, INCLUDING
A CARTOON CHARACTER, A MASCOT, OR ANY OTHER DEPICTION THAT IS COMMONLY
USED TO MARKET PRODUCTS TO MINORS;

(II) 2. DISPLAYS THE USE OF CANNABIS, INCLUDING THE
CONSUMPTION, SMOKING, OR VAPING OF CANNABIS;

(III) 3. ENCOURAGES OR PROMOTES CANNABIS FOR USE AS
AN INTOXICANT; OR

(I) 4. IS OBSCENE;

(3) (IV) ENGAGE IN ADVERTISING BY MEANS OF TELEVISION, RADIO,
INTERNET, MOBILE APPLICATION, SOCIAL MEDIA, OR OTHER ELECTRONIC
COMMUNICATION, OR PRINT PUBLICATION, UNLESS AT LEAST 85% OF THE
AUDIENCE IS REASONABLY EXPECTED TO BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD AS
DETERMINED BY RELIABLE AND CURRENT AUDIENCE COMPOSITION DATA; OR

(4) (V) ENGAGE IN ADVERTISING BY MEANS OF PLACING AN
ADVERTISEMENT ON THE SIDE OF A BUILDING OR ANOTHER PUBLICLY VISIBLE
LOCATION OF ANY FORM, INCLUDING A SIGN, A POSTER, A PLACARD, A DEVICE, A
GRAPHIC DISPLAY, AN OUTDOOR BILLBOARD, OR A FREESTANDING SIGNBOARD.

(B) (1) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
EACH CANNABIS–RELATED WEBSITE OWNED, MANAGED, OR OPERATED BY A
CANNABIS LICENSEE SHALL EMPLOY A NEUTRAL AGE–SCREENING MECHANISM
THAT VERIFIES THAT THE USER IS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD, INCLUDING BY USING AN
AGE–GATE, AGE–SCREEN, OR AGE VERIFICATION MECHANISM BEFORE THE USER
– 83 –
END OF PAGE 83

START OF PAGE 84
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

MAY ACCESS OR VIEW ANY CONTENT AND BEFORE THE WEBSITE MAY COLLECT THE
USER’S ADDRESS, E–MAIL ADDRESS, PHONE NUMBER, OR CONTACT INFORMATION TO
DISSEMINATE ADVERTISEMENTS.

(II) IF A WEBSITE IS APPROPRIATE FOR A QUALIFYING PATIENT
WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS, THE WEBSITE SHALL PROVIDE AN
ALTERNATIVE SCREENING MECHANISM FOR THE QUALIFYING PATIENT.

(2) AN ADVERTISEMENT PLACED ON SOCIAL MEDIA OR A MOBILE
APPLICATION SHALL INCLUDE A NOTIFICATION THAT AN INDIVIDUAL MUST BE AT
LEAST 21 YEARS OLD TO VIEW THE CONTENT.

(3) THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLICABLE TO CANNABIS
LICENSEES MAY NOT BE AVOIDED BY HIRING OR CONTRACTING WITH A
THIRD–PARTY, OR OUTSOURCING ADVERTISEMENTS THAT DO NOT COMPLY WITH
THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) A CANNABIS LICENSEE MAY NOT ALLOW THE USE OF THE
LICENSEE’S TRADEMARKS, BRANDS, NAMES, LOCATIONS, OR OTHER
DISTINGUISHING CHARACTERISTICS FOR THIRD–PARTY USE FOR ADVERTISEMENTS
THAT DO NOT COMPLY WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO
ESTABLISH:

(1) PROCEDURES FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF THIS SECTION; AND

(2) A PROCESS FOR AN INDIVIDUAL TO VOLUNTARILY SUBMIT AN
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE DIVISION FOR AN ADVISORY OPINION ON WHETHER THE
~~ADVERTISEMENT~~ ~~COMPLIES~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESTRICTIONS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~ADVERTISEMENTS~~ ~~FOR~~
CANNABIS, CANNABIS PRODUCTS, EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCTS, AND
~~CANNABIS–RELATED~~ ~~SERVICES.~~

SUBTITLE 10. RESPONSIBLE VENDOR TRAINING PROGRAM.

36–1001.

(A) IF A PERSON WOULD LIKE TO TO OFFER A RESPONSIBLE MEDICAL OR
ADULT–USE CANNABIS VENDOR, SERVER, AND SELLER TRAINING PROGRAM, THE A
PERSON MUST SHALL SUBMIT AN APPLICATION TO THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION.

– 84 –
END OF PAGE 84

START OF PAGE 85
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(B) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL APPROVE THE APPLICATION IF
THE PROPOSED TRAINING PROGRAM MEETS THE MINIMUM EDUCATIONAL
STANDARDS ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) AT A MINIMUM, A TRAINING PROGRAM MUST:

(1) BE TAUGHT IN A CLASSROOM OR VIRTUAL SETTING FOR AT LEAST
A 2–HOUR PERIOD;

(2) ESTABLISH PROGRAM STANDARDS, INCLUDING CERTIFICATION
AND RECERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS, RECORD KEEPING, TESTING AND
ASSESSMENT PROTOCOLS, AND EFFECTIVENESS EVALUATIONS; AND

(3) PROVIDE A CORE CURRICULUM OF RELEVANT STATUTORY AND
REGULATORY PROVISIONS, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) INFORMATION ON REQUIRED LICENSES, AGE
REQUIREMENTS, PATIENT REGISTRY CARDS ISSUED BY THE DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION, MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS, PRIVACY ISSUES, AND UNLAWFUL
ACTS;

(II) ADMINISTRATIVE AND CRIMINAL LIABILITY AND LICENSE
AND COURT SANCTIONS;

(III) STATUTORY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR
EMPLOYEES AND OWNERS;

(IV) STATUTORY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS RELATED
TO CANNABIS SALE, TRANSFER, AND DELIVERY;

(V) ACCEPTABLE FORMS OF IDENTIFICATION, INCLUDING
PATIENT AND CAREGIVER IDENTIFICATION CARDS;

(VI) STATE AND LOCAL LICENSING AND ENFORCEMENT; AND

(VII) INFORMATION ON SERVING SIZE, THC AND CANNABINOID
POTENCY, AND IMPAIRMENT.

36–1002.

THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING
THE RESPONSIBLE VENDOR TRAINING PROGRAM AND THE MINIMUM STANDARDS
FOR THE PROGRAM.

– 85 –
END OF PAGE 85

START OF PAGE 86
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

36–1003.

A PROVIDER OF AN APPROVED TRAINING PROGRAM SHALL:

(1) MAINTAIN ITS TRAINING RECORDS AT ITS PRINCIPAL PLACE OF
BUSINESS FOR AT LEAST 4 YEARS; AND

(2) MAKE THE RECORDS AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION BY THE
~~DIVISION~~ ADMINISTRATION.

SUBTITLE 11. PROHIBITED ACTS.

36–1101.

(A) A CANNABIS LICENSEE MAY NOT SELL, TRANSFER, OR DELIVER
CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS UNLESS THE LICENSEE VERIFIES BY MEANS OF
A VALID DRIVER’S LICENSE OR OTHER GOVERNMENT–ISSUED PHOTO
IDENTIFICATION CONTAINING THE BEARER’S DATE OF BIRTH THAT:

(1) FOR ADULT–USE CANNABIS, THE CONSUMER IS AT LEAST 21
YEARS OLD; OR

(2) FOR MEDICAL CANNABIS, THE PATIENT OR CAREGIVER IS:

(I) REGISTERED WITH THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION; AND

(II) AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD.

(B) (1) (I) A EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A LICENSEE THAT SELLS, TRANSFERS, OR DELIVERS CANNABIS OR
CANNABIS PRODUCTS IN VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IS
SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY OF:

(I) 1. $500 FOR A FIRST VIOLATION;

(II) 2. $1,000 FOR A SECOND VIOLATION OCCURRING
WITHIN 24 MONTHS AFTER THE FIRST VIOLATION; AND

(III) 3. $5,000 FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION
OCCURRING WITHIN 24 MONTHS AFTER THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING VIOLATION.

(II) A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION THAT
OCCURS MORE THAN 24 MONTHS AFTER THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING VIOLATION
SHALL BE TREATED AS A FIRST VIOLATION.

– 86 –
END OF PAGE 86

START OF PAGE 87
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(2) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION MAY DENY A CANNABIS LICENSE
TO AN APPLICANT, REPRIMAND A CANNABIS LICENSEE, OR SUSPEND OR REVOKE A
CANNABIS LICENSE IF THE APPLICANT OR LICENSEE VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION TWO OR MORE TIMES IN A 24–MONTH PERIOD.

(3) IN A HEARING FOR AN ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION, IT
IS A DEFENSE THAT AN AGENT OF THE DEFENDANT EXAMINED THE CONSUMER’S,
PATIENT’S, OR CAREGIVER’S DRIVER’S LICENSE OR OTHER VALID IDENTIFICATION
ISSUED BY A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT THAT POSITIVELY IDENTIFIED THE CONSUMER,
PATIENT, OR CAREGIVER AS MEETING THE MINIMUM AGE SPECIFIED IN SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) A CANNABIS LICENSEE MAY NOT:

(I) SELL, TRANSFER, OR DELIVER CANNABIS TO AN INDIVIDUAL
WHO IS VISIBLY INTOXICATED; OR

(II) OFFER CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS AS A PRIZE,
PREMIUM, OR CONSIDERATION FOR A LOTTERY, CONTEST, GAME OF CHANCE, GAME
OF SKILL, OR COMPETITION OF ANY KIND; OR

(III) CONDUCT DIRECT–TO–CONSUMER INTERNET SALES OF
ADULT–USE CANNABIS ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025.

(2) A CANNABIS LICENSEE THAT VIOLATES PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000, SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF A LICENSE, OR BOTH.

(D) (1) A DISPENSARY MAY NOT:

(I) PACKAGE OR REPACKAGE CANNABIS OR CANNABIS
~~PRODUCTS;~~

(II) TRANSFORM CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS INTO
ANOTHER PRODUCT OR AN EXTRACT; OR

(III) WRAP, ROLL, OR OTHERWISE ENCASE CANNABIS FOR THE
PURPOSE OF SMOKING THE CANNABIS.

(2) A DISPENSARY THAT VIOLATES PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000, SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF A LICENSE, OR BOTH.

– 87 –
END OF PAGE 87

START OF PAGE 88
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

36–1102.

(A) THIS TITLE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO AUTHORIZE AN INDIVIDUAL TO:

(1) OPERATE, NAVIGATE, OR BE IN ACTUAL PHYSICAL CONTROL OF A
MOTOR VEHICLE, AIRCRAFT, OR BOAT WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF CANNABIS;

(2) USE CANNABIS IN A PUBLIC PLACE;

(3) USE CANNABIS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE;

(4) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
SMOKE CANNABIS ON A PRIVATE PROPERTY THAT:

(I) 1. IS RENTED FROM A LANDLORD; AND

2. IS SUBJECT TO A POLICY THAT PROHIBITS THE
SMOKING OF CANNABIS ON THE PROPERTY; OR

(II) IS SUBJECT TO A POLICY THAT PROHIBITS THE SMOKING OF
~~CANNABIS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ATTACHED~~ ~~DWELLING~~ ~~ADOPTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~ONE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
FOLLOWING ENTITIES:

1. THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE COUNCIL OF UNIT
OWNERS OF A CONDOMINIUM REGIME; OR

2. THE GOVERNING BODY OF A HOMEOWNERS
ASSOCIATION; OR

(5) POSSESS CANNABIS, INCLUDING CANNABIS PRODUCTS, IN A
LOCAL DETENTION FACILITY, COUNTY JAIL, STATE PRISON, REFORMATORY, OR
OTHER CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, INCLUDING A FACILITY FOR THE DETENTION OF
JUVENILE OFFENDERS.

(B) THE PROVISIONS OF SUBSECTION (A)(4) OF THIS SECTION DO NOT
APPLY TO VAPORIZING CANNABIS.

~~36–1103.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “HEMP” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 14–401 OF THE
AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

– 88 –
END OF PAGE 88

START OF PAGE 89
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(3) “TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL” MEANS:

(I) ANY TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, INCLUDING
DELTA–8–TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, DELTA–9–TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, AND
DELTA–10–TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, REGARDLESS OF HOW DERIVED;

(II) ANY OTHER CANNABINOID, EXCEPT CANNABIDIOL THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION DETERMINES TO CAUSE INTOXICATION; AND

(III) ANY OTHER CHEMICALLY SIMILAR COMPOUND, SUBSTANCE,
DERIVATIVE, OR ISOMER OF TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, AS IDENTIFIED BY THE
ADMINISTRATION.

(4) “TINCTURE” MEANS A SOLUTION THAT IS:

(I) DISSOLVED IN ALCOHOL, GLYCERIN, OR VEGETABLE OIL;
AND

(II) DISTRIBUTED IN A DROPPER BOTTLE OF 4 OUNCES OR LESS.

(A) (B) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT SELL OR DISTRIBUTE A PRODUCT
INTENDED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION OR INHALATION THAT CONTAINS MORE THAN
0.5 MILLIGRAMS OF TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL PER SERVING OR 2.5 MILLIGRAMS
OF TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL PER PACKAGE UNLESS THE PERSON IS LICENSED
UNDER § 36–401 OF THIS TITLE AND THE PRODUCT COMPLIES WITH THE:

(I) MANUFACTURING STANDARDS ESTABLISHED UNDER §
36–203 OF THIS TITLE;

(II) LABORATORY TESTING STANDARDS ESTABLISHED UNDER §
36–203 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(III) PACKAGING AND LABELING STANDARDS ESTABLISHED
UNDER § 36–203 OF THIS TITLE.

(2) A PERSON MAY NOT SELL OR DISTRIBUTE A PRODUCT DESCRIBED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF
21 YEARS.

(B) (C) A PERSON MAY NOT SELL OR DISTRIBUTE A CANNABINOID
PRODUCT THAT IS NOT DERIVED FROM NATURALLY OCCURRING BIOLOGICALLY
ACTIVE CHEMICAL CONSTITUENTS.

– 89 –
END OF PAGE 89

START OF PAGE 90
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION AND
SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IT IS NOT A VIOLATION OF THIS
SECTION FOR A PERSON TO SELL OR DISTRIBUTE A HEMP–DERIVED TINCTURE
INTENDED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION THAT CONTAINS:

(I) A RATIO OF CANNABIDIOL TO TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL OF
AT LEAST 15 TO 1; AND

(II) 2.5 MILLIGRAMS OR LESS OF TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL PER
SERVING AND 100 MILLIGRAMS OR LESS OF TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL PER
PACKAGE.

(2) TO SELL OR DISTRIBUTE A HEMP–DERIVED TINCTURE UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, A PERSON MUST PROVIDE, AS REQUIRED BY THE ADMINISTRATION,
TINCTURE SAMPLES FOR THE PURPOSE OF TESTING TO DETERMINE CHEMICAL
POTENCY AND COMPOSITION LEVELS AND TO DETECT AND QUANTIFY
CONTAMINANTS.

(C) (E) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A) (B) OF THIS SECTION
IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT
EXCEEDING $5,000.

(D) (F) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION
IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT
EXCEEDING $10,000.

SUBTITLE 12. LEGAL PROTECTIONS.

36–1201.

THE FOLLOWING PERSONS ACTING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS
OF THIS TITLE MAY NOT BE SUBJECT TO ARREST, PROSECUTION, REVOCATION OF
MANDATORY SUPERVISION, PAROLE, OR PROBATION, OR ANY CIVIL OR
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY, INCLUDING A CIVIL PENALTY OR DISCIPLINARY ACTION
BY A PROFESSIONAL LICENSING BOARD, OR BE DENIED ANY RIGHT OR PRIVILEGE,
FOR THE USE OF OR POSSESSION OF CANNABIS THAT IS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
TITLE:

(1) A QUALIFYING PATIENT;

(2) A CANNABIS LICENSEE OR CANNABIS REGISTRANT THAT IS
LICENSED OR REGISTERED UNDER THIS TITLE;

– 90 –
END OF PAGE 90

START OF PAGE 91
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(3) A CERTIFYING PROVIDER;

(4) A CAREGIVER;

(5) AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH REPRESENTATIVE PURCHASING
MEDICAL CANNABIS UNDER § 36–701 SUBTITLE 7 OF THIS TITLE;

(6) A HOSPITAL, MEDICAL FACILITY, OR HOSPICE PROGRAM WHERE A
QUALIFYING PATIENT IS RECEIVING TREATMENT; OR

(7) DESIGNATED SCHOOL PERSONNEL AUTHORIZED TO ADMINISTER
MEDICAL CANNABIS TO A STUDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE GUIDELINES
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–446 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE UNLESS THE ACT OR
OMISSION CONSTITUTES GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR WANTON OR WILLFUL
MISCONDUCT.

SUBTITLE 13. CIVIL IMMUNITIES AND LIABILITIES RESERVED.

~~36–1301.~~

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, NEITHER THE STATE NOR ANY
OF ITS POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS MAY DENY A BENEFIT, AN ENTITLEMENT, A
DRIVER’S LICENSE, A PROFESSIONAL LICENSE, HOUSING ASSISTANCE, SOCIAL
SERVICES, OR OTHER BENEFITS BASED ON LAWFUL CANNABIS USE OR FOR THE
PRESENCE OF CANNABINOIDS OR CANNABINOID METABOLITES IN THE URINE,
BLOOD, SALIVA, BREATH, HAIR, OR OTHER TISSUE OR FLUID OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
IS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD OR A QUALIFYING PATIENT WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF
~~21~~ ~~YEARS.~~

(B) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT BE DENIED CUSTODY OF OR VISITATION WITH
A MINOR FOR ACTING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE, UNLESS THE INDIVIDUAL’S
~~BEHAVIOR~~ ~~CREATES~~ ~~AN~~ ~~UNREASONABLE~~ ~~DANGER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MINOR~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~CAN~~ ~~BE~~
CLEARLY ARTICULATED AND SUBSTANTIATED.

(C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, NEITHER THE STATE NOR ANY
~~OF~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~POLITICAL~~ ~~SUBDIVISIONS~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~DENY~~ ~~EMPLOYMENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONTRACT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~
~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~PRIOR~~ ~~CONVICTION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONVIOLENT~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~OFFENSE~~
THAT DOES NOT INVOLVE DISTRIBUTION TO MINORS.

(D) FOR THE PURPOSES OF MEDICAL CARE, INCLUDING ORGAN AND TISSUE
~~TRANSPLANTS:~~

– 91 –
END OF PAGE 91

START OF PAGE 92
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE USE OF CANNABIS DOES NOT CONSTITUTE THE USE OF AN
~~ILLICIT~~ ~~SUBSTANCE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~DISQUALIFY~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~NEEDED~~
MEDICAL CARE; AND

(2) MAY BE CONSIDERED ONLY WITH RESPECT TO EVIDENCE–BASED
CLINICAL CRITERIA.

(E) (1) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PREVENT A GOVERNMENT EMPLOYER
FROM DISCIPLINING AN EMPLOYEE OR A CONTRACTOR FOR:

(I) INGESTING CANNABIS IN THE WORKPLACE; OR

(II) WORKING WHILE IMPAIRED BY CANNABIS.

(2) THE PROTECTIONS PROVIDED BY THIS SECTION DO NOT APPLY TO
THE EXTENT THAT THEY CONFLICT WITH A GOVERNMENT EMPLOYER’S
~~OBLIGATIONS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXTENT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THEY~~ ~~WOULD~~
DISQUALIFY THE ENTITY FROM A MONETARY OR LICENSING–RELATED BENEFIT
UNDER FEDERAL LAW.

(3) THIS SECTION DOES NOT AUTHORIZE ANY PERSON TO ENGAGE IN,
AND DOES NOT PREVENT THE IMPOSITION OF ANY CIVIL, CRIMINAL, DISCIPLINE, OR
OTHER PENALTIES, INCLUDING DISCIPLINE OR TERMINATION BY A GOVERNMENT
~~EMPLOYER~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ENGAGING~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~TASK~~ ~~WHILE~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INFLUENCE~~ ~~OF~~
CANNABIS, WHEN DOING SO WOULD CONSTITUTE NEGLIGENCE OR PROFESSIONAL
~~MALPRACTICE.~~

(F) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO PREVENT OR
~~PROHIBIT~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~EMPLOYER~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~DENYING~~ ~~EMPLOYMENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONTRACT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~
~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~DISCIPLINING~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EMPLOYEE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONTRACTOR~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~TESTING~~
~~POSITIVE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRESENCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CANNABINOIDS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~CANNABINOID~~ ~~METABOLITES~~
IN THE URINE, BLOOD, SALIVA, BREATH, HAIR, OR OTHER TISSUE OR FLUID OF THE
EMPLOYEE’S OR CONTRACTOR’S BODY, IF THE TEST WAS CONDUCTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE EMPLOYER’S ESTABLISHED DRUG TESTING POLICY.

~~36–1302.~~

(A) A HOLDER OF A PROFESSIONAL OR OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE MAY NOT
~~BE~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PROFESSIONAL~~ ~~DISCIPLINE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~ADVICE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SERVICES~~
~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~ESTABLISHMENTS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~APPLICATIONS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OPERATE~~
~~CANNABIS~~ ~~ESTABLISHMENTS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BASIS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~IS~~ ~~ILLEGAL~~ ~~UNDER~~
FEDERAL LAW.

– 92 –
END OF PAGE 92

START OF PAGE 93
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(B) AN APPLICANT FOR A PROFESSIONAL OR OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE MAY
~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~DENIED~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSE~~ ~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~PREVIOUS~~ ~~EMPLOYMENT~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~
CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS OPERATING IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.

~~36–1303.~~

AN AGENCY OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE MAY NOT RELY ON A
~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~AS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SOLE~~ ~~BASIS~~ ~~FOR~~
TAKING AN ADVERSE ACTION AGAINST A PERSON.

~~36–1304.~~

(A) IT IS THE PUBLIC POLICY OF THE STATE THAT CONTRACTS RELATED TO
~~THE~~ ~~OPERATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~ESTABLISHMENT~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCORDANCE~~ ~~WITH~~
THIS SUBTITLE ARE ENFORCEABLE.

(B) IT IS THE PUBLIC POLICY OF THE STATE THAT NO CONTRACT ENTERED
~~INTO~~ ~~BY~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~CANNABIS~~ ~~ESTABLISHMENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~AGENTS~~ ~~AS~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~IN~~
ACCORDANCE WITH A VALID LICENSE, OR BY THOSE WHO ALLOW PROPERTY TO BE
USED BY A CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT, ITS EMPLOYEES, OR ITS AGENTS AS
AUTHORIZED IN ACCORDANCE WITH A VALID LICENSE, SHALL BE UNENFORCEABLE
ON THE BASIS THAT CULTIVATING, OBTAINING, MANUFACTURING, DISTRIBUTING,
DISPENSING, TRANSPORTING, SELLING, POSSESSING, OR USING CANNABIS IS
PROHIBITED BY FEDERAL LAW.

SUBTITLE 14. CAPITAL ACCESS PROGRAM.

36–1401.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BORROWER” MEANS A BUSINESS THAT:

(1) QUALIFIES AS A SMALL BUSINESS UNDER THE U.S. SMALL
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION SIZE STANDARDS;

(2) APPLIES TO A LENDER FOR BUSINESS FINANCING; AND

(3) HAS FEWER THAN 50 EMPLOYEES.

(C) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.

~~(C)~~ (D) “LENDER” MEANS:

– 93 –
END OF PAGE 93

START OF PAGE 94
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) A CREDIT UNION, AS DEFINED IN § 1–101 OF THE FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS ARTICLE;

(2) A FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, AS DEFINED IN § 1–101 OF THE
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ARTICLE; OR

(3) A COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, AS
DEFINED IN 12 U.S.C. § 4702(5).

(D) (E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE CAPITAL ACCESS PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

36–1402.

THERE IS A CAPITAL ACCESS PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE.

36–1403.

THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO STIMULATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEES THAT HAVE DIFFICULTY OBTAINING FINANCING AND TO
ESTABLISH A LOAN LOSS RESERVE ACCOUNT.

36–1404.

(A) A LOAN TO A SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEE QUALIFIES UNDER THE
PROGRAM IF THE LOAN:

(1) SATISFIES THE LENDING CRITERIA OF THE FINANCIAL
INSTITUTION LENDER; AND

(2) HAS A TERM NOT EXCEEDING 10 YEARS; AND

(3) DOES NOT EXCEED:

(I) FOR A DISPENSARY, $500,000; OR

(II) FOR A GROWER OR PROCESSOR, $1,000,000.

(B) A LOAN THAT QUALIFIES UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION MAY
BE SHORT OR LONG TERM, HAVE FIXED OR VARIABLE RATES, AND BE SECURED OR
UNSECURED.

– 94 –
END OF PAGE 94

START OF PAGE 95
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

36–1405.

(A) IF A LENDER WOULD LIKE TO TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM, THE
LENDER MUST A LENDER SHALL ENROLL THE QUALIFYING LOAN IN THE PROGRAM
NOT MORE THAN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THE FIRST DISBURSEMENT OF THE
LOAN.

(B) A LENDER MAY ENROLL ALL OR A PORTION OF A QUALIFYING LOAN IN
AN AMOUNT OF NOT MORE THAN:

(1) FOR A DISPENSARY, $500,000; OR

(2) FOR A GROWER OR PROCESSOR, $1,000,000.

36–1406.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A LOAN LOSS RESERVE ACCOUNT
FOR A LENDER WHEN THE LENDER ENROLLS ITS FIRST LOAN UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(B) AT THE TIME OF ENROLLMENT:

(1) THE BORROWER SHALL MAKE A PAYMENT TO THE ACCOUNT OF
BETWEEN 0% AND 7% OF THE ENROLLED LOAN AMOUNT;

(2) THE LENDER SHALL MAKE A PAYMENT TO THE ACCOUNT OF AT
LEAST 2% OF THE ENROLLED AMOUNT; AND

(3) THE DIVISION ADMINISTRATION SHALL MAKE A MATCHING
PAYMENT TO THE ACCOUNT IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THE BORROWER AND
LENDER’S AGGREGATE PAYMENT UNDER ITEMS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) THE LOAN LOSS RESERVE ACCOUNT OF A LENDER SHALL BE AVAILABLE
FOR THE LENDER TO WITHDRAW IF A BORROWER DEFAULTS ON A QUALIFYING LOAN.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLABORATE WITH THE OFFICE OF SOCIAL
EQUITY ESTABLISHED UNDER § 1–309.1 OF THIS ARTICLE TO IDENTIFY AND ASSIST
BUSINESSES WITH OBTAINING FINANCING FROM THE PROGRAM.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR A LENDER TO
WITHDRAW FROM THE PROGRAM.

SUBTITLE 15. BANKING AND INSURANCE.

36–1501.

– 95 –
END OF PAGE 95

START OF PAGE 96
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “CANNABIS–RELATED LEGITIMATE BUSINESS” MEANS A
MANUFACTURER, PRODUCER, OR ANOTHER PERSON THAT:

(B) “CANNABIS BUSINESS” MEANS A MANUFACTURER, PRODUCER, OR
ANOTHER PERSON THAT:

(1) PARTICIPATES IN ANY BUSINESS OR ORGANIZED ACTIVITY THAT
INVOLVES HANDLING CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS, INCLUDING
CULTIVATING, PRODUCING, MANUFACTURING, SELLING, TRANSPORTING,
DISPLAYING, DISPENSING, DISTRIBUTING, OR PURCHASING CANNABIS OR CANNABIS
PRODUCTS; AND

(2) ENGAGES IN AN ACTIVITY DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.

(C) “DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION” MEANS A STATE–CHARTERED OR
FEDERALLY CHARTERED FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, OTHER–STATE BANK, OR
FOREIGN BRANCH THAT:

(1) IS LOCATED IN THE STATE OR MAINTAINS BRANCHES IN THE
STATE; AND

(2) IS AUTHORIZED TO MAINTAIN ACCOUNTS.

(C) (D) (1) “SERVICE PROVIDER” MEANS A BUSINESS, AN
ORGANIZATION, OR ANY OTHER PERSON THAT:

(I) SELLS GOODS OR SERVICES TO A CANNABIS–RELATED
CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS; OR

(II) PROVIDES ANY BUSINESS SERVICES, INCLUDING THE SALE
OR LEASE OF REAL OR ANY OTHER PROPERTY, LEGAL OR OTHER LICENSED
SERVICES, OR ANY OTHER ANCILLARY SERVICE, RELATING TO CANNABIS.

(2) “SERVICE PROVIDER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A BUSINESS, AN
ORGANIZATION, OR ANY OTHER PERSON THAT PARTICIPATES IN ANY BUSINESS OR
ORGANIZED ACTIVITY THAT INVOLVES HANDLING CANNABIS OR CANNABIS
PRODUCTS, INCLUDING CULTIVATING, PRODUCING, MANUFACTURING, SELLING,

– 96 –
END OF PAGE 96

START OF PAGE 97
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

TRANSPORTING, DISPLAYING, DISPENSING, DISTRIBUTING, OR PURCHASING
CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS.

36–1502.

THE PROVISIONS IN THIS SUBTITLE APPLY TO:

(1) ALL BANKS, CREDIT UNIONS, AND OTHER ENTITIES OPERATING AS
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS IN THE STATE; AND

(2) INSURANCE COMPANIES AND INSURANCE PRODUCERS
OPERATING IN THE STATE.

36–1503.

(A) THE STATE BANKING REGULATOR OFFICE COMMISIONER OF
FINANCIAL REGULATION MAY NOT:

(1) TERMINATE OR LIMIT THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE OR SHARE
INSURANCE OF A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION UNDER THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT
INSURANCE ACT OR THE FEDERAL CREDIT UNION ACT, A DEPOSITORY
INSTITUTION OPERATING IN THE STATE UNDER THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
ARTICLE, OR TAKE ANY OTHER ADVERSE ACTION AGAINST A DEPOSITORY
INSTITUTION UNDER 12 U.S.C. § 1818 SOLELY BECAUSE THE DEPOSITORY
INSTITUTION PROVIDES OR HAS PROVIDED FINANCIAL SERVICES TO A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER;

(2) PROHIBIT, PENALIZE, OR OTHERWISE DISCOURAGE A
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION FROM PROVIDING FINANCIAL SERVICES TO A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS IN THE STATE;

(3) RECOMMEND, INCENTIVIZE, OR ENCOURAGE A DEPOSITORY
INSTITUTION NOT TO TO NOT OFFER FINANCIAL SERVICES TO AN ACCOUNT HOLDER,
OR TO DOWNGRADE OR CANCEL THE FINANCIAL SERVICES OFFERED TO AN
ACCOUNT HOLDER SOLELY BECAUSE:

(I) THE ACCOUNT HOLDER IS A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS
LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER, OR IS AN EMPLOYEE, OWNER, OR
OPERATOR OF A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE
PROVIDER;

(II) THE ACCOUNT HOLDER LATER BECOMES AN EMPLOYEE,
OWNER, OR OPERATOR OF A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS
OR SERVICE PROVIDER; OR
– 97 –
END OF PAGE 97

START OF PAGE 98
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) THE DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION WAS NOT AWARE THAT THE
ACCOUNT HOLDER IS AN EMPLOYEE, OWNER, OR OPERATOR OF A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER;

(4) TAKE ANY ADVERSE OR CORRECTIVE SUPERVISORY ACTION ON A
LOAN MADE TO:

(I) A CANNABIS–RELATED LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE
PROVIDER SOLELY BECAUSE THE BUSINESS IS A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS
LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER;

(II) AN EMPLOYEE, OWNER, OR OPERATOR OF A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER
SOLELY BECAUSE THE EMPLOYEE, OWNER, OR OPERATOR IS EMPLOYED BY, OWNS,
OR OPERATES A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE
PROVIDER, AS APPLICABLE; OR

(III) AN OWNER OR OPERATOR OF REAL ESTATE OR EQUIPMENT
THAT IS LEASED TO A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR
SERVICE PROVIDER SOLELY BECAUSE THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF THE REAL
ESTATE OR EQUIPMENT LEASED THE EQUIPMENT OR REAL ESTATE TO A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER, AS
APPLICABLE; OR

(5) PROHIBIT OR PENALIZE A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, OR AN
ENTITY PERFORMING A FINANCIAL SERVICE FOR OR IN ASSOCIATION WITH A
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, OR OTHERWISE DISCOURAGE A DEPOSITORY
INSTITUTION, OR AN ENTITY PERFORMING A FINANCIAL SERVICE FOR OR IN
ASSOCIATION WITH A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, FROM ENGAGING IN A FINANCIAL
SERVICE FOR A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE
PROVIDER.

(B) SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL APPLY TO AN INSTITUTION
APPLYING FOR A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION CHARTER TO THE SAME EXTENT AS IT
APPLIES TO A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION.

36–1504.

FOR THE PURPOSES OF TITLE 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956 AND 1957 AND ALL OTHER
PROVISIONS OF FEDERAL LAW, THE PROCEEDS FROM A TRANSACTION INVOLVING
ACTIVITIES OF A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR

– 98 –
END OF PAGE 98

START OF PAGE 99
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

SERVICE PROVIDER MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED PROCEEDS FROM AN UNLAWFUL
ACTIVITY SOLELY BECAUSE:

(1) THE TRANSACTION INVOLVES PROCEEDS FROM A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER; OR

(2) THE TRANSACTION INVOLVES PROCEEDS FROM:

(I) CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY
A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS; OR

(II) ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY A SERVICE PROVIDER.

36–1505.

(A) WITH RESPECT TO PROVIDING A FINANCIAL SERVICE TO A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR A SERVICE PROVIDER, A
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, ENTITY PERFORMING A FINANCIAL SERVICE FOR OR IN
ASSOCIATION WITH A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, OR INSURER THAT PROVIDES A
FINANCIAL SERVICE TO A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR
SERVICE PROVIDER, AND THE OFFICERS, DIRECTORS, AND EMPLOYEES OF THAT
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, ENTITY, OR INSURER MAY NOT BE HELD LIABLE UNDER
ANY STATE LAW OR REGULATION:

(1) SOLELY FOR PROVIDING THE FINANCIAL SERVICE; OR

(2) FOR FURTHER INVESTING ANY INCOME DERIVED FROM THE
FINANCIAL SERVICE.

(B) AN INSURER THAT ENGAGES IN THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE WITH A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER OR
THAT OTHERWISE ENGAGES WITH A PERSON IN A TRANSACTION ALLOWED UNDER
STATE LAW RELATED TO CANNABIS, AND THE OFFICERS, DIRECTORS, AND
EMPLOYEES OF THAT INSURER MAY NOT BE HELD LIABLE UNDER STATE LAW OR
REGULATION:

(1) SOLELY FOR ENGAGING IN THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE; OR

(2) FOR FURTHER INVESTING ANY INCOME DERIVED FROM THE
BUSINESS OF INSURANCE.

(C) A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION THAT HAS A LEGAL INTEREST IN THE
COLLATERAL FOR A LOAN OR ANOTHER FINANCIAL SERVICE PROVIDED TO AN
OWNER, EMPLOYEE, OR OPERATOR OF A CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS
– 99 –
END OF PAGE 99

START OF PAGE 100
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER, OR TO AN OWNER OR OPERATOR OF
REAL ESTATE OR EQUIPMENT THAT IS LEASED OR SOLD TO A CANNABIS–RELATED
CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER, MAY NOT BE SUBJECT TO
CRIMINAL, CIVIL, OR ADMINISTRATIVE FORFEITURE OF THAT LEGAL INTEREST
UNDER STATE LAW FOR PROVIDING THE LOAN OR OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICE.

36–1506.

(A) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT REQUIRE A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION,
ENTITY PERFORMING A FINANCIAL SERVICE FOR OR IN ASSOCIATION WITH A
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION, OR INSURER TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL SERVICES TO A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS, SERVICE PROVIDER, OR
ANY OTHER BUSINESS.

(B) THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO LIMIT OR OTHERWISE
RESTRICT THE GENERAL EXAMINATION, SUPERVISORY, AND ENFORCEMENT
AUTHORITY OF THE STATE BANKING REGULATOR COMMISSIONER OF FINANCIAL
REGULATION, PROVIDED THAT THE BASIS FOR ANY SUPERVISORY OR
ENFORCEMENT ACTION IS NOT THE PROVISION OF FINANCIAL SERVICES TO A
CANNABIS–RELATED CANNABIS LEGITIMATE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER.

(C) THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO INTERFERE WITH THE
REGULATION OF THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE.

36–1507.

THE STATE MAY NOT COOPERATE OR AID FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
AUTHORITIES ATTEMPTING TO PROSECUTE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS THAT ARE
LAWFULLY OPERATING WITHIN THE CONFINES OF THIS SUBTITLE.

Article – Tax – General

2–1302.2.

AFTER MAKING THE DISTRIBUTIONS REQUIRED UNDER §§ 2–1301 THROUGH
2–1302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE, OF THE SALES AND USE TAX COLLECTED UNDER §
11–104(K) OF THIS ARTICLE FROM THE SALE OF CANNABIS FROM A DISPENSARY TO
A CONSUMER UNDER TITLE 36, AS DEFINED IN § 1–101 OF THE ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE, THE COMPTROLLER QUARTERLY SHALL
DISTRIBUTE:

(1) TO THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT FUND,
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 36–206 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS

– 100 –
END OF PAGE 100

START OF PAGE 101
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

ARTICLE, AN AMOUNT NECESSARY TO DEFRAY THE ENTIRE COST OF THE
OPERATION OF THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION
OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES OF THE MARYLAND CANNABIS
ADMINISTRATION ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 36 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
AND CANNABIS ARTICLE;

(2) AFTER MAKING THE DISTRIBUTION REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (1) OF
THIS SECTION:

(2) (I) 30% 35% TO THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR
FUND UNDER § 1–322 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2024 THROUGH 2033;

(3) 1.5% TO COUNTIES AND MUNICIPALITIES, WHICH SHALL BE
~~ALLOCATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ ~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERCENTAGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~REVENUE~~
COLLECTED FROM THAT JURISDICTION;

(3) 1.5% OF THE REVENUE COLLECTED IN EACH COUNTY OUTSIDE
THE BOUNDARIES OF A MUNICIPALITY TO THE COUNTY, TO BE USED FOR
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND DRUG TREATMENT;

(4) 1.5% OF THE REVENUE COLLECTED IN EACH MUNICIPALITY TO
THE MUNICIPALITY, TO BE USED FOR BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND DRUG TREATMENT;

(II) 5% TO COUNTIES, WHICH SHALL BE ALLOCATED TO EACH
COUNTY BASED ON THE PERCENTAGE OF REVENUE COLLECTED FROM THAT COUNTY,
EXCEPT THAT A COUNTY SHALL DISTRIBUTE TO A MUNICIPALITY LOCATED IN THE
COUNTY 50% OF THE ALLOCATION RECEIVED UNDER THIS ITEM THAT IS
ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE SALES AND USE TAX REVENUE GENERATED BY A DISPENSARY
LOCATED IN THAT MUNICIPALITY;

(4) (5) (III) 1.5% 5% TO THE CANNABIS PUBLIC HEALTH FUND
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 13–4505 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(5) (6) (IV) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2024 THROUGH 2028, 1.5% 5% TO
THE CANNABIS BUSINESS ASSISTANCE FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–1901 OF
THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE; AND

(6) (7)(3) ANY BALANCE REMAINING AFTER THE DISTRIBUTIONS
REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPHS (1) THROUGH ITEMS (1) AND (2) (5) (6) OF THIS
SECTION TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

2–1303.

– 101 –
END OF PAGE 101

START OF PAGE 102
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

After making the distributions required under §§ 2–1301 through [2–1302.1]
2–1302.2 of this subtitle, the Comptroller shall pay:

(1) revenues from the hotel surcharge into the Dorchester County
Economic Development Fund established under § 10–130 of the Economic Development
Article;

(2) to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund established under § 5–206
of the Education Article, the following percentage of the remaining sales and use tax
revenues:

(i) for fiscal year 2023, 9.2%;

(ii) for fiscal year 2024, 11.0%;

(iii) for fiscal year 2025, 11.3%;

(iv) for fiscal year 2026, 11.7%; and

(v) for fiscal year 2027 and each fiscal year thereafter, 12.1%; and

(3) the remaining sales and use tax revenue into the General Fund of the
State.

11–104.

(K) THE SALES AND USE TAX RATE FOR THE SALE OF CANNABIS FROM A
DISPENSARY TO A CONSUMER UNDER TITLE 36, AS DEFINED IN § 1–101 OF THE
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE IS AS FOLLOWS:, FOR FISCAL
YEAR 2024 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, 9%.

(1) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024, 6%;

(2) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025, 7%;

(3) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026, 8%;

(4) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2027, 9%; AND

(5) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
~~10%.~~

11–245.

THE SALES AND USE TAX DOES NOT APPLY TO THE SALE OF:

– 102 –
END OF PAGE 102

START OF PAGE 103
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(1) MEDICAL CANNABIS UNDER TITLE 36 OF THE ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE; OR

(2) CANNABIS BETWEEN CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS BUSINESSES
THAT ARE LICENSED UNDER TITLE 36 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND
CANNABIS ARTICLE.

Article – Economic Development

5–1901.

(a) (1) In this section[,] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “Fund” means the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund.

(3) (I) “PERSONAL NET WORTH” MEANS THE NET VALUE OF THE
ASSETS OF AN INDIVIDUAL REMAINING AFTER TOTAL LIABILITIES ARE DEDUCTED,
INCLUDING THE INDIVIDUAL’S SHARE OF ASSETS HELD JOINTLY OR AS COMMUNITY
PROPERTY WITH THE INDIVIDUAL’S SPOUSE.

(II) “PERSONAL NET WORTH” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

1. THE INDIVIDUAL’S OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN THE
APPLICANT;

2. THE INDIVIDUAL’S EQUITY IN THE INDIVIDUAL’S
PRIMARY PLACE OF RESIDENCE; OR

3. THE CASH VALUE OF ANY QUALIFIED RETIREMENT
SAVINGS PLANS OR INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS.

(b) There is a Cannabis Business Assistance Fund.

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to assist small, minority–owned, and
women–owned businesses entering the adult–use cannabis industry.

(d) The Department shall administer the Fund.

(e) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.
– 103 –
END OF PAGE 103

START OF PAGE 104
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) The Fund consists of:

(1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; [and]

(2) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1302.2 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE; AND

(3) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(g) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Fund may be used only
for:

(i) grants or loans to small, minority–owned, or women–owned
businesses for:

1. license application assistance for participation in the
adult–use cannabis industry;

2. assistance with the operating or capital expenses of a
business participating in the adult–use cannabis industry; or

3. targeted training to support participation in the adult–use
cannabis industry; and

(ii) grants to historically black colleges and universities for
cannabis–related programs and business development organizations, including incubators,
to train and assist small, minority, and women business owners and entrepreneurs seeking
to become licensed to participate in the adult–use cannabis industry.

(2) The Department:

(i) shall prioritize awarding grants and loans in accordance with
paragraph (1) of this subsection to:

1. populations that have been historically disproportionately
impacted by the enforcement of laws criminalizing the use of cannabis; ~~and~~

2. individuals who have been convicted of a violation of a law
criminalizing the use of cannabis; and

3. SOCIAL EQUITY LICENSEES TO ASSIST WITH
START–UP OPERATING AND CAPITAL FUNDING NEEDS; AND

– 104 –
END OF PAGE 104

START OF PAGE 105
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(ii) may not award grants or loans to small, minority, and women
business owners and entrepreneurs with a personal net worth exceeding $1,700,000.

(3) In order to award grants and loans in accordance with paragraph (1) of
this subsection, the Department shall develop partnerships with:

(i) traditional minority–serving institutions in the State and
surrounding jurisdictions, including historically black colleges and universities;

(ii) trade associations representing minority and women–owned
businesses; and

(iii) the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business
Affairs.

(h) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(i) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–201.

(e) “Financial institution” means:

(1) any banking institution;

(2) any national banking association;

(3) an institution that is incorporated under the laws of any other state as
a bank; [and] OR

(4) an institution that is incorporated under the laws of this State or of the
United States as a savings and loan association.

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to

– 105 –
END OF PAGE 105

START OF PAGE 106
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund;

172. THE CANNABIS REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT
FUND; AND

173. THE MEDICAL CANNABIS COMPASSIONATE USE
FUND.

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

23–201.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, §§ 23–203 through 23–205
of this subtitle apply only to:

(13) an individual who, on and before the effective date of participation as
defined under § 31–101(c) of this article, is:

(i) a supportive service employee of the Board of Education of Kent
County;

(ii) an employee of the Town of Oakland;

(iii) an employee of the City of Frostburg;

(iv) an employee of the Town of Sykesville; or

(v) an employee of the Town of University Park; [and]

(14) an employee of the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund on or after
the date that the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund begins participation in the
Employees’ Pension System; AND

(15) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND
CANNABIS COMMISSION, IF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR IS NOT A SWORN POLICE
OFFICER WITH THE POWERS GRANTED TO AN OFFICER OF THE FIELD

– 106 –
END OF PAGE 106

START OF PAGE 107
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

ENFORCEMENT DIVISION UNDER § 1–313 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND
CANNABIS ARTICLE.

26–201.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, this subtitle applies only
to:

(22) the Executive Director of the Alcohol [and], Tobacco, AND CANNABIS
Commission, ONLY IF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR IS A SWORN POLICE OFFICER WITH
THE POWERS GRANTED TO AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE FIELD
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION UNDER § 1–313 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND
CANNABIS ARTICLE.

Article – Health – General

13–4505.

(a) There is a Cannabis Public Health Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funding to address the health effects
associated with the legalization of adult–use cannabis.

(c) The Department shall administer the Fund.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) Revenue distributed to the Fund based on revenues from adult–use
cannabis;

(2) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; [and]

(3) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1302.2 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE; AND

[(3)] (4) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the Fund.

(f) The Fund may be used only for:

– 107 –
END OF PAGE 107

START OF PAGE 108
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Supporting the Advisory Council in performing its duties;

(2) Supporting data collection and research on the effects of cannabis
legalization in the State;

(3) Providing funding for education and public awareness campaigns
related to cannabis use, including funding for educational programs to be used in schools;

(4) Supporting substance use disorder counseling and treatment for
individuals;

(5) Training and equipment for law enforcement to recognize impairments
due to cannabis; and

(6) Purchasing technology proven to be effective at measuring cannabis
levels in drivers.

(g) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(h) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

SECTION ~~5.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Article – Alcoholic
Beverages of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renamed to be Article – Alcoholic
Beverages and Cannabis.

SECTION ~~6.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The transfer of the Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission personnel to the
~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ Maryland Cannabis Administration to
oversee the regulation of cannabis under this Act shall be conducted in a manner that will
minimize the costs of the transfer and will result in a more cost–efficient operation for the
regulation of cannabis for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the
State.

~~(b)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~ ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~successor~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~in~~ ~~matters~~ ~~concerning~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulation~~ ~~of~~
~~medical~~ ~~cannabis.~~

(b) The Maryland Cannabis Administration is the successor of the Maryland
Medical Cannabis Commission in matters concerning the regulation of medical cannabis.

– 108 –
END OF PAGE 108

START OF PAGE 109
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(c) In every law, executive order, rule, regulation, policy, or document created by
an official, an employee, or a unit of this State, the names and titles of those agencies and
officials mean the names and titles of the successor agency or official.

SECTION ~~7.~~ 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That all persons who, as of ~~June~~
~~30,~~ ~~2023~~ the effective date of this Act, are merit employees or contract staff in budgeted
positions of the Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission and whose positions are
transferred to the ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~ ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~oversee,~~ ~~the~~
~~regulation~~ ~~of~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~provided~~ ~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~are~~ ~~hereby~~ ~~transferred~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Cannabis~~
~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~ ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Alcohol,~~
~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ Maryland Cannabis Administration to oversee, the
regulation of cannabis provided by this Act, are hereby transferred to the Maryland
Cannabis Administration without any change or loss of rights, pay, working conditions,
benefits, rights, or status, and shall retain any merit system and retirement status they
may have on the date of transfer.

SECTION ~~8.~~ 9. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the balance of the Natalie
M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Fund on the date immediately preceding the date this Act
takes effect shall be credited to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund, and that
any funds credited to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund may be used to cover
the costs of implementing this Act and regulating the cannabis industry in Maryland.

SECTION ~~9.~~ 10. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding any
other provision of law, from the date this Act takes effect to December 31, 2023, both
inclusive, the ~~Commission~~ Maryland Cannabis Administration is exempt from
procurement requirements under the State Finance and Procurement Article if the
procurement is for:

(1) banking services for the ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~
~~Division~~ Administration to collect fees and tax revenue;

(2) banking services to help support cannabis businesses to transition from
an all cash system;

(3) a consultant to support the ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~
~~Division~~ Administration in the process for cannabis licensure, including services related to
investigations and the financial or criminal history review of applicants; ~~and~~

(4) a consultant to provide technical assistance to social equity applicants;
~~and~~

(5) communication services for public and consumer education campaigns
on cannabis laws and regulations and potential health and safety risks associated with
cannabis use; and

– 109 –
END OF PAGE 109

START OF PAGE 110
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(5)~~ (6) establishing a State cannabis testing laboratory at a preexisting site.

SECTION ~~10.~~ 11. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

~~(a)~~ ~~To~~ ~~the~~ ~~extent~~ ~~practicable~~ ~~and~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~U.S.~~ ~~Constitution,~~ ~~a~~ ~~cannabis~~
~~licensee~~ ~~shall~~ ~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~State’s~~ ~~Minority~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Enterprise~~ ~~Program.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~6~~ ~~months~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~issuance~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~license~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~36–401~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Alcoholic~~ ~~Beverages~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor’s~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Small,~~ ~~Minority,~~
~~and~~ ~~Women~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Affairs,~~ ~~in~~ ~~consultation~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~and~~
~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Social~~ ~~Equity~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~cannabis~~ ~~licensee,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~establish~~ ~~a~~ ~~clear~~ ~~plan~~ ~~for~~ ~~setting~~ ~~reasonable~~ ~~and~~ ~~appropriate~~
~~minority~~ ~~business~~ ~~enterprise~~ ~~participation~~ ~~goals~~ ~~and~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~of~~
~~goods~~ ~~and~~ ~~services~~ ~~related~~ ~~to~~ ~~cannabis,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~cultivation,~~ ~~manufacturing,~~ ~~and~~
~~dispensing~~ ~~of~~ ~~cannabis.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~To~~ ~~the~~ ~~extent~~ ~~practicable,~~ ~~the~~ ~~goals~~ ~~and~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~specified~~ ~~in~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~
~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~based~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~Title~~ ~~14,~~ ~~Subtitle~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~
~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~implementing~~ ~~that~~ ~~subtitle.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~11.~~ ~~12.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

(a) ~~(1)~~ As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Act, the ~~Cannabis~~
~~Regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Enforcement~~ ~~Division~~ Maryland Cannabis Administration established
under § 36–201 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section ~~4~~ 5
of this Act, ~~shall~~ ~~issue~~ ~~a~~ ~~license~~ ~~to~~ shall, by regulation, establish a process for issuing up to
five grower licenses to operate as a cannabis grower under Title 36, Subtitle 4 of the
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section ~~4~~ 5 of this Act, to ~~one~~
~~applicant~~ five applicants that:

(1) ~~is~~ ~~a~~ are recognized class ~~member~~ members of Pigford v. Glickman, 185
F.R.D. 82 (D.D.C. 1999), or In Re Black Farmers Litig., 856 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2011).;

(2) were awarded damages pursuant to the claims processes established for
class members of Pigford v. Glickman or In Re Black Farmers Litig. and those damages
were related to farming operations in Maryland;

(3) have provided evidence, suitable to the Administration and consistent
with constitutional and federal requirements, that they have not been fully compensated for
the discrimination they have endured and that they have experienced ongoing
discrimination or the continued effects of past discrimination; and

(4) satisfy any other criteria established by the Administration.

~~(2)~~ ~~An~~ ~~applicant~~ ~~awarded~~ ~~a~~ ~~license~~ ~~under~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection~~
~~may~~ ~~subsequently~~ ~~apply~~ ~~for~~ ~~and~~ ~~be~~ ~~awarded~~ ~~a~~ ~~license~~ ~~to~~ ~~operate~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~processor~~

– 110 –
END OF PAGE 110

START OF PAGE 111
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

~~under~~ ~~Title~~ ~~36,~~ ~~Subtitle~~ ~~4~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Alcoholic~~ ~~Beverages~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~
~~Section~~ ~~4~~ ~~5~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a license issued under subsection
(a) of this section is in addition to and not subject to the limitations on the total number of
licenses that the ~~Division~~ Administration may issue under Title 36, Subtitle 4 of the
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section ~~4~~ 5 of this Act.

(c) If an applicant for a license to operate as a cannabis grower that is a
recognized class member is not awarded a license under subsection (a) of this section:

(1) the applicant may apply for a license in accordance with the provisions
of Title 36 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section ~~4~~ 5 of
this Act;

(2) the ~~Division~~ Administration shall allow the applicant to amend, if
necessary, and resubmit the applicant’s application or withdraw the application entirely;
and

(3) the ~~Division~~ Administration may waive the initial application fee for
the applicant but may charge the applicant a reasonable fee for the resubmission or an
unamended or amended application.

SECTION ~~13.~~ 12. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Act, the ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~
~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ Maryland Cannabis Administration shall contract with an
independent consultant to complete a study on wholesale cannabis licenses.

(b) The study shall include:

(1) the costs to regulate wholesale cannabis licenses;

(2) whether there is market necessity for wholesale cannabis licensing;

(3) whether there is a need for wholesale cannabis licensing to alleviate
supply demand and facilitate an equitable marketplace for suppliers and retailers; and

(4) the approximate number of wholesale cannabis licenses appropriate for
the size of the marketplace in the State.

(c) On or before June 1, 2024, the ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~
Maryland Cannabis Administration shall submit the results of the study required under
subsection (a) of this section to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

– 111 –
END OF PAGE 111

START OF PAGE 112
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION ~~14.~~ 13. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Economic Development Corporation shall identify in each of
the following locations a site for proposed use as incubator space, to be established in
accordance with § 36–406 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, as enacted by
Section 5 of this Act:

(1) Caroline County, Cecil County, Dorchester County, Kent County,
Queen Anne’s County, Somerset County, Talbot County, Wicomico County, or Worcester
County;

(2) Allegany County, Garrett County, or Washington County;

(3) Baltimore City or a beltway community located in Anne Arundel
County or Baltimore County; and

(4) a beltway community located in Montgomery County or Prince George’s
County.

(b) The site identifications shall include:

(1) the proposed locations for incubator spaces identified under subsection
(a) of this section;

(2) the square footage of the identified locations; and

(3) the estimated costs for construction or renovation of the proposed
location to prepare it for use as an incubator space.

(c) In evaluating sites for proposed use as incubator spaces, the Maryland
Economic Development Corporation shall consider, in addition to other appropriate
criteria, the suitability of converting to incubator space obsolete or underutilized
commercial and retail properties such as enclosed malls, big box stores, and warehouse
spaces.

(d) On or before January 1, 2024, the Maryland Economic Development
Corporation shall submit a report on the identified sites and the qualifying criteria required
by this section to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION ~~15.~~ 14. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Act, the ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~
~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ Maryland Cannabis Administration shall conduct a study on
on–site consumption of cannabis and cannabis products at retail premises of cannabis
licensees.

– 112 –
END OF PAGE 112

START OF PAGE 113
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

(b) The study shall include:

(1) a survey of regulations and trade practices for on–site consumption of
cannabis and cannabis products in other states and countries;

(2) authorizations and restrictions for the use of cannabis distributed at
cannabis premises and for the removal of unconsumed cannabis or cannabis products from
the premises;

(3) operational procedures and controls for on–site consumption premises
and the preparation, use, and consumption of cannabis and cannabis products;

(4) training requirements and safeguards for employees of premises with
on–site consumption of cannabis and cannabis products; and

(5) recommendations for policies to implement on–site consumption of
cannabis and cannabis products at suitable locations, including suggested legislative and
regulatory changes.

(c) The ~~Commission~~ Administration may contract with an independent
contractor to conduct the study under this section.

(d) On or before June 1, 2024, the ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~
Maryland Cannabis Administration shall submit the results of the study required under
subsection (a) of this section to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

~~SECTION~~ ~~16.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Alcohol,~~ ~~Tobacco,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~study:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~types~~ ~~of~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~products~~ ~~and~~ ~~cannabis–infused~~ ~~products~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~not~~
~~meant~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~smoked~~ ~~and~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~available~~ ~~in~~ ~~neighboring~~ ~~states~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~jurisdictions,~~
~~such~~ ~~as~~ ~~low–concentration~~ ~~edibles,~~ ~~cannabis–infused~~ ~~soft~~ ~~drinks~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~beverages,~~ ~~and~~
~~related~~ ~~products;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~issues~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~processing,~~ ~~packaging,~~ ~~labeling,~~ ~~and~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~these~~
~~cannabis~~ ~~products~~ ~~as~~ ~~they~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~introduced~~ ~~into~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~adult–use~~ ~~cannabis~~
~~regulatory~~ ~~system;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~regulatory~~ ~~and~~ ~~enforcement~~ ~~issues~~ ~~that~~ ~~may~~ ~~arise~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~introduction~~
~~and~~ ~~availability~~ ~~of~~ ~~these~~ ~~cannabis~~ ~~products~~ ~~in~~ ~~Maryland.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~July~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~submit~~ ~~a~~ ~~report,~~ ~~including~~
~~any~~ ~~proposed~~ ~~legislative~~ ~~or~~ ~~regulatory~~ ~~changes,~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~and,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~

– 113 –
END OF PAGE 113

START OF PAGE 114
Ch. 254 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Senate~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~House~~
~~Economic~~ ~~Matters~~ ~~Committee.~~

SECTION 15. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) This section applies only to a business awarded a grower license under § 9 of
Chapter 598 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018 that does not hold a cannabis
dispensary license.

(b) (1) A licensed grower subject to this section may apply to the Maryland
Cannabis Administration for and be awarded a standard dispensary license established
under § 36–401(c)(1)(iii) of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article as enacted by
Section 5 of this Act.

(2) If the licensed grower meets the minimum qualifications as determined
by the Maryland Cannabis Administration for a standard dispensary license, the
Administration shall award the grower a standard dispensary license.

SECTION 16. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding any other
provision of law, on or before June 30, 2024, the Governor may transfer to the Maryland
Cannabis Administration established under § 36–201 of the Alcoholic Beverages and
Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section 5 of this Act, any positions and the associated funds,
and any amount of the unexpended appropriation under the Alcohol and Tobacco
Commission – Administration and Enforcement (E17A01.01), Alcohol and Tobacco
Commission – Shared Services (E17A01.02), and Alcohol and Tobacco Commission –
Cannabis Regulatory and Enforcement Division (E17A01.03) that was included in the fiscal
year 2024 operating budget (House Bill 200 of the Acts of 2023).

SECTION 17. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, as soon as practicable after
the effective date of this Act, the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission and the
Maryland Cannabis Administration shall enter into a memorandum of understanding that
provides that both parties agree to collaborate in order to enforce the provisions of this Act
with respect to unlicensed cannabis operations in the State.

SECTION 18. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That notwithstanding §
1–309(c)(1) of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section 5 of this
Act, an individual serving as the Executive Director of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission
on the effective date of this Act may continue to serve as the Executive Director of the Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission.

SECTION ~~12.~~ ~~17.~~ 19. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
the section affected.

– 114 –
END OF PAGE 114

START OF PAGE 115
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 254

SECTION ~~13.~~ ~~18.~~ 20. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an
emergency measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or
safety, has been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members
elected to each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the
date it is enacted.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 115 –
END OF PAGE 115