START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 516 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 516 
(Delegate Love) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Agriculture - Use of Antimicrobial Drugs - Reporting Deadlines 
 
 
This bill moves the date – from February 1 to July 1 – by which the Maryland Department 
of Agriculture (MDA) must submit a report to the General Assembly each year on data 
collected on the use in the State of medically important antimicrobial drugs in cattle, swine, 
and poultry. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each year MDA must collect publicly available data on the use in the State 
of medically important antimicrobial drugs in cattle, swine, and poultry from (1) the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture; (2) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; (3) the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA); and (4) appropriate national and State trade 
associations, organizations, and councils.  
 
By February 1 each year, a licensed veterinarian must submit to MDA (1) a copy of the 
record prescribing the medically important antimicrobial drug or a copy of the veterinary 
feed directive for each medically important antimicrobial drug, as listed in Appendix A of 
FDA’s Guidance for Industry #152, administered in feed or water to cattle, swine, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 516/ Page 2 
poultry during the previous calendar year and (2) an accounting, as provided by the owner, 
of the total number of animals raised during the previous calendar year, categorized by 
species and production class. 
 
By February 1 each year, MDA must report to the General Assembly on the above data 
collected – from public sources and licensed veterinarians – on the use in the State of 
medically important antimicrobial drugs in cattle, swine, and poultry. The report must 
include, for the previous calendar year, the following data (disaggregated by county, unless 
there are two or fewer reporting farm operations in a particular county for a category of 
data): 
 
 
the total number of animals raised on specified farm operations, categorized by 
species and production class; 
 
the specific antimicrobial active ingredients and classes of antimicrobial active 
ingredients used; 
 
the total weight of antimicrobial active ingredients used; 
 
indications for which veterinarians prescribed medically important antimicrobial 
drugs; and 
 
patterns of use for medically important antimicrobial drugs, including duration and 
seasonal variation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2