START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 561 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 561 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Town of Mount Airy (Carroll County and Frederick County) - Urban Renewal 
Authority 
 
  
This bill authorizes the Town of Mount Airy to undertake urban renewal projects within 
urban renewal areas by exercising the power of eminent domain to acquire properties in 
specific areas. The town may not initiate an urban renewal project unless its legislative body 
adopts a resolution that defines the area and finds that rehabilitation or redevelopment is 
necessary and in the public’s interest. Condemnation of land or property under the bill must 
be in accordance with the procedure set forth in State law. Further, the bill sets forth 
procedures for taking the property, funds which may be used to do so, and disposition of the 
property, including authorization to dispose of it to private persons. Property may not be 
taken without just compensation, either as agreed upon by the parties or awarded by a jury. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
  
State Effect:  No direct effect; however, the bill could result in a minimal increase in State 
tax revenues, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  If the bill’s authority is used, the Town of Mount Airy’s expenditures may 
increase to acquire land and conduct urban renewal projects, and town revenues may 
increase from the sale of land and properties acquired. While not a direct effect, the bill 
could result in a minimal increase in tax revenues for Mount Airy and Carroll and Frederick 
counties. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful if a property targeted 
for urban renewal is a small business or if any urban renewal projects lead to additional 
economic activity for small businesses in the town. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 561/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Eminent Domain  
 
 
The power to take, or condemn, private property for public use is one of the inherent powers 
of state government and, through the state, its political subdivisions. Courts have long held 
that this power, known as “eminent domain,” is derived from the sovereignty of the state. 
Both the federal and State constitutions limit the condemnation authority. Both 
constitutions establish two requirements for taking property through the power of eminent 
domain:  (1) the property taken must be for a “public use”; and (2) the party whose property 
is taken must receive “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair market value 
of the real property. In either event, the party whose property is being taken is generally 
entitled to a judicial proceeding prior to the taking of the property. However, the 
Maryland Constitution 
does 
authorize 
“quick-take” 
condemnations 
in 
limited 
circumstances prior to a court proceeding.  
 
Other entities have been given express statutory authority by the State to exercise 
condemnation powers under specified circumstances, including the major subdivisions of 
the State, municipalities, and specified utilities such as gas, oil pipeline, railroad, telephone 
and telegraph, and water companies.  
 
Public Use  
 
There is no clear cut rule to determine whether a particular use of property taken through 
eminent domain is a “public use,” and Maryland courts have broadly interpreted the term. 
The Court of Appeals has recognized takings that encompass a “public benefit” or a “public 
purpose.” Maryland courts have given great deference to a legislative determination as to 
whether property should be taken for a particular public purpose.  
 
The courts have stated that government may not simply transfer property from one private 
party to another. For example, in Van Witsen v. Gutman, 79 Md. 405 (1894), the Court of 
Appeals invalidated a condemnation by Baltimore City in which the court found the 
transfer would have benefited one private citizen at the cost of others. However, 
transferring property from one private party to another is not necessarily forbidden. In 
Prince George’s County v. Collington, 275 Md. 171 (1975), the Court of Appeals 
authorized the county to use its eminent domain authority to take private property to be 
used for economic development purposes, even though the property was not blighted. The 
Collington court enunciated the following rule:  “projects reasonably designed to benefit 
the general public, by significantly enhancing the economic growth of the State or its 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 561/ Page 3 
subdivisions, are public uses, at least where the exercise of the power of condemnation 
provides an impetus which private enterprise cannot provide.” Id. at 191. 
 
U.S. Supreme Court Ruling  
 
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Kelo v. City of New London, 125 S. Ct. 2655 (2005) that 
New London, Connecticut’s use of its condemnation authority under a state law to require 
several homeowners in an economically depressed area to vacate their properties to make 
way for mixed use development did not violate the U.S. Constitution. In essence, the Kelo 
decision left the determination to state law as to whether eminent domain may be used for 
economic development purposes. An earlier decision, Berman v. Parker, 75 S. Ct. 98 
(1954), had already found that taking a nonblighted property in a blighted area as part of 
an overall economic development scheme does not violate the U.S. Constitution.  
 
Urban Renewal Authority  
 
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution grants municipalities broad power to amend 
their existing charters or local laws and to adopt a new charter without the approval of the 
General Assembly. In addition, Article XI-E generally prohibits the General Assembly 
from enacting local laws for particular municipalities. However, this general prohibition is 
expressly qualified by Article III, Section 61 of the Constitution (the Urban Renewal 
Amendment). This amendment provides that the General Assembly’s power to enact local 
laws regarding local urban renewal projects for slum clearance prevails over the restrictions 
contained in Article XI-E. The General Assembly has enacted more than 60 separate public 
local laws authorizing individual municipalities to carry out urban renewal projects for the 
rehabilitation of slum or blighted areas. Chapter 519 of 1995 amended the home rule 
powers of municipalities as expressed in Article 23A of the Code by adding the power to 
acquire land or property for development or redevelopment and to sell or otherwise dispose 
of the land or property to any private, public, or quasi-public entity. The law, however, 
specifies that this power may be exercised only by a municipality that has urban renewal 
authority for slum clearance under Article III, Section 61 of the Maryland Constitution. 
 
The Town of Mount Airy does not have the power to use eminent domain for an urban 
renewal area. As of July 1, 2021, the population of Mount Airy totaled 9,755, with 
6,181 individuals residing in Carroll County and 3,574 individuals residing in 
Frederick County. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  If an urban renewal area in the Town of Mount Airy is rehabilitated 
and the real property assessable base increases, property tax revenues increase. Similarly, 
if an area is revitalized and additional residents move to these areas, income tax and sales 
tax revenues could increase. It is noted that any tax revenue that might derive from 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 561/ Page 4 
economic development depends on the success of a particular project. Given the population 
of the town, it is assumed that any such impact is minimal. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal impact of the bill depends on whether the town exercises 
eminent domain authority for urban renewal purposes, how many times this authority is 
used, and the value of any property taken, none of which can be quantified at this time. If 
the town exercises this authority, expenditures increase related to legal fees and land and 
property acquisition costs. However, the town could recoup some or all of these 
expenditures if a property taken is sold to a developer. 
 
In addition to the direct fiscal effect of the bill, there is an indirect effect that urban renewal 
could have on local tax revenues. If a blighted area in the town is rehabilitated and the real 
property assessable base increases, property tax revenues increase. Similarly, if an area is 
revitalized and additional residents move to these areas, income tax and sales tax revenues 
could increase. It is noted that any tax revenue that might derive from economic 
development depends on the success of a particular project. Given the population of the 
town, it is assumed that any such impact is minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1385 of 2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:SB 313 (Carroll County Senators) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll and Frederick counties; Comptroller’s Office; Town of 
Mount Airy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Commerce; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Planning; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
js/hlb    
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4