START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 293

Chapter 293

(House Bill 505)

AN ACT concerning

Elevator Safety – Privately Owned Single–Family Residential Elevators –
Inspection and Registration Requirements

FOR the purpose of establishing that an elevator installed in a privately owned
single–family residential dwelling on or after a certain date is subject to certain
inspection and registration requirements; and generally relating to elevator safety.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 12–804 and 12–808
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 12–810
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

12–804.

(a) (1) Part II of this subtitle does not apply to an elevator unit that is:

(i) except as provided in [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of
this subsection, installed in a privately owned single–family residential dwelling; or

(ii) installed in a building or structure under federal control or
regulation.

(2) Part II of this subtitle applies to a cliffside elevator located on the
property of a privately owned single–family residential dwelling.

(3) SECTIONS 12–808 AND 12–810 OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLY TO AN
ELEVATOR UNIT INSTALLED ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2023, IN A PRIVATELY
OWNED SINGLE–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 293 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) Sections 5–205(j), 5–207, 5–214, 5–215, and 5–216 and Title 5, Subtitle 8 of
the Labor and Employment Article apply to Part II of this subtitle.

12–808.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, each elevator unit owned or to be
operated shall be registered with the Commissioner at least 60 days before its planned
completion and before it is placed in service.

(b) (1) The owner or lessee of each elevator unit shall register it on the form
provided by the Commissioner.

(2) For each elevator unit registered, the owner or lessee shall provide:

(i) its type;

(ii) its rating load and speed;

(iii) the name of its manufacturer;

(iv) its location;

(v) the purpose for which it is used; and

(vi) any other information the Commissioner requires.

(3) THE COMMISSIONER:

(I) MAY NOT DISCLOSE TO THE PUBLIC ANY INFORMATION
REGARDING A REGISTERED ELEVATOR UNIT INSTALLED IN A PRIVATELY OWNED
SINGLE–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING; AND

(II) SHALL DELETE THE REGISTRATION OF AN ELEVATOR UNIT
THAT IS INSTALLED IN A PRIVATELY OWNED SINGLE–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING ON COMPLETION OF THE FINAL ACCEPTANCE INSPECTION UNDER §
12–810 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(c) Under emergency circumstances, an owner or lessee may register an elevator
unit with the Commissioner with less than 60 days’ notice in accordance with regulations
adopted under Part II of this subtitle.

(d) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN ELEVATOR UNIT THAT
IS INSTALLED IN A PRIVATELY OWNED SINGLE–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 293

(2) After an elevator unit is placed in service and a certificate issued
pursuant to § 12–811(a) of this subtitle, the owner or lessee shall reregister the elevator
unit with the Commissioner 30 days prior to the expiration of the certificate.

12–810.

The Commissioner shall conduct a final acceptance inspection on completion of the
installation, modification, or alteration of an elevator unit before it is placed in service.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3