START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 503 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 503 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Natural Resources - Greenspace Equity Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Greenspace Equity Program in the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) to provide grants to eligible applicants to enhance the public health and 
livability of overburdened communities and underserved communities. The program is 
funded with money from Program Open Space (POS). The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $101,000 in FY 2024, by $365,700 
in FY 2025, and by ongoing amounts in future years, as discussed below. Grants are funded 
with redirected special funds, having no net effect on special fund expenditures. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
101,000 
365,700 
361,200 
479,200 
497,600 
Net Effect 
($101,000) 
($365,700) 
($361,200) 
($479,200) 
($497,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures may increase beginning in 
FY 2025. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 503/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Program and Advisory Board Established 
 
The bill establishes the Greenspace Equity Program within, and administered by, DNR. 
The purpose of the program is to enhance the public health and livability of overburdened 
communities and underserved communities by implementing projects to preserve, create, 
and enhance community greenspace. 
 
“Overburdened community” and “underserved community” have the meanings stated 
under existing provisions of the Environment Article of the Maryland Code that establish 
and govern the Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities. 
“Overburdened community” means any census tract for which three or more of specified 
environmental health indicators are above the seventy-fifth percentile statewide. 
“Underserved community” means any census tract in which, according to the most recent 
U.S. Census Bureau Survey (1) at least 25% of the residents qualify as low-income; (2) at 
least 50% of the residents identify as nonwhite; or (3) at least 15% of the residents have 
limited English proficiency. 
 
“Community greenspace” includes (1) a community garden; (2) a community gathering 
open space area; (3) a community woodland; (4) a green network (a system of greenspaces 
interconnected by linear corridors that facilitate the movement of people and wildlife); (5) a 
park; (6) a trail; and (7) an urban farm. 
 
The bill also establishes a Greenspace Equity Advisory Board, staffed by DNR, to serve as 
a consultant to the department in the implementation and administration of the program. 
 
Program Funding and Grants 
 
The bill requires a portion of POS funding to be transferred by an appropriation in the State 
budget to the Greenspace Equity Program, as follows:  (1) up to $5.0 million in fiscal 2025; 
(2) up to $7.0 million in fiscal 2026; and (3) up to $10.0 million in fiscal 2027 and each 
fiscal year thereafter.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2025, DNR must make grants under the program to eligible applicants 
for community greenspace projects located (1) in an overburdened community; (2) in an 
underserved community; or (3) on a property owned by an eligible applicant, or for which 
the applicant holds a conservation easement, located in a census tract adjacent to an 
overburdened community or an underserved community. If there are sufficient funding 
requests for land acquisition, at least 50% of grants awarded each year must be awarded to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 503/ Page 3 
projects that include land acquisition. “Land acquisition” means the fee simple acquisition 
of real property or the acquisition of a perpetual conservation easement.  
 
The bill lists authorized expenses the grants may be used for, in addition to land acquisition:  
(1) appraisals, environmental assessments, site clearance or development, and other due 
diligence expenses related to implementing a project; (2) specified administrative and 
compliance costs; and (3) specified stewardship projects. 
 
Eligible applicants are (1) specified land trusts or nongovernmental organizations located 
or working in an overburdened community or an underserved community where a project 
is proposed to be implemented or (2) a county or municipality. Grants for land acquisition 
may only be awarded to land trusts, counties, and municipalities. 
 
The bill specifies responsibilities of DNR in administering the program and procedures, 
requirements, and criteria applicable to the awarding and use of the grants, including a 
requirement that DNR submit to the Maryland State Clearinghouse for Intergovernmental 
Assistance, for review and comment, all grant applications that will be recommended to 
the Board of Public Works (BPW) for an award under the program. A grant application 
submitted to the clearinghouse is subject to approval by BPW. 
 
The bill prohibits land acquired by a grant awarded under the program from being 
converted from outdoor public recreation or open space to any other use without prior 
written approval of the secretaries of natural resources, budget and management, and 
planning. In addition, the grant recipient must replace the land being converted with 
specified equivalent outdoor public recreation or open space land. Land developed or 
improved by a grant awarded under the program must be operated and maintained for 
public use by the grant recipient for at least 15 years from the project completion date. 
 
DNR may adopt regulations to carry out the program. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Program Open Space 
 
POS is administered by DNR and provides funding at the State and local level for the 
acquisition and development of land for recreation and open space purposes. POS consists 
of a State and local component and is funded with the State transfer tax of 0.5% of the 
consideration paid for the transfer of real property. Under a statutory formula, 76.15% of 
State transfer tax revenues are distributed to POS and, subject to certain additional detail 
and distributions, in general, approximately 50% of the transfer tax funding distributed to 
POS is allocated to State land acquisition and capital improvements on DNR land, 30% is 
allocated to local government acquisition and development, and 20% is allocated to State 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 503/ Page 4 
forest and park operations. The funding transferred under the bill to the Greenspace Equity 
Program is from the 50% allocated to State land acquisition and capital improvements. 
 
Use of Park Equity Tool in Decision Making 
 
Chapter 39 of 2022 requires that DNR’s decisions related to the location and establishment 
of new State parks or amenities must target areas (1) identified by the department’s park 
equity tool as in need of recreational opportunities and (2) that would relieve overcrowding 
in existing State parks that have consistently had to close to the public due to capacity 
restrictions. 
 
Maryland State Clearinghouse for Intergovernmental Assistance 
 
State law requires the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) to serve as a repository 
and clearinghouse for information concerning federal and State grants, loans, and other 
financial and technical assistance. MDP regulations establish (1) the State Clearinghouse 
for Intergovernmental Assistance as a unit of the department and (2) under the 
clearinghouse, a Maryland Intergovernmental Review and Coordination Process for 
collecting and transmitting the views of State, regional, and local officials on, among other 
things, specific applications for federal and State financial assistance.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Program Grants Funded with Redirected Special Funds 
 
Special fund expenditures of up to $5.0 million in fiscal 2025, up to $7.0 million in 
fiscal 2026, and up to $10.0 million in fiscal 2027 and each fiscal year thereafter, are 
redirected from State land acquisition, under POS, to grants for community greenspace 
projects under the Greenspace Equity Program. The funding that is redirected to the 
program under the bill, funds – under current law – certain allocations toward capital 
improvement and other purposes, before the remaining funding is allocated to State land 
acquisition. 
 
Because the special funds are redirected from other purposes, there is no net increase in 
special fund expenditures. It is assumed for the purposes of this fiscal and policy note that 
those special fund expenditures are only used for grants under the program and not for 
administrative costs since (1) under current law, those funds are used only for land 
acquisition and not POS administrative costs and (2) the bill does not explicitly authorize 
the use of those funds for administrative costs under the Greenspace Equity Program. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 503/ Page 5 
General Fund Expenditures Increase to Administer the Program 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $101,019 in fiscal 2024, by $365,658 in fiscal 2025, 
and by ongoing amounts in future years. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
(1) one lead program administration position in fiscal 2024 to set up the program, staff the 
Greenspace Equity Advisory Board, and provide technical assistance to potential grant 
recipients and (2) two additional program administration positions and one administrative 
support position in fiscal 2025, to help administer the program when funding for grants 
becomes available. The estimate assumes the maximum amounts authorized under the bill 
are transferred from POS to the program (discussed below). DNR advises that existing 
personnel cannot absorb the additional work of administering the grant program. As 
discussed above, it is assumed for the purposes of this fiscal and policy note that the 
redirected special funds are used only for grants and, therefore, general funds are needed 
to cover the costs of administering the program. The estimate reflects a 30-day start-up 
delay, with expenditures beginning July 1, 2023, and includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
Positions (New) 
1.0 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$93,345 
$341,534 
Operating Expenses 
      7,674 
    24,124 
Total General Fund Expenditures 
$101,019 
$365,658 
  
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) hiring of an additional program administration position in fiscal 2027, to help 
manage an increased workload when annual funding available for grants reaches 
$10.0 million; and (3) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The estimate reflects the level of staff needed to administer the program if the maximum 
amounts authorized under the bill are transferred to the program for grants – $5.0 million 
in fiscal 2025, $7.0 million in fiscal 2026, and $10.0 million annually thereafter. If smaller 
amounts are transferred, the number of staff needed may be reduced to as little as two – the 
lead program administration position starting in fiscal 2024 and one additional program 
administration position starting in fiscal 2025 – in which case, general fund expenditures 
increase by $101,019 in fiscal 2024 and $186,214 in fiscal 2025, with future years 
reflecting full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover and annual increases 
in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Other Agencies 
 
MDP indicates that the State Clearinghouse for Intergovernmental Assistance can 
coordinate the review and comment process for grant applications with existing resources; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 503/ Page 6 
review and comment by other State agencies is assumed to be handled with existing 
resources. Likewise, BPW can approve grant awards using existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase beginning in 
fiscal 2025, to the extent counties or municipalities apply for and receive grants under the 
program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may meaningfully benefit from the redirection 
of funds from State land acquisition under POS to community greenspace projects under 
the Greenspace Equity Program. DNR indicates that small businesses perform due 
diligence work – title work, surveys, and appraisals – associated with POS State land 
acquisition. If community greenspace projects involve capital improvements, as well as 
land acquisition, small businesses may benefit from an increase in the demand for their 
goods and services.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 923 (Senator Rosapepe) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Planning; Board of 
Public Works; Department of Housing and Community Development; Baltimore City; 
Calvert, Caroline, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - May 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 17, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6