START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 552 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 552 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Economic Development - Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program and Fund 
(Innovation Economy Infrastructure Act of 2023) 
 
   
This Administration bill establishes the Build Our Future Grant (BOFG) Pilot Program and 
Fund (BOFGF) in the Department of Commerce to provide grant funding for infrastructure 
projects intended to support innovation in eligible technology sectors. Under the program, 
grants of up to $2.0 million may be awarded to private companies, nonprofits, local 
governments, or colleges and universities in the State and may be used to defray specified 
costs associated with an eligible innovation infrastructure project. A grant recipient must 
provide matching funds of either 200% or 400%, depending on the size of the grant. 
Additional requirements are placed on grants to and used by colleges and universities. A 
single entity is limited to $2.0 million in grants in a fiscal year. Commerce administers 
BOFGF, which may be used to provide grants and for administrative costs (up to 10%). 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually from FY 2024 
through 2027, under the assumptions discussed below. Special fund revenues and 
expenditures for BOFGF increase correspondingly. Higher education revenues and 
expenditures increase to the extent that public institutions of higher education receive 
grants and provide matching funds. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the General 
Assembly includes a general fund appropriation of $10.0 million for Commerce, contingent 
on enactment of this bill.   
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$0 
Higher Ed Rev. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 552/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that local 
governments, including community colleges, receive grants and provide matching funds. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with 
this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Eligible Recipients and Uses 
 
Grants may be awarded to private companies, nonprofit entities, local governments, or 
colleges and universities in the State. 
 
Commerce may award grants to approved recipients carrying out infrastructure projects 
intended to support innovation in any of the following eligible technology sectors:  
advanced manufacturing; aerospace; agriculture; artificial intelligence; biotechnology; 
blue technology; cybersecurity; defense; energy and sustainability; life sciences; quantum; 
and sensor and robotics. Examples of eligible projects include sensitive compartmented 
information facilities, wet laboratories, cyber ranges, prototype manufacturing centers, and 
other specialized workforce training, skill certification, or research-related spaces. 
 
The grant awards may be used to defray the cost of acquiring, constructing, rehabilitating, 
installing, improving, or equipping eligible innovation infrastructure projects. 
 
A single entity may be awarded a maximum of $2.0 million in grant funds per fiscal year. 
For a grant of up to $1.0 million, the grant recipient must provide matching funds of at 
least 200%. For grants exceeding $1.0 million and up to $2.0 million, the grant recipient 
must provide matching funds of at least 400%. Matching funds received through other State 
grant programs are not counted toward the requirement. The grant recipient must 
demonstrate the ability to cover the full estimated cost of the project. 
 
Grants to colleges and universities must be for projects that are performed in collaboration 
with private industry or offer significant economic impact and the opportunity for 
entrepreneurship or technological innovation clusters in the State. No more than 50% of 
the appropriation to BOFGF can be awarded to colleges and universities in a fiscal year. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 552/ Page 3 
A grant recipient may be subject to repayment of the grant in an amount determined by 
Commerce if the recipient fails to comply with the department’s reporting requirements or 
demonstrate appropriate use of the grant funds. 
 
Build Our Future Grant Fund 
 
BOFGF is established as a special, nonlapsing, fund in Commerce, consisting of money 
appropriated in the State budget, interest earnings, and any other money from any other 
source. The fund may be used to provide grants in accordance with the program and to pay 
administrative costs (up to 10% per fiscal year). All funds remaining in BOFGF when the 
bill terminates June 30, 2027, revert to the general fund. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
By July 1, 2026, Commerce must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
projects funded through and the economic impact of the program. 
 
Current Law/Background:  There is no direct State analogue for the BOFG Pilot Program 
established under the bill. Several related programs are described below, along with their 
funding levels in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly. Commerce’s 
Office of Finance Programs is charged with delivering and administering the department’s 
financial incentive and tax credit programs. A more comprehensive list of financial 
incentives available for Maryland businesses can be found on Commerce’s website. 
 
Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority and Fund 
 
The Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority and Fund (MEDAAF) is 
Commerce’s primary and most flexible tool for business financial assistance. The fund has 
five capabilities, which are to provide: 
 
 
loans to businesses of up to $10.0 million for a significant economic development 
opportunity on a statewide or regional level; 
 
loans to businesses of up to $5.0 million, or conditional loans and grants to 
businesses of up to $2.0 million, for a local economic development opportunity;  
 
direct assistance to the Maryland Economic Development Corporation or a local 
jurisdiction for purposes such as land acquisition, infrastructure improvements, 
acquisition of fixed assets, and leasehold improvements;  
 
grants to regional or local revolving loan funds; and  
 
special purpose loans, including day care facilities, aquaculture, and brownfields.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 552/ Page 4 
Generally, businesses must be located within a priority funding area and an eligible 
industry sector. With few exceptions, assistance may not exceed 70% of the total project 
costs. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $17.5 million 
for MEDAAF.   
 
Biotechnology and Innovation Investment Incentive Tax Credits 
 
The Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit is a refundable income tax credit for 
investments in qualified biotechnology companies. An investor who invests at least 
$25,000 in a qualified Maryland biotechnology company can claim a credit equal to 33% 
of the investment, not to exceed $250,000. An enhanced credit of 50% of the investment, 
up to $500,000, is available if a qualified biotechnology company is located in certain rural 
counties or a Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise (RISE) Zone and meets other 
specified requirements. Commerce administers the tax credit, and the total amount awarded 
in each year is generally limited to the amount appropriated to the program’s reserve fund. 
Commerce may not issue any tax credit certificates after June 30, 2028. The fiscal 2024 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $12.0 million in funding for the 
program. 
 
The Innovation Investment Incentive Tax Credit (formerly the Cybersecurity Investment 
Incentive Tax Credit) is a refundable income tax credit for investments in qualified 
technology companies. An investor who invests at least $25,000 in a qualified Maryland 
technology can claim a refundable credit equal to 33% of a qualified investment, not to 
exceed $250,000. An enhanced credit of 50% of the investment, up to $500,000, is 
available if a qualified technology company is located in certain rural counties or a 
RISE Zone and meets other specified requirements. Commerce administers the tax credit, 
and the total amount of credits awarded each year is generally limited to the amount 
appropriated to the program’s reserve fund. The program terminates June 30, 2025. The 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $2.0 million in funding for 
the program. 
 
More Jobs for Marylanders Program 
 
Chapter 149 of 2017 established the More Jobs for Marylanders program, which after 
several modifications provides a refundable State income tax credit to certain businesses 
that create and maintain a minimum number of qualified jobs. For businesses certified 
beginning June 1, 2022, the credit is equal to 4.75% of the wages paid to each qualified 
position. Credits are available for manufacturing businesses, or other businesses if they are 
located in opportunity zones. Credits may be claimed for 5 or 10 years, depending on the 
location of the business. Commerce may issue up to $5.0 million in credit certificates in 
each of fiscal 2023 and 2024 and may not issue new tax credit certificates after 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 552/ Page 5 
May 31, 2024. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$34.0 million in funding for the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
a general fund appropriation of $10.0 million for Commerce, contingent on enactment of 
this bill. The bill does not mandate any level of funding in any year; however, given the 
potential size of the program grants, this analysis assumes $10.0 million is provided each 
year until the program terminates and that Commerce provides all of the available funding 
to eligible recipients each year. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million from fiscal 2024 through 
2027. Special fund revenues and expenditures for BOFGF increase correspondingly as 
funds are received and used to provide grants and to potentially pay for Commerce’s 
administrative costs. At this funding level, Commerce advises that it can provide a limited 
number of large grants (for example, 10 grants of $1.0 million) each year with existing 
staff resources. In the event that more grants are provided, either due to smaller grant 
amounts or additional program funding, up to 10% of BOFGF funds may instead be used 
for the department’s administrative expenses. 
 
Among other eligible recipients and subject to specified requirements, Commerce may 
provide grants to colleges and universities in the State – up to 50% of the BOFGF 
appropriation each year. Therefore, higher education revenues increase from fiscal 2024 
through 2027 to the extent that funds are awarded to public institutions of higher education; 
higher education expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2024 as grant funds are used 
and to provide required matching funds. 
 
While not assumed in the above estimate, any remaining funds in BOFGF revert to the 
general fund upon termination of the program. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Among other eligible recipients, Commerce may provide grants to 
local governments and colleges and universities in the State, which presumably would 
include community colleges. Therefore, local revenues and expenditures increase to the 
extent local governments, including community colleges, receive grants and provide 
matching funds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 552/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  SB 549 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and 
Management; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland 
Independent College and University Association; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 15, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 552/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Innovation Economy Infrastructure Act  
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0552/SB0549 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY:  Brad Fallon  
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
    X    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
If passed, this legislation will impact a variety of businesses. Most directly, the Build Our 
Future Grant Pilot Program will impact real estate developers who construct, rehabilitate, 
and/or modify infrastructure to house businesses in certain, tech-driven industries. While 
less common, this may also impact certain businesses who own the facilities that they 
operate within. At the matching ratios set forth in the bill, this could cover between 33% 
and 20% of total project costs for a company receiving a grant with a 2:1 match ratio and 
up to 20% of total project costs for a company receiving a grant with a 4:1 match ratio. 
 
This will also impact not-for-profit organizations, local government, colleges, and 
universities through direct financial assistance. The economic activity initiated by these 
entities and for-profit organizations will impact construction companies, equipment 
manufacturers and retailers, and other related businesses.  

END OF PAGE 7