START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 69

Chapter 69

(House Bill 516)

AN ACT concerning

Agriculture – Use of Antimicrobial Drugs – Reporting Deadlines

FOR the purpose of altering the date on which the Department of Agriculture must submit
a certain annual report regarding the use of medically important antimicrobial drugs
in cattle, swine, and poultry to the General Assembly; and generally relating to the
use of medically important antimicrobial drugs in cattle, swine, and poultry.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Agriculture
Section 3–1004
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

3–1004.

(a) Each year the Department shall collect publicly available data on the use in
the State of medically important antimicrobial drugs in cattle, swine, and poultry from:

(1) The U.S. Department of Agriculture;

(2) The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;

(3) The U.S. Food and Drug Administration; and

(4) Appropriate national and State trade associations, organizations, and
councils.

(b) On or before February 1[, 2021, and each February 1 thereafter] EACH YEAR,
a licensed veterinarian shall submit to the Department, in a manner determined by the
Department:

(1) A copy of the record prescribing the medically important antimicrobial
drug or a copy of the veterinary feed directive for each medically important antimicrobial
drug, as listed in Appendix A of the federal Food and Drug Administration’s Guidance for
Industry #152, administered in feed or water to cattle, swine, or poultry during the previous
calendar year; and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 69 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) An accounting, as provided by the owner, of the total number of animals
raised during the previous calendar year, categorized by species and production class.

(c) (1) On or before [February 1, 2020, and each February 1 thereafter] JULY
1 EACH YEAR, the Department shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the data collected under subsections (a) and (b)
of this section.

(2) [On or before February 1, 2021, the] THE report shall include the
following information for the previous calendar year:

(i) The total number of animals raised on farm operations covered
by this subtitle, categorized by species and production class;

(ii) The specific antimicrobial active ingredients and classes of
antimicrobial active ingredients used;

(iii) The total weight of antimicrobial active ingredients used;

(iv) Indications for which veterinarians prescribed medically
important antimicrobial drugs; and

(v) Patterns of use for medically important antimicrobial drugs,
including duration and seasonal variation.

(3) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the information
required under paragraph (2) of this subsection shall be disaggregated by county.

(ii) If there are two or fewer reporting farm operations in a particular
county for any of the categories described in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the
Department may report the information for that category on a regional or statewide basis.

(d) The Department shall maintain all records and information relating to the
administration of medically important antimicrobial drugs submitted to the Department
under this section:

(1) In a manner that protects the identity of the owner, operator, and
veterinarian for whom the information was submitted; and

(2) For at least 5 years.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2