START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 402

Chapter 402

(House Bill 573)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Higher Education Commission – Access to Mental Health Advisory
Committee – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Access to Mental Health Advisory Committee within
the Maryland Higher Education Commission; and generally relating to the Access to
Mental Health Advisory Committee.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 11–108
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

11–108.

(A) THERE IS AN ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(B) THE COMMITTEE CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) THE SECRETARY OF HIGHER EDUCATION, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(2) THE CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND,
OR THE CHANCELLOR’S DESIGNEE;

(3) THE PRESIDENT OF ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF MARYLAND, OR THE
PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE PRESIDENT OF MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, OR THE
PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND ASSOCIATION OF
COMMUNITY COLLEGES, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 402 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) THE PRESIDENT OF THE MARYLAND INDEPENDENT COLLEGE
AND UNIVERSITY ASSOCIATION, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(7) TWO DIRECTORS OF THE UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
INSTITUTION MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELING CENTERS, APPOINTED BY THE
CHANCELLOR;

(8) TWO UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND INSTITUTION CLINICAL
PSYCHOLOGISTS, APPOINTED BY THE CHANCELLOR;

(9) TWO LICENSED CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKERS WITH CAMPUS–BASED
CLINICAL EXPERIENCE, APPOINTED BY THE SECRETARY;

(10) TWO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH COUNSELORS FROM A COMMUNITY
COLLEGE, APPOINTED BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
ASSOCIATION OF COMMUNITY COLLEGES;

(11) A BEHAVIORAL HEALTH COUNSELOR FROM A NONPUBLIC
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE, APPOINTED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE MARYLAND INDEPENDENT COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY
ASSOCIATION; AND

(12) THREE TWO UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND STUDENT
REPRESENTATIVES INVOLVED IN CAMPUS–BASED MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS
ADVOCACY GROUPS OR WHO HAVE ACCESS TO UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES:

(I) ONE STUDENT WHO IS A MEMBER OF A MENTAL HEALTH
ADVOCACY GROUP; AND

(II) ONE STUDENT WHO HAS ACCESSED, OR IS ELIGIBLE TO
ACCESS, MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES AT THE INSTITUTION; AND

(13) ONE STUDENT REPRESENTATIVE ENROLLED IN ST. MARY’S
COLLEGE OF MARYLAND, MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, A COMMUNITY COLLEGE,
OR A NONPROFIT INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE.

(C) (1) THE COMMITTEE SHALL ELECT A CHAIR FROM AMONG ITS
MEMBERS.

(2) THE COMMITTEE MAY ELECT OTHER OFFICERS AS DETERMINED
BY THE COMMITTEE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 402

(D) THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COMMITTEE SHALL
BE PROVIDED ON A ROTATING BASIS BY THE INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION
THAT HAVE MEMBERS ON THE COMMITTEE.

(E) THE COMMITTEE SHALL MEET SIX TIMES PER YEAR.

(F) A MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(G) THE COMMITTEE SHALL:

(1) STUDY THE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ADOPTED BY
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE REGARDING ACCESS TO
MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF MENTAL
ILLNESS IN STUDENTS;

(2) EXAMINE THE CHALLENGES FOR INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
EDUCATION IN MEETING THE DEMAND FOR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES;

(3) REVIEW BEST PRACTICES FOR ACCESSING OFF–CAMPUS MENTAL
HEALTH SERVICES;

(4) REVIEW BEST PRACTICES FOR, AND BARRIERS TO, THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF COUNSELING SERVICES, INCLUDING CRISIS, PERSONAL,
MENTAL HEALTH, SEXUAL VIOLENCE, AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE COUNSELING;

(5) REVIEW AND IDENTIFY THE BEST MODELS FOR PROVIDING
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES, INCLUDING STAND–ALONE CENTERS, CENTERS WITH
INTEGRATED STUDENT HEALTH SERVICES, COMPREHENSIVE SERVICES, CASE
MANAGEMENT, AND CRISIS RESOURCES;

(6) IDENTIFY CONCERNS IN RURAL AREAS AND WORKFORCE
SHORTAGE AREAS;

(7) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 402 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) WAYS TO REDUCE COSTS AND BARRIERS TO PROVIDING
ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ON CAMPUS;

(II) THE USE OF TELEMEDICINE AND VIDEO CONFERENCING IN
THE PROVISION OF MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES;

(III) THE USE OF HOTLINES AND OTHER MEANS TO DISSEMINATE
TO STUDENTS INFORMATION RELATED TO MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ON AND OFF
CAMPUS, INCLUDING INFORMATION CONCERNING AVAILABILITY AND FEES; AND

(IV) THE IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERAL MENTAL HEALTH
COUNSELING SERVICES AND SPECIALIZED COUNSELING SERVICES; AND

(8) STUDY AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING ANY OTHER
MATTERS THE COMMITTEE CONSIDERS APPROPRIATE.

(H) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2023, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE COMMITTEE SHALL REPORT ITS FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION
COMMITTEE, THE SENATE EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT
COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE
APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4