START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 584 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 584 
(Delegate Ebersole, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax Credit - Food Donations by Qualified Farms - Sunset Repeal and 
Alterations (Farmers Feeding Families Act) 
 
 
This bill permanently extends the State income tax credit for eligible food donations by 
qualified farms. Under current law, the tax credit terminates after tax year 2023. In addition, 
the bill increases the value of the credit from 50% to 100% of the value of eligible food 
donations and from 75% to 100% of the value of donated certified organic produce (subject 
to an existing $5,000 limit). Finally, the bill states that it is the intent of the 
General Assembly that the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) continue to fund 
the marketing of the credit program and facilitate the donation of eligible food donations 
by qualified farms, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 
2023 and beyond.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by up to $100,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2025 due to credits claimed against the State income tax. As discussed below, general 
fund revenues may also decrease in FY 2024 due to the bill’s alterations to the value of the 
tax credit. To the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, Higher 
Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
revenues and expenditures are also affected (not shown below). Expenditures are not 
otherwise affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
(-) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 584/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease minimally beginning in FY 2025 to 
the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax. Local expenditures are not 
affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 232 and 233 of 2017 established a nonrefundable State income 
tax credit for tax years 2017 through 2019 for eligible food donations made by qualified 
farms located in Anne Arundel, Calvert, Charles, Montgomery, Prince George’s, and 
St. Mary’s counties. Chapter 361 of 2019 extended the tax credit through tax year 2021 
and expanded eligibility to any farm business located in the State; Chapters 170 and 171 
of 2021 subsequently extended the tax credit for an additional two years, through  
tax year 2023. 
 
The value of the tax credit is equal to 50% of the value of an eligible food donation (75% 
for donated certified organic produce), not to exceed $5,000 for a given tax year. However, 
the Secretary of Agriculture may increase the credit limitation for a qualified farm by up 
to an additional $5,000 for any tax year. Any unused credit may be carried forward for up 
to five tax years. 
 
To qualify for the credit, an eligible donation must be made to a person or organization that 
is certified by MDA as a tax credit certificate administrator. A certified tax credit certificate 
administrator must issue a tax credit certificate to a qualified farm upon receipt of an 
eligible food donation. Within 30 days after issuing a tax credit certificate, the tax credit 
certificate administrator must provide a copy of the tax credit certificate to MDA and the 
Comptroller. 
 
The total amount of tax credit certificates issued may not exceed $100,000 per fiscal year. 
If the total amount of tax credit certificates issued during any fiscal year totals less than 
$100,000, any excess amount may be carried forward and issued in a subsequent 
fiscal year. A tax credit certificate may not be issued after December 31, 2023. 
 
The Secretary of Agriculture, in consultation with the Comptroller, must annually report 
to the Governor and the General Assembly on the use and impact of the tax credit. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, the bill increases the value of the State 
income tax credit for eligible food donations by qualified farms and permanently extends 
the tax credit beyond tax year 2023. Consistent with existing law, the total amount of  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 584/ Page 3 
tax credit certificates issued may not exceed $100,000 annually. Since the program began, 
tax credit certificates issued have not exceeded $100,000 in any year. 
 
Thus, general fund revenues may decrease in fiscal 2024 to the extent the bill’s alterations 
to the value of the tax credit result in an increase in the amount of credits issued for  
tax year 2023. Beginning in fiscal 2025, general fund revenues decrease by a maximum of 
$100,000 annually due to the extension of the tax credit program beyond tax year 2023. 
 
To the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, a portion of the foregone 
tax revenues will reduce HEIF and TTF revenues, as well as local highway user revenue 
grants to local governments. However, any such impact is minimal.  
 
MDA can continue to administer the program with existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3