START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 525 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 525 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Outdoor Preschool License Pilot Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes an Outdoor Preschool License Pilot Program, administered by the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). The purpose of the pilot program is to 
license outdoor, nature-based early learning and child care programs in order to (1) expand 
access to affordable, high-quality early learning and child care programs and (2) investigate 
the benefits of outdoor, nature-based classrooms. The pilot program must begin by 
August 31, 2024, and continue for four school years. Generally, MSDE must select between 
5 and 10 program participants in the first year. The bill specifies prioritization criteria for 
selection of participants and requires MSDE to select for approval all qualifying applicants 
if the department receives fewer than five applications. MSDE must convene an advisory 
group to inform and support implementation of the program and must submit specified 
reports. By August 31, 2023, MSDE must begin to promulgate regulations necessary to 
launch the pilot program. MSDE must also adopt rules and regulations for the licensure 
and operation of outdoor, nature-based early learning and child care programs, as specified. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2028.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can use existing resources to implement the pilot program and 
comply with related requirements. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 525/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The regulations adopted by MSDE must include provisions on a variety 
of items, as specified, including those that address sheltering during inclement weather, 
correct child‐to‐staff ratios for the outdoor setting, accommodations for children with 
disabilities, and access to potable drinking water, among others. In adopting the required 
rules and regulations, MSDE may adapt existing child care licensing requirements to allow 
for the operation of the pilot program. In adopting the required rules and regulations, 
MSDE must consult with stakeholders that have relevant expertise, as specified. 
 
By December 1 of 2025 and 2026, MSDE must submit interim reports to the Governor and 
the General Assembly on the implementation of the program, including: 
 
 
information on the number of participating providers and the number of children 
and families served by the program; 
 
the number of participating providers who enrolled in the Maryland EXCELS 
Program; 
 
the number of children in the pilot program who participated in the Child Care 
Scholarship Program; and 
 
the number of children in the pilot program served by the Infant and Early 
Childhood Mental Health Support Services Program. 
 
By December 1, 2027, MSDE must submit a final report on the findings of the program, 
including recommendations for continuing, modifying, or expanding the pilot program. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a person must be licensed by MSDE before operating a 
child care center; religious organizations meeting specified requirements may instead 
operate under a letter of compliance. “Child care center” means an agency, institution, or 
establishment that, for part or all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, and 
at least twice a week, offers or provides child care to children who do not have the same 
parentage except as otherwise provided for in law or regulation. The State Board of 
Education (SBE) must adopt regulations relating to the licensing and operation of 
child care centers.  
 
Family child care is the care given to a child younger than age 13 or to any developmentally 
disabled person younger than age 21, in place of parental care for less than 24 hours per 
day, in a residence other than the child’s residence, for which the child care provider is 
paid. A family child care home is a residence in which family child care is provided for up 
to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in which family child care is 
provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children. MSDE is responsible for 
registering family child care homes and large family child care homes. SBE must adopt 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 525/ Page 3 
regulations relating to the registration of family child care homes and large family child 
care homes.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill has a potentially meaningful benefit to child care 
programs participating in the pilot program, particularly to the extent that MSDE adapts 
existing licensing requirements to allow for the pilot program’s operation, as authorized by 
the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 376 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3