START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 573 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 573 
(Delegate Boafo, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission - Access to Mental Health Advisory 
Committee - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Access to Mental Health Advisory Committee within the Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC). Staff for the committee must be provided on a 
rotating basis by the institutions of higher education that have members on the committee. 
By December 1, 2023, the committee must report its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Public four-year institutions of higher education and Baltimore City 
Community College (BCCC) higher education expenditures may increase minimally to 
staff the committee; costs may be higher for the institution initially assigned to staff the 
committee due to the reporting requirement. Staffing costs rotate among institutions that 
have members on the committee. It is unclear if BCCC is included in the rotation, as 
explained below. Any expense reimbursements for members of the committee are assumed 
to be minimal and absorbable with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community college expenditures may increase minimally to staff the 
committee; costs may be higher for the institution initially assigned to staff the committee 
due to the reporting requirement. Staffing costs rotate among institutions that have 
members on the committee. It is unclear if local community colleges are included in the 
rotation, as explained below. Any expense reimbursements for members of the committee 
are assumed to be minimal and absorbable with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 573/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The committee must: 
 
 
study the policies and procedures adopted by institutions of higher education in the 
State regarding access to mental health care and the prevention and treatment of 
mental illness in students; 
 
examine the challenges for institutions of higher education in meeting the demand 
for mental health services; 
 
review best practices for accessing off-campus mental health services; 
 
review best practices for, and barriers to, the implementation of counseling services, 
including crisis, personal, mental health, sexual violence, and substance abuse 
counseling; 
 
review and identify the best models for providing mental health services, including 
stand-alone centers, centers with integrated student health services, comprehensive 
services, case management, and crisis resources; 
 
identify concerns in rural areas and workforce shortage areas; and 
 
study and make recommendations regarding any other matters the committee 
considers appropriate. 
 
Further, the committee must make recommendations regarding: 
 
 
ways to reduce costs and barriers to providing access to mental health services on 
campus; 
 
the use of telemedicine and video conferencing in the provision of mental health 
services; 
 
the use of hotlines and other means to disseminate information to students related 
to mental health services on and off campus, including information concerning 
availability and fees; and 
 
the implementation of general mental health counseling services and specialized 
counseling services. 
 
The bill establishes the membership of the committee. The committee must elect a chair 
from among its members. The committee may elect other officers as determined by the 
committee. The committee must meet six times per year. 
 
A member of the committee may not receive compensation as a member of the committee 
but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 573/ Page 3 
State/Local Expenditures:  Public institutions of higher education that have members on 
the committee must staff the committee on a rotating basis; thus, higher education 
expenditures for the relevant institutions of higher education may increase minimally. Any 
such costs cannot be reliably estimated, partially because it is unknown which institutions 
will have members on the committee. Staffing costs in fiscal 2024 are higher and 
potentially not absorbable due to the reporting requirement and the likely need to 
concentrate several meetings within a few months. The duration or the frequency of the 
rotation is not specified in the bill. The Executive Director of the Maryland Association of 
Community Colleges, or the executive’s designee must serve on the committee. Even with 
additional opportunities for community college representation (two behavioral health 
counselors from a community college must be appointed and one student member may be 
a community college student), it is unclear if BCCC and local community colleges are 
included as institutions that may be in the rotation. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for committee members are assumed to be minimal and 
generally absorbable within existing budgeted resources, presumably by the institution 
providing staff support. Institutions can provide any requested information using existing 
resources. 
 
This estimate does not reflect any policy changes made by institutions of higher education 
in response to the findings and recommendations of the committee. MHEC advises it does 
not have staff to address any non-academic or non-financial aid services provided at 
Maryland’s colleges and universities such as mental health; thus, for MHEC to coordinate 
any statewide effort to support students in accessing mental health resources and 
supporting institutions in this work, additional MHEC staff are required. 
 
Additional Comments:  To the extent private nonprofit institutions are considered to have 
a member on the committee due to the President of the Maryland Independent College and 
University Association or the president’s designee being a member of the committee, 
private nonprofit institution higher education expenditures may increase minimally. 
 
The committee must meet in perpetuity at least six times per year; however, the bill has 
only one reporting requirement – within five months of the bill taking effect. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 937 and HB 1029 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 263 (Senator Jackson, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 573/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Independent College and University 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4