START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 547 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 547 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Family Prosperity Act of 2023 
 
 
This Administration bill permanently extends the temporary expansions to the Maryland 
earned income credit that were enacted under Chapters 39 and 40 of 2021 and further 
eliminates an existing limit on the value of the State refundable earned income credit for 
individuals without qualifying children. In addition, the bill permanently extends and alters 
eligibility for the State child tax credit originally enacted under Chapter 40. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $172.3 million in FY 2024, as discussed 
below. Future years reflect projected growth in credits claimed against the State income 
tax. The FY 2024 general fund revenue reduction is assumed in the FY 2024 budget. 
General fund expenditures increase by $37,000 in FY 2024, as discussed below. Future 
years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($172.30) 
($175.74) 
($179.26) 
($182.85) 
($186.50) 
GF Expenditure 
$0.04 
$0.06 
$0.06 
$0.06 
$0.07 
Net Effect 
($172.34) 
($175.80) 
($179.32) 
($182.91) 
($186.57)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $6.1 million in 
FY 2024 
and 
similar 
amounts 
annually 
thereafter, 
as 
discussed 
below. 
Montgomery County expenditures for its earned income credit supplement program may 
increase beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 547/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Earned Income Credit 
 
Maryland’s earned income credit offers both refundable and nonrefundable credits against 
the State income tax and a nonrefundable credit against the local income tax for low- to 
moderate-income resident taxpayers. The State nonrefundable credit, which was 
first enacted in 1987, is generally equal to 50% of the amount of an eligible taxpayer’s 
federal earned income credit for the taxable year. A taxpayer for whom the State 
nonrefundable credit is less than the taxpayer’s State income tax liability may also be 
eligible to claim the State and local poverty level credits. 
 
The State refundable earned income credit, which was first enacted under Chapter 5 of 
1998 and has been expanded several times by subsequent legislation, is available to eligible 
taxpayers for whom a specified percentage of the federal earned income credit exceeds the 
taxpayer’s State income tax liability. For tax years after tax year 2017 and prior to  
tax year 2020, the value of the State refundable credit was 28% of the amount of the 
taxpayer’s federal earned income credit, minus any pre-credit State income tax liability. 
 
The local earned income credit is generally equal to the amount of the taxpayer’s federal 
earned income credit multiplied by 10 times the county income tax rate for the taxable year, 
not to exceed the taxpayer’s county income tax liability. 
 
Maryland’s earned income credit has historically conformed to eligibility standards for the 
federal earned income credit. Chapters 611 and 612 of 2018 allowed individuals without 
qualifying children to claim the State and local earned income credits without regard to the 
federal minimum age requirement for childless claimants. 
 
Legislation enacted during the 2021 session temporarily expanded Maryland’s earned 
income credit for tax years 2020 through 2022. Specifically:   
 
 
Chapter 39 (1) increased the value of the State refundable credit from 28% to 45% of 
the amount of a claimant’s federal earned income credit, minus any pre-credit State 
income tax liability; and (2) for an individual without a qualifying child, increased 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 547/ Page 3 
the value of the State refundable credit to 100% of the individual’s federal earned 
income credit, up to a maximum of $530; and 
 
Chapter 40 expanded eligibility for Maryland’s earned income credit to taxpayers 
who would be eligible for the federal earned income credit but for specified 
identification requirements (which require that federal earned income credit 
claimants and their qualifying children possess a valid Social Security number). 
 
Under the bill, the temporary expansions enacted under Chapters 39 and 40 are made 
permanent. Further, the $530 limit on the value of the State refundable credit for 
individuals without qualifying children is eliminated. Thus, in tax year 2023 and beyond:   
 
 
the maximum value of the State refundable credit remains at 45% of the federal 
earned income credit; 
 
eligible individuals without qualifying children may claim a State refundable credit 
equal to 100% of the amount of the federal earned income credit (minus any 
pre-credit State income tax liability), without limitation; and 
 
eligible taxpayers may continue to claim the State and local earned income credits 
without regard to federal identification requirements. 
 
Maryland Child Tax Credit 
 
In addition to expanding eligibility for the Maryland earned income credit, Chapter 40 
established, for tax years 2020 through 2022 only, a refundable credit against the State 
income tax for low-income taxpayers with qualifying children (child tax credit). For 
purposes of the credit, a qualified child is a dependent under § 152 of the Internal Revenue 
Code (IRC) who is younger than age 17 and has a disability, as defined under § 8-401 of 
the Education Article. Taxpayers with federal adjusted gross income of $6,000 or less may 
claim a credit equal to $500 for each qualified child, minus the amount of any federal child 
tax credit claimed with respect to the qualified child. 
 
Under the bill, the child tax credit is permanently extended beyond tax year 2022, with 
additional alterations. Specifically, the bill:   
 
 
expands eligibility to taxpayers with federal adjusted gross income of up to $15,000, 
and limits eligibility to residents of the State; 
 
expands the definition of a “qualified child” for purposes of the credit to include 
qualified dependents younger than age six, regardless of disability status; and 
 
eliminates the requirement that the amount of the credit be reduced by the amount 
of any federal child tax credit claimed. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 547/ Page 4 
Background:   
 
Federal Earned Income Tax Credit 
 
Low- to moderate-income workers who have earned income may be eligible to claim the 
federal earned income credit, a refundable income tax credit equal to a specified percentage 
of earned income up to a maximum dollar amount. For tax year 2022, a taxpayer may be 
eligible for the credit if the taxpayer’s investment income does not exceed $10,300 and 
federal adjusted gross income does not exceed:   
 
 
$16,480 ($22,610 if filing jointly), with no qualifying children; 
 
$43,492 ($49,622 if filing jointly), with one qualifying child; 
 
$49,399 ($55,529 if filing jointly), with two qualifying children; or 
 
$53,057 ($59,187 if filing jointly), with three or more qualifying children. 
 
For tax year 2021 only, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARPA) enhanced the value 
of the earned income credit for childless claimants and lowered the minimum age for 
childless claimants from age 25 to age 19 (age 24 for specified students and age 18 for 
qualified former foster youth or qualified homeless youth). In addition, the Act 
permanently allowed taxpayers to claim the childless credit if they are otherwise ineligible 
to claim the credit for filers with qualifying children due to the applicable identification 
requirements. 
 
Federal Child Tax Credit 
 
Taxpayers with qualifying children may be eligible to claim the federal child tax credit. 
The credit is generally nonrefundable; however, a specified portion of the credit may be 
refundable (additional child tax credit). In general, a qualifying child for purposes of the 
child tax credit is a qualifying child as defined under § 152 of the IRC who is younger than 
age 17. In tax years prior to tax year 2018 and after tax year 2025, the maximum value of 
the credit is $1,000 per qualifying child; the value of the credit is reduced by $50 for each 
$1,000 (or fraction thereof) of modified adjusted gross income exceeding $75,000 
($110,000 in the case of joint filers and $55,000 in the case of married individuals filing 
separately). 
 
For tax years 2018 through 2025, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 doubled the maximum 
value of the credit to $2,000, and increased the maximum value of the additional child tax 
credit; increased the income threshold after which the credit begins to phase out to 
$200,000 ($400,000 in the case of joint filers); and authorized a partial credit for other 
dependents. The Act also required, for tax years 2018 through 2025, that a taxpayer provide 
a valid Social Security number for a qualifying child for which the child tax credit is 
claimed. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 547/ Page 5 
ARPA subsequently altered the credit for tax year 2021 only; specifically, the Act:   
 
 
further increased the value of the credit to $3,000 ($3,600 in the case of a qualifying 
child younger than age 6). The increase in the credit amount began to phase out for 
taxpayers with modified adjusted gross income exceeding $75,000 ($150,000 in the 
case of joint filers and $112,500 in the case of heads of household); 
 
made the credit fully refundable for certain eligible taxpayers; 
 
expanded the definition of qualifying children to include 17 year olds; and 
 
provided for certain advance payments for eligible taxpayers during the second half 
of 2021. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  As discussed above, the bill (1) permanently extends and expands 
upon temporary enhancements to Maryland’s earned income credit and (2) permanently 
extends and alters eligibility for the State child tax credit. Exhibit 1 shows the bill’s effect 
on State and local revenues in fiscal 2024 through 2028. As shown in the exhibit, State 
general fund revenues decrease by an estimated $172.3 million in fiscal 2024, and local 
income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $6.1 million in fiscal 2024. Future years 
reflect projected growth in credits claimed against the State and local income tax. As noted 
above, the estimated fiscal 2024 general fund revenue reduction is assumed in the 
fiscal 2024 budget. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on State and Local Revenues 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
State Effect 
 
 
 
 
 
Earned Income Credit 
($154.4) 
($157.4) 
($160.6) 
($163.8) 
($167.1) 
Child Tax Credit 
(17.9) 
(18.3) 
(18.7) 
(19.0) 
(19.4) 
Total 
($172.3) 
($175.7) 
($179.3) 
($182.8) 
($186.5) 
Local Effect 
 
 
 
 
 
Earned Income Credit 
($6.1) 
($6.2) 
($6.3) 
($6.5) 
($6.6) 
Total Effect 
($178.4) 
($181.9) 
($185.6) 
($189.3) 
($193.1) 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 547/ Page 6 
State Expenditures:  As discussed above, the bill permanently extends and alters 
eligibility for the State child tax credit. The Comptroller’s Office advises that, currently, 
taxpayers claiming the child tax credit with respect to a qualifying child with a disability 
must submit with their return a copy of the required certification from a qualified physician 
stating the nature of the disability. Due to an anticipated increase in child tax credit claims 
under the bill, the Comptroller’s Office requires an additional revenue examiner to assist 
in processing and validating the additional claims. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by $36,533 in 
fiscal 2024, which reflects a seven-month start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2023 
effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time revenue examiner to 
process and validate additional tax credit claims. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$29,389 
Other Operating Expenses 
      7,144 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$36,533 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Montgomery County expenditures for the Working Families Income 
Supplement Program, which provides a match to county residents based on the amount of 
the State earned income credit, may increase beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 552 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Internal Revenue Service; U.S. Census 
Bureau; Congressional Research Service; CCH AnswerConnect; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 547/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 547/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Family Prosperity Act of 2023 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 552/HB 547 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8