START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 220

Chapter 220

(House Bill 529)

AN ACT concerning

Gaming – Video Lottery Terminals – Local Impact Grants and Pimlico
Community Development Authority Membership – Baltimore City

FOR the purpose of altering the distribution of certain funds from local impact grants to
Baltimore City; altering the appointment process for certain members of the Pimlico
Community Development Authority; and generally relating to the distribution of
proceeds from video lottery terminals and local impact grants.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 11–1201 and 11–1202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 11–1203
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–1A–31(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

11–1201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Authority” means the Pimlico Community Development Authority.

(c) “Park Heights Corridor” means the area designated as an urban renewal
district in Baltimore City that is bounded by Northern Parkway on the north, Greenspring
Avenue on the east, Druid Park Drive on the south, and the railroad tracks of the Western
Maryland Railroad on the west.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 220 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

11–1202.

There is a Pimlico Community Development Authority.

11–1203.

(a) The Authority consists of the following 15 members:

(1) the Baltimore City Planning Director;

(2) ten members, five of whom shall be business owners, residents, or service
providers of the areas described in § 9–1A–31(a)(3)(ii) of the State Government Article,
appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore City, [after consultation with the members of the
Baltimore City Delegation in the General Assembly representing legislative districts 40 and
41] WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE;

(3) the State Senators representing legislative districts 40 and 41; and

(4) one State Delegate representing legislative district 40 and one State
Delegate representing legislative district 41, each appointed by the Speaker of the House.

(b) The Mayor of Baltimore City shall appoint the Chair of the Authority, subject
to confirmation by the Baltimore City Council.

(c) (1) The term of a member appointed by the Mayor is 3 years.

(2) The terms of members are staggered as required by the terms provided
for members on October 1, 2005.

(3) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
appointed and qualifies.

(4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(5) At the end of a term, resignation, or removal of a member, the Mayor
shall appoint a new member to the Authority.

(d) A member may be removed by the Mayor for incompetence, misconduct, or
failure to perform the duties of the position.

Article – State Government

9–1A–31.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 220

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (8) of this subsection, the local impact
grants provided under § 9–1A–27 of this subtitle shall be distributed as provided in this
subsection.

(2) The following amounts shall be distributed to the following
jurisdictions:

(i) Allegany County – $200,000;

(ii) Cecil County – $130,000;

(iii) Town of Forest Heights – $120,000;

(iv) Town of Perryville – $70,000; and

(v) Worcester County – $200,000.

(3) The remaining funds for local impact grants shall be distributed in the
following manner:

(i) 82% to the local jurisdictions with video lottery facilities, based
on each jurisdiction’s percentage of overall gross revenues from video lottery terminals; and

(ii) except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, for
operations at a video lottery facility starting in fiscal year 2012 and ending in fiscal year
2032, 18% to Baltimore City with the Pimlico Community Development Authority acting
as the local development council in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, to be
distributed primarily for capital projects benefiting economic and community development
in the following manner:

1. A. FOR FISCAL YEARS 2012 THROUGH 2023, at
least 75% in a manner that is consistent with the Park Heights Master Plan; and

B. FOR FISCAL YEARS 2024 THROUGH 2032, 85% IN A
MANNER THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PARK HEIGHTS MASTER PLAN; AND

2. the remainder dedicated to the needs of:

A. any census blockgroup that Baltimore City identifies as
being located partly or entirely within 1 mile of Pimlico Race Course but not within the
boundaries of the Park Heights Master Plan in a manner that is consistent with adopted
neighborhood priorities;

B. any neighborhood included in the Northwest Community
Planning Forum Strategic Neighborhood Action Plan in a manner that is consistent with

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 220 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the adopted Northwest Community Planning Forum Strategic Neighborhood Action Plan
priorities; and

C. beginning after a video lottery operation license is issued
to a video lottery facility in Baltimore City, any neighborhood within an area bounded by
Liberty Heights Avenue, Northern Parkway, Druid Park Drive, and Wabash Avenue in a
manner that is consistent with adopted neighborhood priorities.

(4) (i) Of the amount specified under paragraph (3)(ii) of this
subsection:

1. $1,000,000 shall be provided annually to Prince George’s
County to be used for public safety projects in the community within 5 miles surrounding
Rosecroft Raceway;

2. $500,000 shall be provided annually for impact aid to be
distributed as provided under § 11–404(d) of the Business Regulation Article to help pay
for facilities and services in communities within 3 miles of the Laurel Race Course;

3. for fiscal years 2022 through 2032, $3,500,000 shall be
provided annually to the State Lottery Fund established under § 9–120 of this title; and

4. for fiscal years 2021 through 2032, the greater of
$2,400,000 or 24% of the total amount distributed for the fiscal year under paragraph (3)(ii)
of this subsection shall be provided annually to Park Heights Renaissance, Inc.

(ii) The Legislative Policy Committee shall report its findings and
recommendations concerning the advisability of the continuation of the distribution of
funds after fiscal year 2032 to the Comptroller and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of this
article, the General Assembly, on or before November 1, 2030.

(5) Anne Arundel County, Howard County, Prince George’s County, and
the City of Laurel shall report to the Legislative Policy Committee, in accordance with §
2–1257 of this article, by December 31 of each year as to the distribution of the funds
provided under this section.

(6) Baltimore City shall:

(i) except as provided in subsection (b)(3)(i) of this section, establish
a schedule for the distribution and expenditure of funds provided under this section; and

(ii) provide a quarterly report to the Legislative Policy Committee,
in accordance with § 2–1257 of this article, on the distribution of the funds provided under
this section.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 220

(7) (i) The distribution under paragraph (3)(i) of this subsection to
Anne Arundel County, Baltimore City, and Prince George’s County equals the sum of the
amounts to be distributed to Anne Arundel County, Baltimore City, and Prince George’s
County divided by three.

(ii) 1. Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the
amount distributed to Anne Arundel County and Baltimore City under paragraph (3)(i) of
this subsection may not be less than the amount received in the fiscal year before the video
lottery operation license for a video lottery facility in Prince George’s County was issued.

2. Any amount distributed to Anne Arundel County or
Baltimore City as required under subsubparagraph 1 of this subparagraph shall be paid
from the State Lottery Fund established under § 9–120(b) of this title.

(8) Beginning after a video lottery operation license is issued to a video
lottery facility in Baltimore City, 100% of the local impact grants provided under §
9–1A–27 of this subtitle from the proceeds of the video lottery facilities located in Allegany,
Cecil, and Worcester counties shall be distributed to the local jurisdictions in which those
video lottery facilities are located.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5