START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 419

Chapter 419

(House Bill 560)

AN ACT concerning

Carroll County – Alcoholic Beverages – Multiple Event Entertainment Licenses

FOR the purpose of establishing the fee for a certain multiple event entertainment alcoholic
beverages license in Carroll County; repealing the limit on the total number of days
for which a multiple event entertainment license may be used; and generally relating
to alcoholic beverages licenses in Carroll County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 16–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 16–1312
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

16–102.

This title applies only in Carroll County.

16–1312.

(a) The Board may issue a Class C multiple event beer, wine, and liquor license.

(b) The license authorizes the license holder to exercise any privilege conferred
by a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license at an entertainment event held by a county fire
department or an arts center on West Main Street in Westminster.

(c) (1) The license shall be in the form that the Board requires.

(2) The applicant shall sign the license.

(d) [(1) The total number of days for which a multiple event license may be used
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 419 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

may not exceed 40 in a calendar year.

(2)] A fire department or an arts center on West Main Street in Westminster
may not be issued a multiple event license more than one time in a calendar year.

(e) The annual fee for the license is:

(1) $125, for not more than 10 events per year;

(2) $250, for not more than 20 events per year;

(3) $375, for not more than 30 events per year; [and]

(4) $500, for not more than 40 events per year; AND

(5) $2,000 FOR 41 OR MORE EVENTS PER YEAR.

(f) A fire company or an arts center on West Main Street in Westminster that
holds a Class C multiple event license is not precluded from obtaining a Class C per diem
license under this subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2