START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 161

Chapter 161

(House Bill 543)

AN ACT concerning

State Procurement – Small Procurement – Definition

FOR the purpose of altering certain dollar thresholds of spending for the purposes of
defining “small procurement” for State procurement contracts; and generally
relating to small procurements.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 13–109
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

13–109.

(a) In this section, “small procurement” means a procurement for which:

(1) a unit spends [$50,000] $100,000 or less;

(2) a contractor provides services subject to § 11–202(3) of this article for
expected annual revenues of [$50,000] $100,000 or less;

(3) the Department of General Services or the Department of
Transportation is seeking to award a procurement contract for a construction with a value
that is [$100,000] $200,000 or less;

(4) the Department of Natural Resources is seeking to award a
procurement contract for capital projects or maintenance with a value that is [$100,000]
$200,000 or less; or

(5) for purposes of administering Title 29, Subtitle 1 of the State Personnel
and Pensions Article, the State Retirement Agency spends [$50,000] $100,000 or less
during a fiscal year for:

(i) expenses related to independent medical evaluations by a
physician; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 161 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) any expenses related to testimony by the physician at
administrative hearings on behalf of the Agency.

(b) A unit may make small procurements in accordance with the regulations of
primary procurement units.

(c) A primary procurement unit may not create a small procurement by artificial
division of a procurement.

(d) Any regulation of a primary procurement unit to govern small procurements:

(1) shall provide for a simplified administrative procedure;

(2) shall be consistent with the basic intent of this Division II; and

(3) may not be disadvantageous economically to the State.

(e) At least every 3 years, the Board shall:

(1) review the prevailing costs of labor and materials; and

(2) if warranted by changes in cost, recommend to the General Assembly
appropriate adjustments in the ceiling for a small procurement.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2