START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 571 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 571 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Opioids - Opioid Restitution Advisory Council and Fund and Overdose Response 
Program 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), subject to the limitations of 
the State budget, to allow specified entities to choose the formulation or dosage of an opioid 
overdose reversal drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that 
the entity is provided with through the Overdose Response Program (ORP). The bill also 
(1) authorizes the Attorney General to direct that a committee be formed within the Opioid 
Restitution Fund Advisory Council in accordance with the requirements of a court or 
administrative order or a settlement agreement and (2) requires the Attorney General to 
establish procedures for any such committee. Finally, the bill clarifies how specified funds 
received by the Opioid Restitution Fund (ORF) must be appropriated and distributed. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDH may increase minimally to provide an 
entity chosen formulations or dosages of FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs 
under ORP, as discussed below. The bill’s requirements related to the advisory council and 
ORF can be implemented with existing budgeted resources and may facilitate decision 
making regarding, and processing of, monies distributed to ORF. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 571/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If the Attorney General directs the council to form a committee, the 
committee must conduct only business related to the purpose of the court or administrative 
order or settlement agreement; however, it may conduct business related to multiple orders 
or agreements if the requirements are identical. The committee may consist only of council 
members. Unless otherwise specified by a court or administrative order or settlement 
agreement, the chair of the council (or the chair’s designee) must be the chair of the 
committee. 
 
The bill clarifies that, as with other settlement funds under current law, funds received by 
ORF in accordance with any other opioid-related court or administrative judgment or 
settlement agreement involving the State and one or more of its political subdivisions must 
be appropriated as required under the court or administrative judgment or settlement 
agreement. Furthermore, the Secretary of Health must establish and administer a grant 
program for the distribution of funds to political subdivisions of the State pursuant to such 
judgments or agreements. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Overdose Response Program 
 
ORP is administered by MDH to provide a means of authorizing certain individuals to 
administer an opioid overdose reversal drug to an individual experiencing or believed to 
be experiencing an opioid overdose to help prevent a fatality when medical services are 
not immediately available. 
 
Chapter 239 of 2022 (also known as the STOP Act) allows for FDA-approved opioid 
overdose reversal drugs to be offered to specified individuals – free of charge – by multiple 
providers, programs, and entities, which are generally required to establish protocols, as 
specified, to do so. Subject to the limitations of the State budget, MDH must purchase and 
then provide FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs, at no cost, to the entities who 
may provide the reversal drugs only if MDH provides them. MDH may authorize private 
or public entities to conduct education and training on opioid overdose recognition and 
response that includes (1) education on recognizing the signs and symptoms of an opioid 
overdose; (2) training on responding to an opioid overdose, including the administration of 
FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs; and (3) access to opioid overdose reversal 
drugs and the necessary supplies for the administration of the opioid overdose reversal 
drug. Individuals are not required to obtain the specified training and education on opioid 
overdose recognition and response from a private or public entity before a pharmacist may 
dispense an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 571/ Page 3 
Opioid Restitution Fund and Opioid Restitution Fund Advisory Council 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 established ORF, a special fund to retain any revenues received by 
the State relating to specified opioid judgments or settlements, which may be used only for 
opioid-related programs and services. Chapter 270 of 2022 specifies that ORF may be used 
for programs, services, supports, and resources for evidence-based substance use disorder 
(SUD) prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction that have the purpose of 
currently authorized outcomes and activities. ORF may also be used for: 
 
 
evidence-informed SUD prevention, treatment recovery, or harm reduction pilot 
programs or demonstration studies that are not evidence based if the advisory 
council determines that emerging evidence supports funding or that there is a 
reasonable basis for funding with the expectation of creating an evidence-based 
program and approves the use of money for the pilot program or demonstration 
study; and 
 
evaluations of the effectiveness and outcomes reporting for SUD abatement 
infrastructure, programs, services, supports, and resources for which the fund is 
used. 
 
On July 21, 2021, a $26 billion global settlement was announced by opioid manufacturer 
Johnson & Johnson (Janssen Settlement Agreement) and McKesson, Amerisource Bergen, 
and Cardinal Health (Final Distributor Agreement). On September 8, 2021, Maryland 
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh announced Maryland’s participation in the global 
settlement. Maryland is expected to receive approximately $500 million as part of the 
settlement. A copy of the Janssen Settlement can be located here. A copy of the 
Final Distributor Agreement can be located here. In fiscal 2022, ORF received 
approximately $12 million from the $573 million global settlement agreement with 
McKinsey & Company for its role in marketing opioids, including OxyContin. The 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly directs $36.2 million to ORF, 
reflecting years one, two, and three of settlement payments from Janssen and distributors. 
 
Chapters 84 and 85 of 2022 require that settlement funds received in accordance with the 
Final Distributor Agreement of July 21, 2021, as amended, and the Janssen Settlement 
Agreement of July 21, 2021, as amended, be appropriated as agreed upon in the 
State-Subdivision Agreement of January 21, 2022, as amended. The Secretary of Health 
must establish and administer a grant program for the distribution of funds to political 
subdivisions of the State pursuant to the specified State-Subdivision Agreement. 
 
Chapter 270 established the Opioid Restitution Fund Advisory Council to report by 
November 1 each year on its findings and recommendations regarding the allocations of 
money from ORF, consistent with authorized uses of the fund and considering (1) the 
number of people per capita with a SUD in a jurisdiction; (2) disparities in access to care 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 571/ Page 4 
in a jurisdiction that may preclude persons; (3) the number of overdose deaths per capita 
in a jurisdiction; (4) the programs, services, supports, or other resources currently available 
to individuals with an SUD in a jurisdiction; and (5) disparities in access to care and health 
outcomes in a jurisdiction. The Governor must consult at least twice annually with the 
advisory council to identify recommended appropriations from ORF.  
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that it currently purchases three types of naloxone 
through Cardinal Health, each in a two-dose kit:  (1) Narcan nasal spray (4 mg) at $45.34; 
(2) Kloxxado nasal spray (8 mg) at $57.27; and (3) naloxone intramuscular injectable 
(0.4 mg/mL) (price not provided). Most requests that MDH receives for naloxone are for 
the Narcan nasal spray. However, if requests are made for higher-priced opioid overdose 
reversal drugs or those unavailable through Cardinal Health and MDH must honor such 
requests, expenditures increase to the extent that the requested drugs are more expensive. 
At this time, any such increase is expected to be minimal. However, to the extent it is more 
significant, MDH advises that it will not be able to fulfill the requests for the opioid 
overdose reversal drugs within budget. The Department of Legislative Services notes that 
the bill specifies that the requirement to allow an entity to choose the formulation or dosage 
with which it is provided is subject to the limitations of the State budget. 
 
Additional Comments:  FDA currently approves both nasal spray and injectable versions 
of opioid overdose reversal drugs sold under the names Kloxxado, Naloxone, 
Naloxone Hydrochloride (or Naloxone HCl), Narcan, and Zimhi. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 954 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of the Attorney General; Baltimore City 
Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 571/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5