START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 520 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 520 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
City of Annapolis - Alcoholic Beverages - Art Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes an art establishment beer and wine license in the City of Annapolis 
that authorizes the license holder to sell or serve beer and wine at retail for on-premises 
consumption. The bill authorizes the City of Annapolis Board of License Commissioners 
to issue the license to a nonprofit organization primarily engaged in (1) the display, sale, 
or demonstration of art by an artist or group of artists; (2) the instruction of participating 
clients in creating art; or (3) live performances, including musical acts or theater 
performances. The board is prohibited from issuing the license to an organization that 
displays and sells commercially prepared or mass-produced artistic products or has a 
corporate purpose that is not dedicated to the above-mentioned activities. The hours and 
days of sale for an art establishment beer and wine license may be established by the board 
and the annual license fee is $1,000. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Revenues for the City of Annapolis decrease to the extent that art 
establishment licenses issued under the bill replace specific event licenses that are currently 
issued for similar events, as discussed below. City of Annapolis expenditures are not 
affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for any art 
establishment that is able to decrease license fee expenditures by obtaining the annual 
license created by the bill rather than multiple single-use licenses with higher fees overall. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 520/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners that issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner and may authorize the sale of alcohol for 
on-premises consumption. For example, Class A licenses generally only allow the sale of 
alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption, and Class B licenses are generally 
issued to restaurants and allow the sale of alcoholic beverages with food.  
 
Each local jurisdiction has its own regulatory processes and requirements in place for who 
can apply for and obtain a license and how many licenses, in total, may be issued for use 
in the jurisdiction. In general, retail establishments like grocery stores and convenience 
stores are not permitted to obtain alcoholic beverages licenses in most of the State. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The City of Annapolis advises that during 2022, Annapolis had 
138 applicants for event licenses who could possibly display art and the city received 
approximately $9,950 in fees from those applicants. The city estimates that if those 
applicants received an art establishment license under this bill, instead of multiple event 
licenses, revenues would decrease accordingly.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 472 (Senator Elfreth) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  City of Annapolis; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2