START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 560 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 560 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Carroll County - Alcoholic Beverages - Multiple Event Entertainment Licenses 
 
 
This bill repeals the 40-day limit for which specified multiple event entertainment licenses 
issued in Carroll County may be used in a calendar year. The annual fee for a license for 
41 or more events per year is $2,000. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Carroll County finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current law:  The Carroll County Board of License Commissioners may 
issue a Class C multiple event beer, wine, and liquor license. The license authorizes the 
license holder to exercise any privilege conferred by a Class C beer, wine, and liquor 
license at an entertainment event held by a county fire department or an arts center on 
West Main Street in Westminster. The annual fee for the license is:  
 
 
$125, for not more than 10 events per year; 
 
$250, for not more than 20 events per year;  
 
$375, for not more than 30 events per year; and  
 
$500, for not more than 40 events per year.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 560/ Page 2 
The bill adds a new license tier for 41 or more events per year with an annual fee of $2,000.  
 
Under current law, the total number of days for which a multiple event license may be used 
may not exceed 40 in a calendar year. The bill repeals this provision.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 306 (Carroll County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2