START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 779

Chapter 779

(House Bill 525)

AN ACT concerning

Outdoor Preschool License Pilot Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Outdoor Preschool License Pilot Program in the State
Department of Education; and generally relating to the establishment of the Outdoor
Preschool License Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 9.5–1101 through ~~9.5–1106~~ 9.5–1104 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle
11. Outdoor Preschool License Pilot Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

SUBTITLE 11. OUTDOOR PRESCHOOL LICENSE PILOT PROGRAM.

9.5–1101.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD CARE
PROGRAM” MEANS AN EARLY LEARNING OR CHILD CARE PROGRAM:

(1) THAT IS PRIMARILY OPERATED OUTDOORS; AND

(2) IN WHICH CHILDREN ARE ENROLLED ON A REGULAR BASIS FOR 3
OR MORE HOURS PER DAY.

(C) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE OUTDOOR PRESCHOOL LICENSE PILOT
PROGRAM.

9.5–1102.

(A) (1) THERE IS AN OUTDOOR PRESCHOOL LICENSE PILOT PROGRAM.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 779 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT MAY SHALL CONVENE AN ADVISORY GROUP OF
OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING PRACTITIONERS TO INFORM AND
SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(4) THE ADVISORY GROUP SHALL INCLUDE REPRESENTATIVES FROM
THE OUTDOOR PRESCHOOL LICENSING ADVISORY TEAM ESTABLISHED BY THE
EASTERN REGION ASSOCIATION OF FOREST AND NATURE SCHOOLS AND OTHER
STAKEHOLDERS WITH EXPERTISE IN OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING
AND CHILD CARE.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO LICENSE OUTDOOR,
NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS IN ORDER TO:

(1) EXPAND ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, HIGH–QUALITY EARLY
LEARNING AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS; AND

(2) INVESTIGATE THE BENEFITS OF OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED
CLASSROOMS.

9.5–1103.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 31, 2023, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
BEGIN TO PROMULGATE REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO COMPLY WITH § 9.5–1102(A)
AND (B) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE PILOT PROGRAM SHALL BEGIN ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 31,
2023 2024, AND SHALL CONTINUE FOR 3 4 SCHOOL YEARS.

(2) (3) THE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SELECT BETWEEN 5 AND 10 OUTDOOR,
NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS TO PARTICIPATE IN
THE PILOT PROGRAM DURING THE FIRST YEAR OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(3) BEGINNING AUGUST 31, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT MAY SELECT
ADDITIONAL OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD CARE
PROGRAMS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(4) IF THE DEPARTMENT RECEIVES FEWER THAN 5 APPLICATIONS
THAT MEET THE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR LICENSURE AND OPERATION OF
OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS UNDER

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 779

SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SELECT FOR
APPROVAL ALL APPLICANTS THAT QUALIFY.

(B) WHEN SELECTING AND APPROVING OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY
LEARNING AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM,
THE DEPARTMENT:

(1) SHALL GIVE PRIORITY TO EXISTING:

(I) EXISTING OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING
AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS THAT ARE LICENSED AS CAMPS BY THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH; AND

(II) EXISTING LICENSED CHILD CARE CENTERS OR REGISTERED
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES THAT PARTICIPATE IN THE MARYLAND EXCELS
PROGRAM AND ARE SEEKING TO EXPAND INTO NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING;

(2) SHALL, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, SELECT A MIX OF RURAL,
URBAN, AND SUBURBAN PROGRAMS; AND

(3) MAY GIVE PRIORITY TO:

(I) AREAS WHERE THERE ARE FEW OR LIMITED LICENSED
EARLY CHILD CARE PROGRAMS; AND

(II) AREAS OF NEED WHERE LICENSED EARLY CHILD CARE
PROGRAMS ARE AT OR NEAR FULL CAPACITY, AND WHERE ACCESS MAY BE
RESTRICTED BY ENROLLMENT WAITLISTS.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR
THE LICENSURE AND OPERATION OF OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING
AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS.

(2) THE REGULATIONS SHALL INCLUDE PROVISIONS FOR:

(I) BATHROOM USE AND DIAPER CHANGING;

(II) HAND WASHING;

(III) SHELTERING DURING INCLEMENT WEATHER;

(IV) CORRECT CHILD–TO–STAFF RATIOS FOR THE OUTDOOR
SETTING;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 779 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) THE SAFE STORAGE OF AND READY ACCESS TO
MEDICATION;

(VI) ACCOMMODATIONS FOR CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES;

(VII) THE SAFE STORAGE AND PREPARATION OF FOOD;

(VIII) ESTABLISHING SAFE BOUNDARIES IN UNENCLOSED
OUTDOOR SPACES AND BOUNDARIES AROUND HAZARDS;

(IX) PROPER OUTDOOR CLOTHING FOR CHILDREN;

(X) ACCESS TO POTABLE DRINKING WATER; AND

(XI) APPROPRIATE SLEEPING AREAS FOR NAPS.

(3) IN ADOPTING RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADAPT EXISTING CHILD CARE LICENSING
REQUIREMENTS TO ALLOW FOR THE OPERATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(4) IN ADOPTING RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT WITH STAKEHOLDERS THAT HAVE
EXPERTISE IN PROVIDING OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD
CARE, INCLUDING REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OUTDOOR PRESCHOOL
LICENSING ADVISORY TEAM ESTABLISHED BY THE EASTERN REGION ASSOCIATION
OF FOREST AND NATURE SCHOOLS.

9.5–1104.

THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADAPT THE MARYLAND EXCELS PROGRAM AS
NECESSARY FOR USE IN ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF OUTDOOR, NATURE–BASED
EARLY LEARNING AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS.

~~9.5–1105.~~

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 OF 2023 2025 AND 2024 2026, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT INTERIM REPORTS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM, INCLUDING:

(1) THE NUMBER OF PARTICIPATING PROVIDERS IN THE PILOT
PROGRAM; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 779

(2) THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES BEING SERVED BY THE
PILOT PROGRAM;

(3) THE NUMBER OF PARTICIPATING PROVIDERS WHO ENROLLED IN
THE MARYLAND EXCELS PROGRAM;

(4) THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN THE PILOT PROGRAM WHO
PARTICIPATED IN THE CHILD CARE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM; AND

(5) THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN THE PILOT PROGRAM SERVED BY
THE INFANT AND EARLY CHILDHOOD MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORT SERVICES
PROGRAM.

(B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
SUBMIT A FINAL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE FINDINGS
OF THE PILOT PROGRAM, INCLUDING:

(1) A DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL OPTIONS TO MITIGATE THE
UNCERTAINTY FOR FAMILIES AND PARTICIPATING PROVIDERS DURING THE FINAL 6
MONTHS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(2) RECOMMENDATIONS RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CONTINUING,
MODIFYING, OR EXPANDING THE PILOT PROGRAM.

~~9.5–1106.~~

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SUBTITLE IN CONSULTATION WITH:

(1) THE OUTDOOR PRESCHOOL LICENSING ADVISORY TEAM; AND

(2) ANY OTHER STAKEHOLDERS THE DEPARTMENT CONSIDERS
~~NECESSARY.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of ~~3~~ 5 years ~~and~~ ~~6~~ ~~months~~ and, at the end of
~~December~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2026~~ June 30, 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5