START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 513 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 513 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Investor-Owned Utilities - Prevailing Wage - Enforcement 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) to enforce an existing 
requirement that specified investor-owned utilities require contractors and subcontractors 
to pay their employees at least the applicable prevailing wage on certain underground 
projects. The bill also specifies that the prevailing wage rate for purposes of this 
requirement is the one determined solely by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, in a 
process substantially similar to the process for determining prevailing wage rates on public 
works contracts. The bill establishes related administrative processes during the initial 
period of enforcement. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDL can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources, 
generally through complaint investigation by the Division of Labor and Industry’s 
Employment Standards Service. Assuming general compliance with existing law by 
contractors and subcontractors, State revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal; the requirement to pay prevailing wage rates already 
exists. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By October 1, 2023, contractors and subcontractors required to pay 
prevailing wage rates must request a copy of a wage determination from MDL and ensure 
all employees performing covered work are paid in compliance with existing prevailing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 513/ Page 2 
wage rates; MDL must provide guidance to the affected contractors and subcontractors 
upon request. By December 1, 2023, if MDL determines that no existing prevailing wage 
rates and classifications apply to the covered work, the Commissioner of Labor and 
Industry must determine the initial prevailing wage rates by hand survey. 
 
The Commissioner must waive all civil penalties for, and may not take any related action 
against, a contractor or subcontractor who, on or before June 1, 2023, is not in compliance 
with the prevailing wage requirements for underground projects if the contractor or 
subcontractor comes into compliance by March 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law:    
 
Wage and Labor Requirements for Utility Contractors 
 
Chapter 12 of the 2021 special session required investor-owned gas and/or electric utilities 
to require contractors and subcontractors on specified underground projects to pay their 
employees at least the applicable prevailing wage rate. This is the provision modified by 
the bill; these are not public works projects. 
 
Chapter 38 of 2022 (The Climate Solutions Now Act) required an investor-owned electric 
company or gas and electric company to require a contractor or subcontractor that is 
working on specified projects to meet certain wage and labor requirements for federally 
funded electric infrastructure work. The requirements apply to a project that (1) involves 
the construction, reconstruction, installation, demolition, restoration, or alteration of any 
electric infrastructure of the company (and any related traffic control activities) and (2) is 
funded by federal funds to meet the State’s policy goals for the electric distribution system, 
as specified. The wage and labor requirements only apply to the portion of a project 
supported by the federal funds. 
 
Specifically, on the applicable projects, the company must (1) pay the area prevailing wage 
for each trade employed, including wages and fringe benefits; (2) offer health care and 
retirement benefits to the employees working on the project; (3) participate in an 
apprenticeship program registered with the State for each trade employed on the project; 
(4) establish and execute a plan for outreach, recruitment, and retention of State residents, 
as specified, to perform work on the project; (5) have been in compliance with federal and 
State wage and hour laws for the previous three years; (6) be subject to all State reporting 
and compliance requirements; and (7) maintain all appropriate licenses in good standing. 
 
Prevailing Wage – Generally 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland 
must pay their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 513/ Page 3 
including a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that 
are constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
“Public work” does not include, unless let to contract, a structure or work whose 
construction is performed by a public service company under order of PSC, regardless of 
public supervision or direction or payment wholly or partly from public money. 
 
See Appendix 1 – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law for additional information, 
including a discussion of estimated project costs associated with paying the prevailing 
wage. 
 
Employment Standards Service 
 
The Employment Standards Service in MDL administers and enforces provisions of law 
concerning the payment of wages and overtime to employees, compliance with various 
employee leave laws such as the Maryland Healthy Working Families Act, and the 
enforcement of the State’s worker misclassification law (the Workplace Fraud Act). In 
addition, the service enforces various other worker protection laws in Maryland, such as 
employment of minors and equal pay for equal work. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill addresses the enforcement of the novel prevailing wage 
requirement in Chapter 12 by explicitly requiring MDL to enforce the provision. PSC 
recently decided a matter on the level and type of enforcement of prevailing wage rate 
requirements under Chapter 12. The resulting decision document provides an overview of 
the novel nature of the prevailing wage requirements, utility/union disagreement as to 
enforcement, and PSC’s current stance that “addressing the prevailing wage requirements 
of [Public Utilities Article] § 5-305 through contractual terms between the utilities and 
their contractors and subcontractors is an appropriate mechanism.” Under that method of 
enforcement for prevailing wage, PSC has no operational role in enforcing prevailing wage 
requirements, such as the kind MDL has for covered prevailing wage projects (see the 
appendix). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 513/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 513/ Page 5 
Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law 
 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland, 
including mechanical service contractors that are part of public works projects, must pay 
their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, including 
a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that are 
constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
 
Eligible public works projects are: 
 
 
those carried out by the State; 
 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is State 
money; and 
 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages. 
 
Any public works contract valued at less than $250,000 is not required to pay prevailing 
wages. The State prevailing wage rate also does not apply to (1) any part of a public works 
contract funded with federal funds for which the contractor must pay the prevailing wage 
rate determined by the federal government; (2) specified construction projects carried out 
by public service companies under order of the Public Service Commission; or (3) local 
House or Senate initiatives that receive State funds in the capital budget. 
 
Prevailing wages are wages paid to at least 50% of workers in a given locality who perform 
the same or similar work on projects that resemble the proposed public works project. If 
fewer than 50% of workers in a job category earn the same wage, the prevailing wage is 
the rate paid to at least 40% of those workers. If fewer than 40% receive the same wage 
rate, the prevailing wage is calculated using a weighted average of local pay rates. The 
State Commissioner of Labor and Industry is responsible for determining prevailing wages 
for each public works project and job category based on annual surveys of contractors and 
subcontractors working on both public works and private construction projects. 
 
The commissioner has the authority to enforce contractors’ compliance with the prevailing 
wage law, including issuing a stop work order if the commissioner makes an initial 
determination that a contractor or subcontractor may have violated the prevailing wage 
requirements. Contractors found to have violated the prevailing wage law must pay 
restitution to the employees and liquidated damages to the public body in the amount of 
$20 a day for each laborer who is paid less than the prevailing wage or $250 per laborer 
per day if the employer knew or reasonably should have known of the obligation to pay the 
prevailing wage. If an employer fails to comply with an order by the commissioner to pay 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 513/ Page 6 
restitution, either the commissioner or an employee may sue the employer to recover the 
difference between the prevailing wage and paid wage. The court may order the employer 
to pay double or triple damages if it finds that the employer withheld wages or fringe 
benefits willfully and knowingly or with deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard for the 
law. 
 
The Governor must include at least $385,000 in the budget each year for the Prevailing 
Wage Unit within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland, and the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) are all exempt from the 
prevailing wage law. However, USM, MSU, and MSA all voluntarily comply with 
prevailing wage requirements for contracts that exceed the $250,000 threshold. 
 
History of the Prevailing Wage 
 
The federal Davis-Bacon Act, originally enacted in 1931, requires contractors working on 
federal public works contracts valued at more than $2,000 to pay their employees the 
prevailing local wage for their labor class, as determined by the U.S. Secretary of Labor. 
The general intent of the law, and similar state and local laws, is to stabilize local wage 
rates by preventing unfair bidding practices and wage competition. Thirty-two states and 
the District of Columbia currently have prevailing wage laws; since 1979, nine states have 
repealed their prevailing wage laws. 
 
Maryland adopted a prevailing wage law in 1945 (Chapter 999), but it only applied to road 
projects in Allegany, Garrett, and Washington counties. In 1969, the statute was amended 
to include State public works contracts of $500,000 or more. There have been periodic 
changes to the law and the definition of “prevailing wage.” In 1983, the law was broadened 
to include public works projects in which the State funds 50% or more of the total project 
costs and 75% or more in the case of public schools. Chapter 208 of 2000 reduced the 
prevailing wage threshold for public schools from 75% to 50% of construction costs, 
thereby bringing school construction projects in line with prevailing wage requirements for 
other public works projects. Chapters 281 and 282 of 2014 further lowered the State 
funding threshold for school construction projects to 25% of total construction costs, 
thereby requiring the vast majority of public school construction projects in the State to 
pay the prevailing wage, subject to the $500,000 contract value threshold. Chapters 57 and 
58 of 2021 lowered the State funding threshold for all public works projects (including 
school construction) to 25% of total construction costs and lowered the contract value 
threshold for payment of prevailing wages to $250,000; however, legislative bond 
initiatives that receive State funds in the capital budget are exempt from the requirement 
to pay prevailing wages. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 513/ Page 7 
The number of prevailing wage projects rose dramatically following the Great Recession 
and has remained high each year since. MDL advises that, during fiscal 2022, its prevailing 
wage unit monitored 921 projects, down slightly from 941 projects in fiscal 2021, but 
significantly higher than 496 in fiscal 2014. To accommodate the increase in projects, the 
number of prevailing wage investigators increased in fiscal 2016 from three to six; as of 
January 2023, there are five investigators in the unit. 
 
Six Maryland jurisdictions – Allegany, Baltimore, Charles, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City – have local prevailing wage laws requiring 
public works projects in the jurisdiction to pay prevailing wages. 
 
Research on the Effects of Prevailing Wage on Contract Costs 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) has reviewed research on the effect of 
prevailing wage laws on the cost of public works contracts and has found inconsistent 
and/or unreliable results. The primary challenge confronted by all prevailing wage 
researchers is identifying an appropriate “control group” consisting of projects of similar 
type, timing, and location that do not pay the prevailing wage. In most jurisdictions that 
require a prevailing wage, all projects of a specified type and size are subject to it, so there 
is no natural control group. Some researchers have compared project costs in states or 
localities before and after they adopted prevailing wage requirements, but their findings 
are clouded by the difference in time, during which construction costs changed and other 
factors were not consistent. Another deficiency in the research is that it almost always relies 
on project bid prices (i.e., the anticipated cost prior to the beginning of construction) rather 
than actual final costs. As most construction projects experience change orders or cost 
overruns affecting their cost, reliance on bid prices negatively affects the validity of the 
findings. Therefore, research findings related to the effect of the prevailing wage on 
project costs are inconsistent and often inconclusive. A similar review of research 
conducted by MDL (at the time, the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation) for 
the Task Force to Study the Applicability of the Maryland Prevailing Wage Law also 
concluded that “data limitations create difficulty for researchers on both sides of the issue.” 
 
Local school systems occasionally solicit side-by-side bids with and without prevailing 
wages to help them decide whether they want to accept the full State match (and, thus, be 
subject to the prevailing wage) or a lesser State match without being subject to the 
prevailing wage. Data provided to the Public School Construction Program by 
Anne Arundel, Carroll, Frederick, Howard, and Washington counties, from 2012 through 
2015, shows that the cost differential between bids with and without prevailing wages for 
266 individual bids submitted for 26 different school construction and renovation projects 
averaged 11.7%, with a range from 0% to 49%. As with other research data, these represent 
bid prices, not actual construction costs. An independent analysis of the Maryland 
side-by-side bid data concluded that factors other than prevailing wages, including bid 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 513/ Page 8 
timing and the level of competition for the bids, accounted for most of the differences 
between the prevailing wage and nonprevailing wage bids. 
 
One area of the research in which there is a general consensus, and which is supported by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, is that labor costs represent between 20% and 30% of 
construction costs (with materials and site costs making up most of the rest). Therefore, a 
10% gap between prevailing wages and market wages could theoretically increase total 
contract costs by about 2.5%, and a 20% gap in wages could increase total contract costs 
by about 6%. Given the empirical evidence that prevailing wages tend to be higher than 
nonprevailing wages and that labor costs are a significant portion of overall project costs, 
DLS believes that it is reasonable to expect that the prevailing wage requirement adds 
between 2% and 5% to the cost of a public works project. Given the inconsistency and 
inconclusiveness of the empirical research, however, actual effects may vary by project, 
with some projects exhibiting higher cost differences and others experiencing negligible 
differences. 
 

END OF PAGE 8