START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 587 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 587 
(Delegate Bridges, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - 41st District - Alcoholic Beverages - Licenses 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to exchange a 
Class B-D-7 beer, wine, and liquor license for premises located on the odd side of the 
4000 block of Frederick Avenue for a Class A-7 license. The bill repeals the provisions 
prohibiting the board from issuing a Class A-7 license (1) on or after July 1, 2022, and 
(2) in the 43rd legislative district. The bill also alters the definition of a “marketplace” to 
include premises expected to open within 24 months after issuance of the marketplace 
license in the 41st district. The bill also authorizes the marketplace license holder to sell 
beer, wine, and liquor, as specified, for off-premises consumption. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024. The bill’s provisions related to a 
marketplace license terminate on June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 537 of 2018 authorized the board to issue a Class A-7 beer, wine, 
and liquor license. The license authorizes the holder to sell, for off-premises consumption, 
beer, wine, and liquor at retail at the place described in the license on Monday through 
Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to midnight. The annual license fee is $1,500. A license holder 
who holds a valid Class B-D-7 license issued on or before July 1, 2018, may apply to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 587/ Page 2 
board to exchange the license for a Class A-7 license if the license holder first obtains 
approval by resolution of the Baltimore City Council. The board may not issue a 
Class A-7 license after June 30, 2022, and Chapter 510 of 2020 prohibited a 
Class A-7 license from being issued in the 43rd Legislative District. 
 
Chapter 753 of 2022 authorized the board to issue a marketplace license in the 
41st legislative district of Baltimore City, in an area bounded by Cross Keys Road, 
Village Square, Interstate 83, and Hamlet Hill Road. “Marketplace” means premises that 
(1) accommodate the public and (2) are made up of at least three food and beverage 
establishments, at least one of which is licensed to conduct off-premises sales, that opened 
to the public by July 1, 2022, or are expected to open within six months of issuance of the 
marketplace license. The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor 
from one or more establishments within the marketplace by the drink or by the bottle for 
on-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $6,000; in addition, the license holder 
must annually pay $500 to provide live entertainment and $200 to provide outdoor table 
service. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 765 (Senator Carter)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2