START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 417

Chapter 417

(House Bill 559)

AN ACT concerning

Carroll County – Alcoholic Beverages – Modification of Seating Requirements

FOR the purpose of modifying the seating requirements for certain beer, wine, and liquor
licenses in Carroll County; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages in Carroll
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 16–102, 16–902(a), 16–904(a), and 16–905(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 16–902(b), 16–904(b), and 16–905(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

16–102.

This title applies only in Carroll County.

16–902.

(a) There is a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license.

(b) The Board may issue the license for use by:

(1) a hotel that:

(i) accommodates the public by providing service ordinarily found in
hotels;

(ii) has:

1. at least 25 rooms;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 417 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. a lobby with registration and mail desk; and

3. a dining room that serves full–course meals at least twice
daily and that has regular seating at tables, [not] including NOT MORE THAN 15 seats at
bars or counters, for at least 50 individuals; and

(iii) is operated in facilities that are valued for State and local
assessment and taxation at not less than $50,000; or

(2) a restaurant that:

(i) is open for business at least 5 days a week and serves at least:

1. two full–course meals each day it is open from Monday to
Friday; and

2. one full–course meal each day it is open on Saturday and
Sunday;

(ii) has regular seating at tables, [not] including NOT MORE THAN
15 seats at bars or counters, for at least 50 individuals; and

(iii) is operated in facilities that are valued for State and local
assessment and taxation at not less than $50,000.

16–904.

(a) There is a Class BR beer, wine, and liquor license.

(b) The Board may issue the license for use by a restaurant that:

(1) serves at least one full–course evening dinner meal at least 5 days a
week;

(2) is only open during the time meals are served;

(3) has regular seating at tables, [not] including [seating] NOT MORE
THAN 15 SEATS at bars and counters, for at least 50 individuals; and

(4) is operated in facilities valued for State and local assessment and
taxation at not less than $50,000.

16–905.

(a) There is a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 417

(b) (1) The Board may issue the license for use by a club that:

(i) has a dining room;

(ii) has a regular seating capacity at tables, [excluding] INCLUDING
NOT MORE THAN 15 seats at bars or counters, for at least 50 individuals; and

(iii) operates in a facility with an assessed real property valuation of
at least $20,000.

(2) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
at a club, at the place described in the license, for on–premises consumption.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3