START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 170

Chapter 170

(House Bill 586)

AN ACT concerning

State Procurement – Purchasing ~~Preferences~~ – Compost, Mulch, and Soil
Amendments and Aggregate

FOR the purpose of requiring each unit of State government to ~~give~~ ~~preference~~ ~~to~~ include
certain specifications for certain products produced from recycled or organic
materials when ~~purchasing~~ establishing procurement specifications for compost,
mulch, or other soil amendments or aggregate; requiring the Maryland Green
Purchasing Committee to establish certain specifications and publish and maintain
the specifications online; and generally relating to the procurement of compost,
mulch, and soil amendments or aggregate.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 14–409
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

14–409.

(a) IN THIS SECTION, “PREFERENCE” MEANS:

(1) A PERCENTAGE PRICE PREFERENCE; AND

(2) ANY OTHER PROVISION THAT FAVORS PRODUCTS PRODUCED
FROM ORGANIC MATERIALS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “AGGREGATE” MEANS GRAVEL, CRUSHED STONE,
SAND, AND OTHER SIMILAR MATERIALS.

(B) A State or local unit responsible for the maintenance of public lands in the
State, to the maximum extent practicable, shall give consideration and preference to the
use of compost in any land maintenance activity that is to be paid for with public funds.

[(b)] (C) It is the goal of the Department of General Services to:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 170 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) compost, to the extent practicable, all landscape waste on State
property that is under its operation for use as fertilizer in landscaping activities; and

(2) increase the percentage of landscaped area fertilized by compost each
year.

(D) (1) IN PURCHASING COMPOST, MULCH, OR OTHER SOIL AMENDMENTS
OR AGGREGATE, EACH UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT SHALL GIVE PREFERENCE TO
PRODUCTS PRODUCED FROM MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE, FOOD WASTE, SLUDGE,
YARD WASTE, CLEAN WOOD WASTE, OR OTHER ORGANIC MATERIALS, PROVIDED
~~THAT~~ INCLUDE IN ITS PROCUREMENT SPECIFICATIONS THE SPECIFICATIONS
PUBLISHED BY THE MARYLAND GREEN PURCHASING COMMITTEE FOR COMPOST,
MULCH, OR OTHER SOIL AMENDMENTS OR AGGREGATE UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF
THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
APPLY IF:

(I) THE PRODUCTS ARE COMPETITIVELY PRICED; AND

(II) THE QUALITY OF THE PRODUCTS IS SATISFACTORY FOR THE
INTENDED PURPOSES; AND

(III) THE PRODUCTS ARE READILY AVAILABLE.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
~~PRODUCT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~CONSIDERED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~COMPETITIVELY~~ ~~PRICED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PURPOSES~~ ~~OF~~
THIS SUBSECTION IF THE PRICE OF THE PRODUCT IS NOT MORE THAN 10% ABOVE
~~THE~~ ~~PRICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~COMPARABLE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~MANUFACTURED~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~VIRGIN~~
~~MATERIALS.~~

(II) IF THE MARYLAND GREEN PURCHASING COMMITTEE
DETERMINES THAT A 15% PRICE DIFFERENTIAL IS IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE
STATE, A PRODUCT MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE COMPETITIVELY PRICED FOR
~~PURPOSES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBSECTION~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~MORE~~ ~~THAN~~
15% ABOVE THE PRICE OF A COMPARABLE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED FROM VIRGIN
~~MATERIALS.~~

(3) (I) THE MARYLAND GREEN PURCHASING COMMITTEE,
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–410 OF THIS SUBTITLE, SHALL ESTABLISH
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PURCHASING OF COMPOST, MULCH, OR OTHER SOIL
AMENDMENTS OR AGGREGATE PRODUCED FROM MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE, FOOD

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 170

WASTE, DREDGED MATERIAL, CONSTRUCTION WASTE, YARD WASTE, CLEAN WOOD
WASTE, OR OTHER RECYCLED OR ORGANIC MATERIALS.

(II) THE SPECIFICATIONS ESTABLISHED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE PUBLISHED AND MAINTAINED
ONLINE BY THE MARYLAND GREEN PURCHASING COMMITTEE FOR USE BY STATE
AGENCIES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3