START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 596 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 596 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
 
Health and Human Services Transportation Improvement Act of 2023 
 
 
This bill establishes a State Coordinating Committee for Health and Human Services 
Transportation in the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) and repeals the 
limits on annual funding for the Maryland Senior Rides Program (MSRP) and the Job 
Access and Reverse Commute Program (JARCP) administered by the Maryland Transit 
Administration (MTA). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $180,000 in 
FY 2024 and by $80,000 annually thereafter for consultants to assist with the new 
coordinating committee. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
180,000 
80,000 
80,000 
80,000 
80,000 
Net Effect 
($180,000) 
($80,000) 
($80,000) 
($80,000) 
($80,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 596/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
State Coordinating Committee for Health and Human Services Transportation 
 
“Transportation-disadvantaged” means an individual who qualifies for federally conducted 
or assisted transportation-related programs or services, as implemented and coordinated by 
a State agency due to disability, income, or advanced age. 
 
The State Coordinating Committee for Health and Human Services Transportation must be 
staffed by MDOT. The committee must:   
 
 
examine the transportation needs of residents of the State who are elderly, have a 
disability, or require transportation to access jobs, medical and other health-related 
appointments, senior citizen programs, or other programs requiring the 
transportation of individuals who qualify as “transportation disadvantaged”; 
 
coordinate efforts in the State to provide quality health and human services 
transportation services by working with appropriate federal, State, and local 
agencies, transit consumers, and transportation providers, to develop a cooperative 
and coordinated health and human services transportation system; 
 
conduct an inventory and assessment of health and human services transportation 
providers in the State; 
 
devise a five-year health and human services transportation plan, as specified; 
 
serve as the clearinghouse for health and human services transportation coordination 
issues in the State; 
 
identify and facilitate resolution to issues regarding health and human services 
transportation, both locally and statewide; 
 
participate in the identification of potential allocations of health and human services 
transportation resources during emergency evacuations; 
 
evaluate cost-saving measures; 
 
investigate the need for the establishment of standards for vehicles and drivers 
within health and human services transportation programs; and 
 
examine other appropriate areas to facilitate the development of a quality health and 
human services transportation system in the State. 
 
By September 1 each year, the committee must report on its activities to the Governor and 
the General Assembly. A member of the committee may not receive compensation but is 
entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 596/ Page 3 
Maryland Senior Rides Program 
 
The limit of $500,000 in annual grants that may be awarded through MSRP is repealed 
and, consequently, more than $500,000 in annual grants may be provided through the 
program. 
 
Job Access and Reverse Commute Program 
 
The limit of $400,000 that may be provided by the Governor in the annual State budget for 
JARCP is repealed. Instead, the Governor must provide funding for the program in the 
State budget. No specific funding mandate is established, however. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Senior Rides Program 
 
Under MSRP, MTA must award grants to qualified program applicants for the operation 
of transportation services. To be eligible for a grant, the program applicant must (1) provide 
door-to-door transportation for low-income to moderate-income seniors who have 
difficulty accessing or using other existing transportation systems; (2) use primary 
volunteer drivers who drive their own vehicles; (3) use a dispatcher system to respond 
quickly to requests from low-income to moderate-income seniors for door-to-door 
transportation; and (4) define a geographic area for which door-to-door transportation is 
provided. 
 
MTA may not award more than $500,000 in grants per year, and a program participant 
must expend a matching fund of at least 25% of the total capital or operating costs 
associated with providing the door-to-door transportation. 
 
Jobs Access and Reverse Commute Program 
 
Chapter 793 of 2018 established JARCP. Through the program, MTA may make grants to 
a provider for job access and reverse commute projects that connect targeted populations 
with targeted employment areas. Generally, MTA must distribute (1) 70% of the funds to 
providers for use in urbanized areas and (2) 30% of the funds to providers for use in rural 
areas. A grant under the program may not exceed 80% of the net operating costs of a 
project, as determined by MTA, and must provide services for more than three years. A 
provider may use no more than 10% of the grant amount for administrative costs, as 
determined by MTA. 
 
Funds for the program must be as provided by the Governor in the State budget, not to 
exceed $400,000 annually. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 596/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:   
 
State Coordinating Committee for Health and Human Services Transportation 
 
The bill requires MDOT to staff the committee. MDOT plans to do so with support from 
the Office of Planning and Capital Programming within MDOT itself, MTA, and 
consultant services to assist MDOT and MTA with the health-related issues in which they 
lack expertise. Thus, TTF expenditures for consultant services increase by $180,000 in 
fiscal 2024 and by $80,000 annually thereafter. 
 
This estimate assumes that other representatives on the committee (such as the Maryland 
Department of Health) can provide their expertise and support to MDOT as well, as 
necessary and appropriate. To the extent that this is not the case, TTF expenditures increase 
further as additional consultant services would likely be necessary. 
 
Funding Limitations 
 
Even though the bill repeals the limits on funding for MSRP and JARCP, it does not require 
additional spending for the programs. Consequently, any additional funding for the 
programs is discretionary and not required by the bill. Therefore, this analysis assumes that 
no additional funding is provided for the two programs. 
 
For informational purposes, the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes $187,091 for 
MSRP and $400,000 for JARCP. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 511 (Senators Ellis and Hester) - Finance and Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Human Services; 
Office of Deaf and Hard of Hearing; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland 
Department of Aging; Department of Veteran Affairs; Maryland Association of County 
Health Officers; Calvert, Caroline, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Washington, and Worcester counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 596/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5