START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 556 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 556 
(Delegates Wilson and Atterbeary) 
Economic Matters 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
 
Cannabis Reform 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes an adult-use cannabis industry in the State by renaming the 
Alcohol and Tobacco Commission as the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission 
(ATCC) (with cannabis-related duties) and establishing (1) the Maryland Cannabis 
Administration (administration) as an independent unit of State government; (2) a licensing 
framework for the regulated sale of cannabis; (3) a sales and use tax on the sale of adult-use 
cannabis; (4) the Office of Social Equity (OSE) in the administration; and (5) the Social 
Equity Partnership Grant Program in OSE.  
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2024 from sales and use 
tax revenue distributions, as shown below; the FY 2024 budget assumes $15.0 million in 
general fund revenues. Special fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2024 from fees and 
tax revenues. Special fund expenditures increase beginning in FY 2023 to establish the 
administration; the FY 2024 budget includes $1.1 million in special funds in FY 2023. 
Additional significant increases in special fund expenditures begin in FY 2024; the 
FY 2024 budget includes $8.8 million in special funds. General fund expenditures increase 
beginning in FY 2023; the FY 2024 budget includes $0.3 million in FY 2023 and 
$3.5 million in FY 2024. Future year general fund expenditures reflect a mandated 
appropriation. Bond expenditures increase in FY 2024; the FY 2024 capital budget includes 
$2.0 million. Some of the budgeted funds are contingent on the enactment of this bill or its 
cross file. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
GF Revenue 
$0 
$18,000,000 
$36,559,600 
$49,670,800 
$64,249,700 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$67,952,200 
$52,831,500 
$50,990,800 
$65,555,400 
GF Expenditure 
$610,700 
$4,434,900 
$7,389,400 
$7,313,000 
$7,415,100 
SF Expenditure 
$128,400 
$62,996,400 
$72,224,300 
$54,567,800 
$68,296,000 
Bond Exp. 
$0 
$2,000,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($739,200) 
$16,520,800 
$9,777,500 
$38,780,800 
$54,094,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 556/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase significantly due to the bill’s 
capitalization and distribution of specified special funds and sales and use tax revenues, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In general, the bill redesignates the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission as 
ATCC and establishes the Maryland Cannabis Administration (the administration) as an 
independent unit of State government; the administration is funded by the newly 
established Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF). The administration is 
tasked with overseeing the regulation of adult-use cannabis and is the designated successor 
of the Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission (MMCC) in all matters concerning the 
regulation of medical cannabis. As soon as practicable after the bill’s effective date, ATCC 
and the administration must enter into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that 
provides that both parties agree to collaborate to enforce the bill’s provisions regarding 
unlicensed cannabis operations in the State. Among other things, the bill (1) establishes an 
advisory board on medical and adult-use cannabis; (2) establishes OSE in the 
administration and the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program in OSE; (3) includes 
various provisions to encourage participation by “social equity applicants”; (4) establishes 
a cannabis licensing and registration framework; (5) establishes civil and criminal penalties 
for specified violations; (6) establishes a Maryland Incubator Program; (7) establishes 
cannabis advertising restrictions; (8) prohibits the Commissioner of Financial Regulation 
from taking specified actions; (9) authorizes a “political subdivision” (i.e., a county or a 
municipality) to establish its own ordinances, with specified limitations; and 
(10) establishes a 9% sales and use tax on the sale of adult-use cannabis. 
 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission 
 
The bill makes numerous changes to reflect the renaming of the former Alcohol and 
Tobacco Commission as ATCC, establishes cannabis-related duties for ATCC, authorizes 
(rather than requires) the Executive Director of ATCC to be a sworn police officer (while 
also making conforming changes and authorizing the current Executive Director to 
continue to serve in that role), and adds two members to ATCC, as specified. ATCC must 
develop best practices for regulating the cannabis industry; implementing public health 
measures related to cannabis; and regulating, to the extent possible, medical and adult-use 
cannabis in a similar manner.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 556/ Page 3 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis 
 
The bill establishes the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis. The advisory 
board consists of members who meet specified criteria and are appointed by the Governor 
with the advice and consent of the Senate. The director of the administration serves as chair 
of the board. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by ATCC, 
the Governor, the administration, or the General Assembly; (2) on its own initiative, 
provide recommendations to ATCC and the administration regarding guidelines, rules, and 
regulations that the advisory board considers important or necessary for review and 
consideration; and (3) establish at least two subcommittees to focus on medical and 
adult-use cannabis. 
 
Social Equity Provisions 
 
The administration must (1) conduct extensive outreach to small, minority, and women 
business owners and entrepreneurs who may have an interest in applying for a cannabis 
license before accepting and processing cannabis license applications and (2) connect 
potential social equity applicants with OSE. By August 1 each year, cannabis licensees and 
registrants must report specified information determined by the administration to be 
necessary for assessing the need for remedial measures in the cannabis industry. The 
administration must report the collected data by August 15 to the certification agency 
designated by the Board of Public Works under the State’s minority business enterprise 
(MBE) law (i.e., the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT)) and by January 1 
each year to the General Assembly. 
 
Office of Social Equity:  The bill establishes OSE as an independent office that functions 
within the administration. OSE is headed by an executive director who meets specified 
criteria and is appointed by the Governor. OSE may employ staff and retain contractors as 
necessary to carry out the functions of the office, which include:   
 
 
promoting and encouraging full participation in the regulated cannabis industry by 
people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on 
drugs in order to positively impact those communities; 
 
consulting with and assisting the Comptroller in administering the Community 
Reinvestment and Repair Fund (CRRF) (established by Chapter 26 of 2022 and 
moved from the Health-General Article to the Alcoholic Beverages Article by the 
bill);  
 
consulting with and assisting the Department of Commerce in administering the 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund (established by Chapter 26 of 2022; the bill 
expands the authorized uses of the fund to include start-up operating and capital 
funding needs for social equity licensees);  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 556/ Page 4 
 
identifying and opposing regulations that unnecessarily burden or undermine the 
legislative intent of OSE, as specified; 
 
providing recommendations to ATCC on regulations related to diversity and social 
equity applications; 
 
working with the administration to implement free technical assistance for social 
equity and minority cannabis business applicants;  
 
producing reports and recommendations on diversity and equity in ownership, 
management, and employment in the legal cannabis economy; and 
 
assisting businesses with obtaining financing through the Capital Access Program 
(discussed below). 
 
OSE must (1) issue and make publicly available a report by March 1 each year on how the 
CRRF was allocated during the immediately preceding calendar year (and also submit the 
report to the General Assembly); (2) solicit public input on the use of CRRF by 
November 1 each year; and (3) publish a review of the input received by December 15 each 
year. 
 
Social Equity Partnership Grant Program:  The bill establishes the Social Equity 
Partnership Grant Program in OSE to promote qualifying partnerships between operational 
cannabis licensees and “social equity licensees.” Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor 
must include in the annual budget bill an annual appropriation of $5.0 million for the grant 
program. OSE must adopt regulations to implement and administer the grant program. 
 
A “social equity licensee” means a “social equity applicant” who has been awarded a 
cannabis license or registration and includes a grower, processor, or dispensary that held a 
stage one preapproval for a license before October 1, 2022, and was not operational before 
that date. A “social equity applicant” is an applicant for a cannabis license or registration 
who has at least 65% ownership and control held by one or more individuals who (1) have 
lived in a disproportionately impacted area for at least 5 of the 10 years immediately 
preceding the submission of the application; (2) attended a public school in a 
disproportionately impacted area for at least 5 years; or (3) for at least 2 years, attended a 
4-year institution of higher education in the State where at least 40% of the individuals who 
attend the institution of higher education are eligible for a Pell Grant. Individuals must also 
meet any other criteria established by the administration. “Disproportionately impacted 
area” means a geographic area identified by OSE that has had above 150% of the State’s 
10-year average for cannabis possession charges.   
 
Subject to specified limitations, OSE has discretion to approve, deny, or revoke qualifying 
partnerships. OSE must award grants to operational cannabis licensees that have a 
qualifying partnership, as specified, in an amount that is based on the nature of the 
qualifying partnership. The total grant amount issued to an operational cannabis licensee 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 556/ Page 5 
that has a converted license may not exceed the license conversion fee paid by the licensee 
or $250,000 per year per qualifying partnership. OSE may require a grant recipient that 
fails to fulfill the requirements of the grant to return all or part of the grant. 
 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund:  The bill repeals and recodifies CRRF (as 
established by Chapter 26 of 2022) under the Alcoholic Beverages Article (rather than its 
current location under the Health-General Article). The bill also requires that OSE, in 
consultation with the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), (rather than OAG alone under 
existing statute) determine which communities have been the most impacted by the 
disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before July 1, 2022. Based on the 
percentage allocable to each county as determined by OSE and reported to the Office of 
the Comptroller by July 31 each year, the Comptroller must distribute funds to each county 
in an amount that for the period from July 1, 2002, to January 1, 2023, is proportionate to 
the total number of cannabis possession charges in the county compared to the total number 
in the State. (Current law uses a calculation based on cannabis arrests from July 1, 2002, 
to June 30, 2022.) 
 
Capital Access Program:  The bill establishes a Capital Access Program within Commerce 
to (1) stimulate opportunities for social equity licensees that have difficulty obtaining 
financing and (2) establish a loan loss reserve account. Commerce must collaborate with 
OSE to identify and assist businesses with obtaining financing from the program. A loan 
to a social equity licensee qualifies if the loan satisfies the lending criteria of the lender and 
does not exceed $500,000 for a dispensary or $1.0 million for a grower or processor. To 
participate in the program, a lender must enroll the qualifying loan in the program within 
30 days of the first loan disbursement. 
 
Commerce must establish a loan loss reserve account for a lender when the lender enrolls 
its first loan under the program. At the time of enrollment, the borrower (which must 
qualify as a small business), lender, and the administration must make specified payments 
into the reserve account. The loan loss reserve account must be available for a lender to 
withdraw from if the borrower defaults on a qualifying loan, subject to procedures that 
Commerce must establish. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program:  To the extent practicable and authorized by the 
U.S. Constitution, a cannabis licensee must comply with the State’s MBE Program. The 
administration, in consultation with the specified certification agency (MDOT), the 
Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs (GOSBA), the 
General Assembly, and OAG, must review the disparity study required by Chapter 26 of 
2022 to evaluate whether application of the State’s MBE program to cannabis licenses 
would comply with the U.S. Supreme Court decision in City of Richmond v. J. A. Croson 
Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989), and any subsequent federal and constitutional requirements. 
Within six months of issuing a cannabis license, GOSBA – in consultation with OAG, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 556/ Page 6 
OSE, and the cannabis licensee – must establish a clear plan for setting reasonable and 
appropriate MBE participation goals and procedures for the procurement of goods and 
services related to cannabis, including the cultivation, manufacturing, and dispensing of 
cannabis. To the extent practicable, these goals and procedures must be based on the 
requirements of the State’s MBE program. 
 
Maryland Cannabis Administration 
 
The bill establishes the Maryland Cannabis Administration as an independent unit of State 
government that is headed by a director who meets specified criteria and is appointed by 
the Governor. The administration is responsible for administering and enforcing the 
Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages Article, as established 
by the bill. The administration may (1) employ staff and retain contractors as provided in 
the State budget and (2) recommend changes to improve the administration of the bill’s 
provisions relating to the regulation of cannabis. The administration is exempt from State 
procurement requirements until December 31, 2023, if the procurement is for establishing 
a State cannabis laboratory at a preexisting site, specified consultants, specified banking 
services, or communication services for specified public and consumer education 
campaigns.  
 
The bill further establishes that the administration is the successor to MMCC in matters 
concerning the regulation of medical cannabis. As such, all persons who are merit 
employees or contract staff in budgeted positions of MMCC are transferred to the 
administration without any change or loss of rights, pay, working conditions, benefits, 
rights, or status. The transfer of personnel must be conducted in a manner to minimize the 
costs of the transfer and result in a more cost-efficient operation for the regulation of 
cannabis. 
 
The administration must evaluate the regulations adopted by MMCC under the Code of 
Maryland Regulations (COMAR 10.62) and adopt emergency regulations by July 1, 2023, 
that are supplemental to the existing medical cannabis regulations and (notwithstanding 
any other law) remain in effect until the taking effect of nonemergency regulations required 
to be adopted by July 1, 2024 (discussed below). The emergency regulations must (1) carry 
out the requirements for licensure of cannabis businesses, including implementing 
procedures related to applications, licenses, and registrations; (2) assist the Comptroller in 
the collection of taxes imposed on the sale of adult-use cannabis; (3) implement inventory 
management and tracking, as specified; and (4) establish operating requirements for 
cannabis licensees or cannabis registrants, as specified. 
 
By July 1, 2024, the administration must adopt nonemergency regulations to carry out its 
responsibilities. Any adopted regulations must, to the extent practicable, regulate medical 
and adult-use cannabis in the same manner. The administration must adopt regulations that 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 556/ Page 7 
(1) govern Internet sales of cannabis; (2) implement and supplement packaging and 
labeling requirements for cannabis products as established by the bill; (3) establish 
procedures for the use of point of sale technologies by dispensaries for all transactions that 
verify a consumer’s age using a driver’s license or other specified valid identification; and 
(4) establish health, safety, security, and tracking requirements for the packaging and 
repackaging of cannabis by a dispensary. To the extent practicable, the administration must 
adopt regulations that require cannabis licensees to transition from a cash system and to 
use traditional banking services. Also, by July 1, 2024, the administration must adopt 
minimum standards for licensed growers to protect the rights of growers and employees, 
as specified.  
 
The administration must adopt regulations establishing limits on the maximum potency of 
cannabis products sold in the State, including limits on the maximum amount of 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in individual cannabis products and limits on the 
maximum aggregate THC amount for multiple edible cannabis products packaged 
together.  
 
A package of cannabis for distribution to a consumer or qualifying patient must conform 
to child-resistant packaging requirements established under federal regulations, 
tamper-evident packaging, and include specified information and statements. Cannabis 
labeling and packaging may not include (1) any image that may appeal to children or that 
is designed or likely to appeal to minors and (2) anything that could reasonably mislead an 
individual to believe the package contains anything other than a finished cannabis product 
or has been endorsed, manufactured, or used by any agency of a state or political 
subdivision. The administration may adopt regulations to allow the sale, on or before 
July 1, 2024, of cannabis or cannabis products that are labeled or packaged using images 
that may appeal to children.   
 
The administration must also:   
 
 
develop and maintain a seed-to-sale tracking system, as specified; 
 
conduct financial and criminal background investigations of any cannabis license 
applicants and licensees, as specified and required; 
 
develop a process for consumers to purchase clones and seeds, seedlings, stalks, 
roots, and stems of the cannabis plant for cultivation in compliance with current 
law; 
 
solicit, evaluate, and issue or deny applications for cannabis licenses and 
registrations, as specified; 
 
award or deny cannabis licenses and registrations and give notice and hold hearings 
on contested license denials, as specified; 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 556/ Page 8 
 
conduct announced and unannounced inspections of any licensed or registered 
cannabis business to ensure compliance; 
 
after determining that a violation has occurred, impose any authorized penalty after 
giving notice and holding a hearing in accordance with the requirements of the State 
Government Article; and 
 
publish specified data, organized by month on a rolling basis to the publicly 
accessible part of ATCC’s website. 
 
The administration may issue subpoenas for witnesses or evidence in investigations, 
proceedings, or disciplinary actions; delegate its hearing authority to an employee within 
the administration; and hold hearings in absentia when the person against whom action is 
contemplated fails to appear after due notice.   
 
Required Studies and Reports:  As soon as practicable after the bill’s effective date, the 
administration must contract with an independent consultant to complete a study on 
wholesale cannabis licenses and conduct a study for on-site consumption of cannabis and 
cannabis products at retail premises of cannabis licensees. The study results must be 
submitted to the Governor and the General Assembly by June 1, 2024. 
 
By January 1, 2024, the administration must submit to the General Assembly an interim 
report on the ability of micro dispensary licensees to safely and securely dispense cannabis. 
A final report is due by December 31, 2024.  
 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund:  The bill establishes CREF, administered by 
the Comptroller (at the direction of the administration), with the purpose of covering the 
costs of (1) operating the administration and (2) administering and enforcing the Medical 
and Adult-Use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages Article. The fund is subject to 
audit by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) and generally consists of fees the 
administration may impose (including registration fees) and tax revenues from the sale of 
adult-use cannabis sufficient to defray the entire cost of operating the administration. In 
addition, the balance of the Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Fund on the date 
immediately preceding the bill’s effective date must be credited to the fund to cover the 
costs of implementing the bill and regulating the cannabis industry in Maryland. By 
March 15 each year, the Comptroller must publish on its website a specified report of the 
fund’s revenues and expenditures. The report must also be submitted to the 
General Assembly. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
The bill generally repeals Title 13, Subtitle 33 of the Health-General Article in its entirety 
and largely recodifies under the Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic 
Beverages Article the provisions related to certifying providers, qualifying patients, and 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 556/ Page 9 
caregivers, including that (1) the administration (rather than MMCC) must register 
certifying providers, as specified; (2) qualifying patients or caregivers may obtain medical 
cannabis from a licensed dispensary; (3) qualifying patients younger than age 18 may 
obtain medical cannabis only through a caregiver or designated school personnel, as 
specified; and (4) a qualifying patient may possess up to 120 grams of usable cannabis or 
36 grams of THC for cannabis-infused products. The bill establishes a new authorization 
that a qualifying patient who is at least age 21 may cultivate up to four cannabis plants and 
no more than four cannabis plants may be cultivated at a single residence, as specified, 
provided that the qualifying patient complies with the cannabis cultivation provisions in 
Chapter 26 of 2022. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2023, a cannabis licensee that is operating a dispensary must ensure that 
it has adequate supply for qualifying patients and caregivers and set aside operating hours 
or dedicated services lines to serve only qualifying patients and caregivers. 
 
Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission Special Fund:  The bill repeals without 
recodification § 13-3303 of the Health-General Article, which pertains to the membership 
of MMCC and the MMCC special fund. As noted above, the bill also transfers the balance 
of the fund on the date immediately preceding the bill’s effective date to CREF. 
 
Medical Cannabis Compassionate Use Fund:  The bill also recodifies the Medical 
Cannabis Compassionate Use Fund administered by the administration (rather than 
MMCC) to provide access to cannabis for individuals enrolled in Maryland Medicaid or in 
the Veterans Affairs Maryland Health Care System. The bill expands the authorized uses 
of the fund to include access to, at a reduced cost, an assessment of the patient’s medical 
history and current medical condition. The special fund consists of (1) fees set by the 
administration (rather than MMCC) in an amount necessary to provide revenues for the 
fund (but these fees may not be imposed on a licensed medical cannabis grower, processor, 
or dispensary that has not yet become an operational cannabis licensee under the bill);  
(2) fines assessed by the administration; (3) money appropriated in the State budget to the 
fund; (4) interest earnings; and (5) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund.   
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
the administration. A cannabis license issued pursuant to the bill, which is valid for 
five years on initial licensure and renewal, authorizes the licensee to operate a medical and 
adult-use cannabis business. Medical cannabis licensees (growers, processors, and 
dispensaries) convert to a medical and adult-use cannabis business license by paying a 
conversion fee (as discussed below). Cannabis business licenses include those for 
dispensaries, growers, processors, incubator spaces, on-site consumption establishments, 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 556/ Page 10 
and micro licenses. The administration must establish licensing and renewal fees for all 
cannabis business licenses. Standard license fees for initial licenses may not exceed 
$50,000, and fees for renewal may not exceed the lesser of 10% of the licensee’s annual 
gross revenue or $50,000. Licensing and renewal fees for social equity licenses, micro 
licenses, incubator space licenses, and on-site consumption licenses must be reduced by at 
least 50% relative to the fees that apply to standard licensees. All license and renewal fees 
are paid to the administration. A license issued under the bill (1) is not property and does 
not confer property rights and (2) is subject to regulations authorized under the bill as well 
as suspension, revocation, and restrictions authorized by law.  
 
The administration may (1) conditionally award licenses; (2) inspect cannabis licensees to 
ensure compliance; (3) suspend, fine, restrict, or revoke a cannabis license, as specified; 
and (4) impose penalties or rescind the license of a cannabis licensee that does not meet 
specified licensure standards. Exhibit 1 shows the maximum number of licenses that may 
be issued for all license types, including medical cannabis licenses converted in accordance 
with the bill, regardless of the number of license awards authorized for first and second 
round awards (discussed in more detail below). The administration must issue dispensary 
licenses in a manner that encourages a balanced geographic distribution based on 
population and market demand within a specific county, as well as cross-jurisdictional 
market demand. 
 
Exhibit 1 also details what is authorized by each license type and the maximum ownership 
and control interests a person may have for each license type. The administration must 
adopt regulations limiting a person or fund from acquiring a nonmajority ownership 
interest in multiple cannabis businesses beyond the ownership interest and control limits 
established by the bill and listed in Exhibit 1. The ownership interest restrictions do not 
apply to a person or an entity who holds an ownership interest only as a “passive investor” 
(defined under the bill as an individual or an entity that holds an aggregate ownership 
interest of less than 5% in a cannabis licensee and does not have control of the cannabis 
licensee).   
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 556/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 1 
Participation in the Cannabis Industry for All License Types 
 
License 
Type 
Maximum 
Number of 
Licenses 
Authorized 
License Authorizations 
Maximum 
Ownership and 
Control 
Interests 
Standard 
Grower 
751 
To operate 10,000 to 300,000 square feet of 
indoor canopy space 
One 
Standard 
Processor 
100 
To process more than 1,000 pounds of 
cannabis per year 
One 
Standard 
Dispensary 
300 
To operate a physical location for selling 
cannabis or cannabis products 
Four  
Micro Grower 
100 
To operate not more than 10,000 square feet 
of indoor canopy space 
One 
Micro 
Processor 
100 
To process not more than 1,000 pounds of 
cannabis per year 
One 
Micro 
Dispensary 
10  
To operate a delivery service that sells 
cannabis or cannabis products without a 
physical storefront if the licensee employs no 
more than 10 employees  
Four 
Incubator 
Space 
10 
To operate a facility where a micro licensee 
may operate, as specified 
Two2 
On-site 
Consumption 
50 
To operate a facility where individuals can 
smoke cannabis outdoors on the premises, 
vape, or consume cannabis, as specified 
Two2 
1 A grower license awarded to a class member of specified litigation is in addition to and not subject to the 
limitations on the total number of licenses the administration may issue. 
2 A person who owns or controls an incubator space licensee or an on-site consumption licensee may not 
own or control any other cannabis licensee.   
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Additional Grower License Award:  As soon as practicable after the bill’s effective date, 
the administration must establish, by regulation, a process for issuing up to five licenses to 
operate as a cannabis grower to five applicants that are (1) recognized class members of 
Pigford v. Glickman, 185 F.R.D. 82 (D.D.C. 1999), or In Re Black Farmers Litig., 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 556/ Page 12 
856 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2011); (2) were awarded damages related to farming operation 
in Maryland pursuant to the claims processes established for the specified class members;  
(3) have provided specified evidence of not being fully compensated for enduring 
discrimination and have experienced ongoing discrimination or the continued effects of 
past discrimination; and (4) satisfy any other criteria established by the administration. 
Licenses awarded under these circumstances are in addition to and not subject to the 
limitations on the total number of licenses that the administration may issue. An applicant 
that is not awarded the specified license may apply for a license in accordance with the 
bill’s provisions; the administration (1) must allow the applicant to amend, if necessary, 
and resubmit or withdraw the application and (2) may waive the initial application fee but 
may charge a reasonable fee for the resubmission of an application. 
 
Conversion of Medical Cannabis Licenses:  By July 1, 2023, the administration must 
convert licenses, including preapproved licenses, issued to medical cannabis growers, 
processors, and dispensaries to licenses to operate a medical and adult-use cannabis 
business if a one-time conversion fee is paid to the administration and the business 
complies with specified ownership restrictions. The conversion fee may be paid in separate 
installments and must be paid in full by January 1, 2025. In addition, the amount of any 
licensing or renewal fee paid by a medical cannabis licensee for fiscal 2023 must be 
credited against the one-time conversion fee. The holder of an unconverted medical 
cannabis license may not operate under the license or renew the license on or after  
July 1, 2023, but may continue to hold the license for resale to another person for 
conversion. The purchaser of a license is responsible for paying the one-time conversion 
fee. The holder of an MMCC-issued dispensary license converted under the bill to a 
standard dispensary license or a registrant with MMCC may continue to deliver medical 
cannabis until July 1, 2024, notwithstanding any other provisions. The administration must 
adopt regulations requiring converted licensees to reserve a specified amount of cannabis 
for social equity licensees.   
 
Medical licensees that were operational before October 1, 2022, must pay a conversion fee 
equal to 10% of total gross revenues for calendar 2022 (for growers and processors) and 
8% of total gross revenues for calendar 2022 (for dispensaries). However, the conversion 
fee must be at least $100,000 but not more than $2.0 million. Businesses that held a 
stage one preapproval for a license before October 1, 2022, and were not operational before 
that date must pay a conversion fee of (1) $50,000 for a grower or processor and 
(2) $25,000 for a dispensary. All conversion fees collected are paid to the administration 
and credited to CRRF.  
 
It is the stated intent of the General Assembly to preserve production availability for new 
adult-use cannabis cultivation licenses. Thus, medical cannabis growers who convert 
licenses under the bill must adhere to expansion limitations, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 556/ Page 13 
Initial Awards of New Licenses:  For any new cannabis business licenses, an applicant must 
submit an application developed by the administration and the initial application fee of 
$5,000 for all license types except micro licenses, which have an initial application fee of 
$1,000. All application fees are paid to the administration. The administration may not  
(1) accept from a single applicant in any round more than one application per license or 
more than two applications; (2) require that an applicant possess or own a property or 
facility to operate a cannabis business at the time of application; or (3) conduct a market 
demand study prior to the issuance of first round licenses. 
 
By January 1, 2024, the administration must begin issuing first round licenses. First round 
application submissions for all license types are limited to social equity applicants. Each 
applicant that meets the minimum qualifications must be entered into a lottery. The 
administration must determine whether an applicant meets the minimum qualifications for 
the lottery on a pass-fail basis, as determined by the administration, after evaluating an 
applicant’s detailed operational plan, business plan, and detailed diversity plan. In addition, 
if an out-of-state applicant seeks social equity status, the applicant must submit evidence 
that the applicant meets the established criteria for a social equity applicant before the 
administration may consider the application.  
 
Beginning May 1, 2024, the administration must begin issuing second round licenses in an 
amount that does not exceed the specified maximum number of licenses allowed for each 
license type. The administration must consult with the State’s designated MBE certification 
agency (MDOT), GOSBA, the General Assembly, and OAG to determine whether or not 
a disparity study demonstrates a strong basis in evidence of business discrimination against 
firms owned by minorities and women in the cannabis market. If the specified 
discrimination is present, the administration, in issuing second round licenses, must  
(1) apply minimum licensing qualifications and employ remedial measures consistent with 
constitutional requirements and (2) award licenses through a lottery process that employs 
remedial measures (if a lottery system employing remedial measures established in 
accordance with the disparity study can be conducted consistent with constitutional 
requirements). If the specified discrimination is not present, the administration must enter 
each applicant that meets the minimum established qualifications into a lottery. 
 
Exhibit 2 shows the maximum number of licenses (by license type) that the administration 
may issue during the first and second round license awards. The administration must award 
any subsequent cannabis licenses as needed in accordance with a market demand study and 
reserve a reasonable number of standard licenses to allow micro licensees to transition. The 
administration may (1) limit subsequent cannabis licenses (in total or in part) to social 
equity applicants and (2) employ remedial measures, consistent with constitutional 
requirements (if the administration in consultation with specified entities determines a 
disparity study demonstrates a strong basis in evidence for doing so).  
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 556/ Page 14 
 
Exhibit 2 
Maximum Number of Cannabis License Awards 
 
License Type 
First Round Awards 
Second Round Awards 
Standard Grower 
20 
25 
Standard Processor 
40 
25 
Standard Dispensary 
80 
120 
Micro Grower 
30 
70 
Micro Processor 
30 
70 
Micro Dispensary 
10 
- 
Incubator Space 
10 
10 
On-site Consumption 
- 
15 
 
Note:  First round license awards and second round micro license awards under specified circumstances are 
limited to social equity applicants. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
License Transfers:  To transfer ownership or control of a cannabis license, a licensee must 
first submit to the administration an application and fee, as specified by the administration. 
However, a cannabis licensee (including a converted licensee) may not transfer ownership 
or control of the license for at least five years following licensure, with limited exceptions 
and not including the time period that a business is considered to be in a preapproved 
licensure status. In addition, a cannabis licensee may not surrender a license and apply for 
a new license in the same or similar category. The specified limitations do not apply to a 
transfer of ownership that (1) results from the disability, incapacity or death of the owner 
of a cannabis license; (2) results from the bankruptcy or receivership in accordance with a 
lending agreement of a cannabis licensee; (3) occurs pursuant to court order; or (4) is the 
subject of a legally binding settlement agreement from litigation commenced on or before 
January 1, 2023.  
 
Dispensary Licensees:  A dispensary may not be located within (1) 500 feet of specified 
schools, child care centers, playgrounds, recreation centers, libraries, or public parks or  
(2) 1,000 feet of another licensed dispensary. The specified distance requirements do not 
apply to a dispensary license converted under the bill and properly zoned and operating 
before July 1, 2023. Beginning July 1, 2023, a dispensary licensee must ensure that at least 
25% of cannabis and cannabis products in the dispensary are from social equity licensees 
and growers and processors that do not share common ownership with the dispensary.  
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 556/ Page 15 
Grower Licensees:  Each grower or micro grower must calculate its indoor canopy space 
(or equivalent) using a specified methodology and submit the calculation annually to the 
administration; the administration must then submit an annual report to the 
General Assembly on the canopy areas reported. The administration may take specified 
actions (including seizure, destruction, confiscation, or placement of administrative hold 
on any flowering cannabis plants produced in excess of the canopy and reduction of the 
canopy) against a grower who fails to adhere to its canopy authorization. 
 
Incubator Space Licensees:  The administration may issue incubator space licenses 
authorizing a nonprofit entity to operate a licensed premises in which micro licensees may 
operate a cannabis business. An incubator space licensee is authorized to purchase 
equipment for use by other incubator space licensees within the same incubator space. 
 
On-site Consumption Establishments:  The bill establishes additional prohibitions and 
requirements for on-site consumption establishments, including prohibiting (1) the indoor 
smoking of cannabis or cannabis products on the premises; (2) on-duty employees from 
consuming cannabis on the premises; (3) the distribution of free samples on the premises; 
(4) the consumption of alcohol on the premises; (5) the growing, processing, or dispensing 
of cannabis on the premises; and (6) an individual who is younger than age 21 from entering 
the premises. An on-site consumption establishment must require all employees to 
successfully complete an annual responsible vendor training program, ensure that the 
display and consumption of cannabis is not visible from outside of the licensed premises, 
and provide specified educational materials on the safe consumption of cannabis. The 
administration must maintain a list of all on-site consumption establishments in the State 
and make the list available on its website.  
 
Responsible Vendor Training Program:  The administration must adopt regulations 
establishing the responsible vendor training program and the minimum standards for the 
program. Before offering a specified responsible vendor training program, a person must 
submit an application that the administration must approve if the proposed training 
program meets specified minimum educational standards, including a core curriculum of 
relevant statutory and regulatory provisions. An approved program provider must maintain 
its training records for four years, as specified, and make the records available to the 
administration for inspection. 
 
Prohibited Acts for Cannabis Licensees:  A cannabis licensee may not sell, transfer, or 
deliver cannabis or cannabis products unless the licensee verifies, as specified, that (1) for 
adult-use cannabis, the consumer is at least age 21 or (2) for medical cannabis, the patient 
or caregiver is registered with the administration and is at least age 18. 
 
Violators of this prohibition are subject to a civil penalty as follows:  $500 for a 
first violation; $1,000 for a second violation within 24 months of the first violation; and 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 556/ Page 16 
$5,000 for each subsequent violation occurring within 24 months of the immediately 
preceding violation. A violation that occurs more than 24 months after the immediately 
preceding violation is considered a first violation. The administration may also deny a 
cannabis license to an applicant, reprimand a licensee, or suspend or revoke a cannabis 
license if the applicant or licensee commits two or more violations within a  
24-month period. 
 
A cannabis licensee may not sell, transfer, or deliver cannabis to an individual who is 
visibly intoxicated; offer cannabis or cannabis products as a prize; or conduct  
direct-to-consumer Internet sales of adult-use cannabis on or before July 1, 2025. A 
cannabis licensee that violates any of these prohibitions is subject to a fine up to $1,000 
and/or license suspension or revocation.  
 
Cannabis Registrations 
 
Business Registrations:  Before providing services to a cannabis licensee, the following 
businesses must register with the administration:  (1) a transporter; (2) a security guard 
agency; (3) a waste disposal company; and (4) any other type of cannabis business that is 
authorized by the administration to provide plant or product-touching services to cannabis 
licensees. A registration to operate specified cannabis businesses issued by MMCC on or 
before July 1, 2023, authorizes the cannabis business to handle medical and adult-use 
cannabis products. 
 
Agent Registrations:  Before an agent may volunteer or work for a cannabis business 
licensee or registrant, the agent must register with the administration. A registration is valid 
for two years. To register as a cannabis agent, an individual must be at least age 21 and 
obtain a criminal history records check, as specified. The administration may not register 
an individual who fails to meet these criteria or has been convicted of or pleaded 
nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude. The administration may not deny an 
agent registration based on any cannabis-related offenses that occurred before July 1, 2023. 
Each cannabis licensee must require that each registered agent complete an annual 
responsible vendor training program. 
 
An agent registration issued by MMCC on or before July 1, 2023, is valid under the bill 
and authorizes the registered agent to be employed by or volunteer with a licensed cannabis 
business. 
 
Cannabis Research and Development:  Specified entities may register with the 
administration to purchase cannabis for the purpose of conducting a bona fide research 
project relating to the uses, properties, or composition of cannabis, as specified. An 
academic research representative may purchase cannabis from a licensed dispensary or a 
supplier of cannabis that is licensed by any federal agency to supply cannabis to 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 556/ Page 17 
researchers. A registration must include specified information and remains valid until there 
is a change in the research project or a withdrawal of the registration. 
 
The administration may also register an entity to grow, process, test, and transfer cannabis 
for specified research and development purposes. To obtain a research and development 
registration, an applicant must submit an application and fee, as set by the administration. 
A research and development registration is valid for two years on initial issue and renewal. 
 
Cannabis Advertising 
 
The administration must adopt regulations to establish procedures for enforcing advertising 
restrictions. “Advertisement” means the publication, dissemination, or circulation of any 
auditory, visual, digital, oral, or written matter which is directly or indirectly calculated to 
induce the sale of cannabis or any cannabis-related product or service. “Advertisement” 
does not include packaging or labeling. An advertisement for cannabis, cannabis products, 
or cannabis-related services that make therapeutic or medical claims must (1) be supported 
by competent and reliable scientific evidence and (2) include information on the most 
serious and common side effects or risks associated with the use of cannabis. An 
advertisement for a cannabis licensee, cannabis product, or cannabis-related services, 
excluding those placed on property owned or leased by a dispensary, grower, or processor, 
may not:   
 
 
violate Title 13, Subtitle 3 of the Commercial Law Article (Consumer Protection 
Act – Unfair, Abusive, or Deceptive Trade Practices); 
 
directly or indirectly target individuals younger than age 21; 
 
contain specified representations that target minors, display the use of cannabis, 
promote cannabis for use as an intoxicant, or are obscene; 
 
engage in advertising through specified forms of media unless at least 85% of the 
audience is reasonably expected to be at least age 21, as specified; and 
 
engage in advertising by placing the advertisements on specified publicly visible 
locations. 
 
A cannabis-related website must employ a neutral age-screening mechanism verifying the 
user is at least age 21 before the user may access or view any content and before the website 
may collect any contact information to disseminate advertisements. Similarly, if an 
advertisement is placed on social media or a mobile application, it must include a 
notification that an individual must be at least age 21 to view the content. If a website is 
appropriate for a qualifying patient who is younger than age 21, the website must provide 
an alternative screening mechanism for the qualifying patient.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 556/ Page 18 
Cannabis Testing Laboratories 
 
State Cannabis Testing Laboratory:  By July 1, 2023, the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture (MDA) or the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may enter an MOU 
with the administration to test cannabis at an existing State-owned laboratory if doing so 
would be a more economic and efficient alternative to the establishment of a new State 
testing laboratory. However, if MDA or MDH and the administration determine that 
co-locating cannabis testing at an existing State-owned laboratory is not operationally 
feasible, the administration must establish and maintain a State cannabis testing laboratory 
and sufficient funding must be provided in the annual budget to do so. 
 
The State cannabis testing laboratory is generally responsible for developing specified 
cannabis testing methodologies and overseeing independent testing laboratories, as 
specified. The State cannabis testing laboratory must hold medical and adult-use cannabis 
to the same testing standards.  
 
Independent Testing Laboratory:  To be sold or marketed in the State, cannabis or cannabis 
products must be tested by an independent testing laboratory and determined to meet the 
administration’s testing protocols. The administration must convert any registration to 
operate an independent testing laboratory issued by MMCC on or before July 1, 2023, to a 
registration authorizing an independent testing laboratory to test both medical and adult-use 
cannabis and cannabis products. 
 
The administration must register at least one independent testing laboratory to test cannabis 
and cannabis products for sale in the State. To become registered, an independent testing 
laboratory must (1) meet the application requirements, as specified; (2) pay an application 
fee set by the administration; and (3) meet the standards and requirements for accreditation, 
inspection, and testing that the administration must establish. A registered independent 
testing laboratory may operate for two years on initial license and on renewal. A registered 
independent testing laboratory is authorized to test and transport cannabis and cannabis 
products on behalf of cannabis licensees. The administration may inspect a registered 
independent testing laboratory to ensure compliance. 
 
Maryland Incubator Program 
 
The administration must adopt regulations to establish a Maryland Incubator Program 
based on the best practices in other states. The Maryland Economic Development 
Corporation (MEDCO), in consultation with the administration, must acquire and construct 
or refurbish at least one facility to operate an incubator space. After the completion of the 
construction or refurbishment, ownership of the facility must transfer to the Department of 
General Services (DGS). DGS must contract with a nonprofit organization to operate a 
State incubator space facility. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 556/ Page 19 
MEDCO must also identify a site (including sites that may be converted) for proposed use 
as an incubator space in each of four specified regions/locations. The site identifications 
must include (1) the proposed locations for incubator spaces; (2) the square footage of the 
identified locations; and (3) the estimated costs for construction or renovation of the 
proposed location to prepare the location for use as an incubator space. MEDCO must 
submit a report on the identified sites and the qualifying criteria to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by January 1, 2024. 
 
Ownership Interests 
 
A person wishing to hold an ownership interest of at least 5% in or control of a cannabis 
licensee must submit an application, with specified information including a criminal 
history records check, and an application fee set by the administration. 
 
The bill applies the conflict of interest provisions in Title 5 of the General Provisions 
Article for specified individuals and restricts a constitutional officer or secretary of a 
principal department of the Executive Branch, a member of the General Assembly, or an 
employee of the administration from having specified financial, employment, or ownership 
interests with a cannabis business in the State. 
 
Political Subdivisions 
 
A “political subdivision” (defined in the bill as a county or a municipality) may establish 
reasonable zoning requirements for cannabis businesses and decide how to distribute its 
allocation of tax revenues. A political subdivision may not (1) establish zoning or other 
requirements that unduly burden a cannabis licensee; (2) impose licensing, operating, or 
other fees or requirements on a cannabis licensee that are disproportionately greater or 
more burdensome than those imposed on other businesses with a similar impact on the area 
where the cannabis licensee is located; (3) prohibit transportation through or deliveries 
within the political subdivision by cannabis establishments located in other political 
subdivisions; (4) prevent an entity from converting a medical cannabis license that is in 
compliance with all relevant medical cannabis regulations; or (5) negotiate or enter into an 
agreement requiring a cannabis licensee or applicant to provide money, donations, in-kind 
contributions, services, or anything of value to the political subdivision. The use of a 
facility by a cannabis licensee is not required to be submitted to, or approved by a zoning 
board, as specified, if the facility (1) was properly zoned and operating on or before  
January 1, 2023 or (2) is used by a grower, processor, or dispensary that held a stage one 
preapproval for a license before October 1, 2022, and was not operational before that date. 
A political subdivision may adopt an ordinance reducing the distance from specified 
locations within which a dispensary may be located (as discussed above). However, a 
county or municipality must affirmatively authorize an on-site consumption establishment 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 556/ Page 20 
to operate by issuing a permit or license and may place restrictions on or prohibit the 
operation of on-site consumption establishments.  
 
A political subdivision or a special taxing district may not impose a tax on cannabis. 
 
Sales and Use Tax on the Sale of Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2024, the bill establishes a sales and use tax rate of 9% on the sale of 
cannabis. The sales and use tax does not apply to the sale of (1) medical cannabis or  
(2) cannabis between licensed cannabis businesses. After making specified distributions as 
required under current law, the Comptroller must distribute the sales and use tax collected 
from sales of adult-use cannabis on a quarterly basis to CREF in an amount necessary to 
defray the entire administrative and operational costs of the administration. After that 
distribution, the Comptroller must distribute the funds on a quarterly basis as follows:   
 
 
35% to CRRF for fiscal 2024 through 2033; 
 
5% to counties, allocated to each county based on the percentage of revenue 
collected from that county (except that each county must distribute to a municipality 
located in the county 50% of the county’s allocation that is attributable to the 
cannabis sales and use tax revenue generated by a dispensary located in that 
municipality); 
 
5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund; 
 
5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund for fiscal 2024 through 2028; and 
 
any remaining balance after the above specified distributions, to the general fund. 
 
Banking and Insurance 
 
The Commissioner of Financial Regulation is prohibited from taking specified actions 
against the following institutions for providing financial services to a “cannabis business” 
or a “service provider” (as defined under the bill):  (1) banks, credit unions, and other 
entities operating as depository institutions in the State; and (2) insurance companies and 
producers operating in the State. These specified institutions are also not liable under any 
State law or regulation solely for providing a cannabis business or a service provider with 
financial services or for investing any income derived from the financial services.   
 
For purposes of federal law, the proceeds from a transaction involving activities of a 
cannabis business or service provider may not be considered proceeds from an unlawful 
activity, as specified. The State is prohibited from cooperating or aiding federal law 
enforcement authorities attempting to prosecute financial institutions that are lawfully 
operating under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 556/ Page 21 
Criminal Offenses:  A person may not sell or distribute a product intended for human 
consumption or inhalation that contains more than 0.5 milligrams of THC or 2.5 milligrams 
of THC per package unless the person is a cannabis licensee and the product complies with 
specified standards under the bill, or, even if licensed, sell or distribute the specified 
THC products to an individual younger than age 21. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and on conviction is subject to a maximum $5,000 fine. However, it is not a violation of 
this prohibition for a person to sell or distribute a hemp-derived tincture intended for human 
consumption that contains (1) a ratio of cannabidiol to THC of at least 15 to 1 and 
(2) 2.5 milligrams or less of THC per serving and 100 milligrams or less of THC per 
package. To sell or distribute a hemp-derived tincture intended for human consumption, a 
person must provide, as required by the administration, tincture samples for the purpose of 
testing to determine chemical potency and composition and to detect and quantify 
contaminants.  
 
A person may not sell or distribute a cannabinoid product that is not derived from naturally 
occurring biologically active chemical constituents. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and on conviction is subject to a maximum $10,000 fine. 
 
Legal Protections:  The following persons, when acting in accordance with the bill, may 
not be subject to arrest, prosecution, revocation of mandatory supervision, parole, or 
probation, or any civil or administrative penalty, or be denied any right or privilege for the 
authorized use of or possession of cannabis:  (1) qualifying patients; (2) cannabis licensees 
or registrants; (3) certifying providers; (4) caregivers; (5) specified academic research 
representatives; (6) specified health care facilities where a qualifying patient receives 
treatment; and (7) and designated school personnel authorized to administer medical 
cannabis to a qualifying patient who is a student, as specified. 
 
Prevailing Law 
 
A provision in the bill under Division III (Cannabis) within the Alcoholic Beverages 
Article prevails over any conflicting or inconsistent provision in Division I of the Alcoholic 
Beverages Article or the Tax – General Article relating to cannabis. 
 
Authority to Transfer Budgeted Positions and Funds 
 
The bill authorizes the Governor, on or before June 30, 2024, to transfer to the 
administration any positions and associated funds, and any amount of the unexpended 
appropriation, included in the fiscal 2024 operating budget for the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission for the bill’s implementation, as specified.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
    
HB 556/ Page 22 
Current Law:   
 
Legalization of Cannabis 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022 and the passage of the associated constitutional referendum, 
as of January 1, 2023, “personal use amount” means (1) up to 1.5 ounces of usable 
cannabis; (2) up to 12 grams of concentrated cannabis; (3) cannabis products containing 
up to 750 milligrams of delta-9-THC; or (4) beginning July 1, 2023, up to 2 cannabis plants. 
“Civil use amount” means (1) more than 1.5 ounces but not more than 2.5 ounces of usable 
cannabis; (2) more than 12 grams but not more than 20 grams of concentrated cannabis; or 
(3) cannabis products containing more than 750 milligrams but not more than 
1,250 milligrams of delta-9-THC. 
 
From January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, possession of the personal use amount of 
cannabis and possession of the civil use amount of cannabis are subject to civil penalties. 
Possession of more than the civil use amount is subject to a criminal penalty. As of 
July 1, 2023, (1) a person at least age 21 may use and possess the personal use amount of 
cannabis; (2) possession of the personal use amount of cannabis by a person younger than 
age 21 and possession of the civil use amount of cannabis are subject to civil penalties; and 
(3) possession of more than the civil use amount of cannabis is subject to a criminal 
penalty. 
 
Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission 
 
MMCC is responsible for implementation of the State’s medical cannabis program, which 
is intended to make medical cannabis available to qualifying patients in a safe and effective 
manner. The program allows for the licensure of growers, processors, and dispensaries and 
the registration of their agents, as well as registration of independent testing laboratories 
and their agents. There is a framework to certify health care providers (including 
physicians, dentists, podiatrists, nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, and physician 
assistants), qualifying patients, and their caregivers to provide qualifying patients with 
medical cannabis legally under State law via written certification. Additionally, there are 
legal protections for third-party vendors authorized by the commission to test, transport, or 
dispose of medical cannabis, medical cannabis products, and medical cannabis waste. 
 
Status of Medical Cannabis Implementation 
 
Statute limits the number of grower and processor licenses the commission can issue, and 
regulations establish a limit on the number of dispensary licenses. Specifically, the 
commission can issue 22 grower, 28 processor, and 102 dispensary licenses. At the close 
of calendar 2022, the commission had issued 18 final grower licenses, 21 final processor 
licenses, and 97 final dispensary licenses. In addition, there are three licensed independent 

END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
    
HB 556/ Page 23 
testing laboratories. The commission maintains a list of licensees on its website. Also, at 
the close of calendar 2022, there were 162,300 certified patients, 8,159 caregivers, and 
1,560 certifying providers. The commission additionally reports a preliminary total of 
$674.2 million in retail sales at cannabis dispensaries in the State for calendar 2022. 
 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
 
Chapter 26 of 2022 (and the subsequent passage of the associated constitutional 
referendum) established the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund to assist small, 
minority-owned, and women-owned businesses entering the adult-use cannabis industry. 
The fund may be used only for (1) grants or loans to small, minority-owned, or 
women-owned businesses, as specified, and (2) grants to the State’s Historically Black 
Colleges and Universities for cannabis-related programs and business development 
organizations to train and assist small, minority, and women business owners and 
entrepreneurs seeking to become licensed to participate in the adult-use cannabis industry. 
 
Commerce must administer the fund and must prioritize awarding grants and loans to 
(1) populations that have been historically disproportionately impacted by the enforcement 
of cannabis laws and (2) individuals who have been convicted of cannabis offenses. 
Commerce may not award grants or loans to small, minority, and women business owners 
and entrepreneurs with a personal net worth exceeding $1.7 million. In awarding grants 
and loans, Commerce must develop partnerships with specified entities. The fiscal 2023 
budget included $40.0 million for initial capitalization of the fund, and the fiscal 2024 
budget includes $40.0 million for the fund. 
 
Cannabis Public Health Fund and Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council 
 
Chapter 26 of 2022 (and the subsequent passage of the associated constitutional 
referendum) also established the Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council to study and 
report its findings and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public 
health impacts of cannabis legalization. The Cannabis Public Health Fund was also 
established to (1) support the advisory council; (2) support data collection and research on 
the effects of cannabis legalization in the State; (3) provide funding for education and 
public awareness campaigns related to cannabis use, including funding for educational 
programs to be used in schools; (4) support substance use disorder counseling and 
treatment for individuals; (5) provide training and equipment for law enforcement to 
recognize impairments due to cannabis; and (6) purchase technology proven to be effective 
at measuring cannabis levels in drivers. MDH must administer the fund, which consists of 
revenues distributed to the fund based on revenues from adult-use cannabis, money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund, and any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fiscal 2023 budget included $5.0 million for initial 
capitalization of the fund. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
    
HB 556/ Page 24 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
 
Chapter 26 of 2022 also established CRRF as of July 1, 2023, to be administered by the 
Comptroller with the stated purpose of providing funds to community-based organizations 
that serve communities determined by OAG to have been the most impacted by 
disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before July 1, 2022. The fund 
consists of (1) at least 30% of the sales and use tax revenues generated from adult-use 
cannabis; (2) licensing fees paid by dual-licensed cannabis establishments; and (3) money 
from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund by the Comptroller, as specified. 
 
The fund may be used only for (1) funding community-based initiatives intended to benefit 
low-income communities; (2) funding community-based initiatives that serve communities 
disproportionately harmed by the cannabis prohibition and enforcement; and (3) any 
related administrative expenses. Money may not be expended from the fund for law 
enforcement agencies or activities.  
 
The Comptroller must distribute funds to each county in an amount that is proportionate to 
the total number of marijuana arrests in the county compared to the total number of arrests 
in the State between July 1, 2002, and June 30, 2022. Subject to the authorized uses of the 
fund specified above, each county must adopt a law establishing the purpose for which 
money received from the fund may be used. Beginning in 2024, each local jurisdiction 
must submit a report to specified legislative committees by December 1 every two years 
on how the funds received were spent during the immediately preceding two fiscal years. 
 
Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
GOSBA is established in the Executive Department; the head of the office is a Special 
Secretary who is appointed by and serves at the pleasure of the Governor. The Special 
Secretary’s general duties are to advise the Governor on activities to promote the 
employment of minority persons in the State and any other matters that affect the rights 
and interests of minority persons and the communities in which they live. GOSBA has 
designated oversight, reporting, and outreach responsibilities related to the State’s MBE 
program and responsibility for overseeing the State’s Small Business Reserve program. 
MDOT is designated in State regulations as the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
No State or local tax is currently imposed on the sale of cannabis. The State sales and use 
tax rate is 6%, except for the sale of alcoholic beverages, which is taxed at a rate of 9%. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill results in significant effects on State revenues and 
expenditures – the bill affects both the general fund and various special funds. After a 

END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
    
HB 556/ Page 25 
discussion of related funding included in the fiscal 2024 budget and the general 
assumptions used, this analysis provides an estimate of the sales and use tax revenues 
resulting from the bill (and the distribution of those revenues) as well as the fiscal effects 
by agency resulting from the bill’s various provisions. 
 
Related Funding in the Fiscal 2024 Operating Budget  
 
As noted above, the bill authorizes the Governor, on or before June 30, 2024, to transfer to 
the administration any positions and associated funds, and any amount of the unexpended 
appropriation, included in the fiscal 2024 operating budget for the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission for the bill’s implementation, as specified.  
 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission:  Contingent upon the enactment of this bill 
or its cross file, the fiscal 2024 budget includes $317,000 in general funds for fiscal 2023 
for the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission for three regular positions. Contingent on the 
enactment of this bill or its cross file, the fiscal 2024 budget also includes the following 
funding and positions for the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission:  (1) $1.5 million in 
general funds for 12 positions and contractual services; (2) $3.2 million in special funds 
for 13 positions and contractual services; and (3) $2.0 million in general funds to capitalize 
the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program (administered by OSE within the 
administration). While the bill does not authorize any special funds to be used by the 
Alcohol and Tobacco Commission, the administration is wholly funded by special funds 
through CREF. Thus, pursuant to the bill’s authorization for the Governor to transfer funds 
and positions in the budget from the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission to the 
administration, this analysis assumes that the $3.2 million in budgeted special funds for 
13 positions and contractual services are transferred to the administration. Additionally, 
the $2.0 million in budgeted general funds to capitalize the Social Equity Partnership Grant 
Program (within OSE/the administration) are also assumed to be transferred to the 
administration.  
 
Contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file, the fiscal 2024 budget also includes 
language transferring the MMCC funding and positions to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission in fiscal 2024. The bill, however, transfers these positions to the 
administration and the corresponding funds to CREF upon enactment. Accordingly, this 
analysis assumes the positions are transferred to the administration in fiscal 2023. 
 
Maryland Cannabis Administration:  The fiscal 2024 budget includes $1.1 million in 
special funds for fiscal 2023 to convert 38 MMCC contractual positions to full-time merit 
positions and hire seven new staff for MMCC. The fiscal 2024 budget includes $1.8 million 
in special funds to (1) maintain the fiscal 2023 conversions and convert an additional 
eight MMCC contractual staff to merit positions and (2) maintain the seven MMCC staff 
hired in fiscal 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
    
HB 556/ Page 26 
Further Capitalization of Cannabis Business Assistance Fund:  The fiscal 2024 budget 
also includes $40.0 million in general funds for Commerce to further capitalize the 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund, which was established by Chapter 26 of 2022. 
 
Related Funding in the Fiscal 2024 Capital Budget  
 
Contingent upon the enactment of this bill or its cross file, the fiscal 2024 capital budget 
includes $2.0 million in bond funding for MEDCO for the acquisition, planning, design, 
construction, repair, renovation, reconstruction, site improvement, and capital equipping 
of facilities to be used as cannabis incubator spaces.   
 
General Assumptions Used in the Analysis 
 
This analysis generally assumes that:   
 
 
the bill takes effect April 8, 2023 (the bill is an emergency measure that takes effect 
on the date of passage by both chambers; House Bill 556 and Senate Bill 516 are 
identical cross files, and House Bill 556 passed both chambers on April 8, 2023);  
 
CREF may be used to pay for all costs under the Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis 
Title of the Alcohol Beverages Article, including expenditures for the 
administration, OSE, the Capital Access Program, the State Cannabis Testing 
Laboratory, and the Maryland Incubator Program;  
 
all revenues and expenditures related to CREF are attributable to the Comptroller, 
as the bill requires the Comptroller to administer the fund (at the direction of the 
administration); 
 
MMCC staff are transferred to the administration on April 8, 2023, (the effective 
date); and 
 
while some of the effects on specified special funds established pursuant to 
Chapter 26 of 2022 were generally assumed in the fiscal and policy note for that 
Act, the fiscal and policy note also indicated that the extent of the effects could not 
be reasonably estimated until a licensing, regulatory, and taxation framework was 
established; as this bill sets such a framework, additional specificity is added 
regarding those effects in this fiscal and policy note. 
 
Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Sales and use tax revenues from adult-use cannabis sales increase significantly beginning 
in fiscal 2024. Exhibit 3 shows the estimated annual sales of adult-use cannabis, the 
applicable tax rate, and associated sales and use tax revenues estimated to be generated 
under the bill. Sales and use tax revenues are estimated to total $36.0 million in fiscal 2024, 
increasing to $146.6 million by fiscal 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
    
HB 556/ Page 27 
 
Exhibit 3  
Estimated Annual Sales of Cannabis and Associated Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Estimated Annual Sales 
$400.0 
$812.4 
$1,242.6 
$1,629.0 
Applicable Tax Rate 
9% 
9% 
9% 
9% 
Estimated Total SUT Revenues 
$36.0 
$73.1 
$111.8 
$146.6 
 
SUT:  Sales and Use Tax 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
During the 2022 interim, the General Assembly commissioned a study, conducted by 
Cannabis Public Policy Consulting, to conduct predictive modeling for a potential 
adult-use cannabis market in the State, including potential cannabis supply, demand, 
market share, and sales. The consultant’s report can be found here. This estimate is based 
in part on the results of the consultant’s study, with consideration also given to the adult-use 
cannabis markets in Colorado and Massachusetts and estimates of cannabis sales provided 
by MMCC. While the estimates of cannabis sales from all those sources increase by similar 
year-over-year growth rates, the estimates of sales in the first year varies significantly 
across those sources (from approximately $350.0 million to $600.0 million). Due in part to 
the fact that the bill rolls out cannabis licensing more slowly than the consultant’s study 
anticipated, and the fact that the bill establishes canopy restrictions, this analysis assumes 
a more conservative initial estimate of $400.0 million in sales in the first fiscal year, 
increasing by average year-over-year growth rates that are similar to the growth rates 
assumed by the consultant and the other sources. 
 
Sales and Use Tax Revenues – Impact on General Fund After Other Required Distributions 
 
General fund revenues increase by an estimated $18.0 million in fiscal 2024, increasing to 
$64.2 million by fiscal 2027, due to the distribution to the general fund of the sales and use 
tax revenue remaining after other required distributions are made. Exhibit 4 shows the 
distribution of the sales and use tax revenues as required by the bill, based on the total 
estimated sales and use tax revenues (as shown in Exhibit 3). The fiscal 2024 budget 
assumes $15.0 million in general fund revenues due to the enactment of cannabis reform 
legislation.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
    
HB 556/ Page 28 
 
Exhibit 4 
Sales and Use Tax Revenue Distribution 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Total SUT Revenues 
$36.0 
$73.1 
$111.8 
$146.6 
Amount to CREF to Defray the Cost of the 
Administration 
0.0 
0.0 
12.5 
18.1 
35% to CRRF 
12.6 
25.6 
34.8 
45.0 
5% to Counties  
1.8 
3.7 
5.0 
6.4 
5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund 
1.8 
3.7 
5.0 
6.4 
5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
1.8 
3.7 
5.0 
6.4 
General Fund 
18.0 
36.6 
49.7 
64.2 
 
CREF:  Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund 
CRRF:  Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
SUT:  Sales and Use Tax 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Comptroller – Administration of the Sales and Use Tax, the Community Reinvestment and 
Repair Fund, and the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund 
 
Administration of the Sales and Use Tax:  The Comptroller advises that significant 
personnel resources are needed immediately to be able to implement the new tax when 
adult-use cannabis sales begin on July 1, 2023, including (1) 9 full-time positions and 
1 part-time (50%) position for its Revenue Administration Division (RAD) to process a 
significant increase in the number of sales and income tax return filings; (2) 9 full-time 
positions for its Compliance Division due to the uniquely challenging compliance efforts 
of creating a sales and use tax on a formerly illegal industry; (3) 3 full-time positions in the 
Hearings and Appeals Division to handle an increased number of assessment appeals; 
(4) 11 full-time positions to provide administrative support to ATCC under an existing 
MOU with the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; and (5) 2 contractual positions for the 
first two full fiscal years for information technology (IT) support to establish a cannabis 
revenue reporting system. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that without actual experience 
under the bill, it is difficult to determine the number of additional staff that may be needed; 
however, DLS acknowledges that the increase in workload for the Comptroller is 

END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
    
HB 556/ Page 29 
significant. In addition, DLS notes that the 11 positions that the Comptroller indicates it 
needs pursuant to the specified MOU with the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission 
significantly overlap with new positions authorized for the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission in the fiscal 2024 budget; the DLS estimate of such costs is addressed under 
the discussion of ATCC (below). 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for the Comptroller increase by at least $293,732 
in fiscal 2023, which accounts for the bill’s emergency status. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring (1) two revenue examiners in RAD to review sales and income tax return 
filings for cannabis business licensees; (2) two revenue field auditors for the Compliance 
Division to conduct onsite audits; (3) two staff attorneys for the Hearings and Appeals 
Division to handle additional assessment appeals; (4) three accountants to provide 
assistance related to the sales and use tax for cannabis across both divisions; 
(5) one contractual webmaster to adjust tax forms; and (6) one contractual IT programmer 
to establish a new revenue reporting system. This estimate assumes that staff are hired on 
April 8, 2023, as the new tax will apply to any adult-use cannabis sales from medical 
licensees who have converted to cannabis business licenses as of July 1, 2023.  
 
 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Regular Positions 
9.0 
- 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
- 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$218,296 
$923,171 
Operating Expenses 
    75,436 
    11,777 
Minimum Comptroller GF Exp. 
$293,732 
$934,948 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of the 
contractual IT staff at the end of fiscal 2025. This estimate does not include any health 
insurance costs that could be incurred for specified contractual employees under the State’s 
implementation of the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
In addition to the personnel costs above, the Comptroller advises that at least $3.0 million 
in computer programming expenditures are expected to be incurred in fiscal 2023 to 
upgrade the sales and use tax system and connect it to the existing MMCC licensing 
software. DLS is unable to independently verify the Comptroller’s estimate at this time but 
acknowledges that contractual computer programming costs are likely significant. 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for the Comptroller in fiscal 2023 are likely 
significantly higher than the minimum estimate provided above. 
 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund:  While the impact to CRRF of unspecified fees 
and tax revenues was assumed under the fiscal and policy note for Chapter 26 of 2022, this 
bill establishes the relevant conversion fees, establishes the tax rate on the sale of adult-use 

END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
    
HB 556/ Page 30 
cannabis, and specifies the distribution to CRRF of 35% of the sales and use tax revenues. 
(Chapter 26 of 2022 specified that at least 30% of the revenues generated from adult-use 
cannabis must be deposited into CRRF, though that provision is repealed by the bill.) 
 
Medical cannabis licensees must pay or enter into an installment agreement to pay a 
specified fee by July 1, 2023, to convert their licenses to cannabis business licenses under 
the bill. Medical cannabis licensees that enter into an installment agreement must pay their 
conversion fees in full by January 1, 2025. The amount of any renewal fee paid by a 
licensee to MMCC for fiscal 2023 must be credited toward the business’s conversion fee. 
Special fund revenues to CRRF from conversion fees increase by approximately 
$30.4 million in each of fiscal 2024 and 2025, assuming that all medical cannabis licensees 
convert their licenses and pay the applicable conversion fees in four equal installments 
(two in each of fiscal 2024 and 2025). Special fund revenues increase further beginning in 
fiscal 2024 from the distribution of sales and use tax revenues as required by the bill. Thus, 
special fund revenues to CRRF are estimated to increase by a total of $43.0 million in 
fiscal 2024, $56.0 million in fiscal 2025, $34.8 million in fiscal 2026, and $45.0 million in 
fiscal 2027. CRRF expenditures increase accordingly. 
 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund:  Special fund revenues for CREF increase 
by approximately $12.3 million in fiscal 2023 only due to the balance transfer of the 
MMCC special fund (as calculated on the date immediately preceding the effective date of 
the bill) to CREF when the bill becomes effective. (As noted above, the fiscal 2024 budget 
provides for the transfer of the MMCC fund balance to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission in fiscal 2024, contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file.) Special 
fund revenues for CREF increase further beginning in fiscal 2024 from application fees. 
MMCC advises it anticipates receiving 10 applications for each license available for 
standard growers, standard processors, and incubator spaces and 20 applications for each 
license available for standard dispensaries, on-site consumption sites, and all micro licenses 
(growers, processors, and dispensaries). This analysis further assumes:  
 
 
all licenses authorized to be awarded in any given round are actually awarded; 
 
during the first round (fiscal 2024), the administration will award licenses to 
20 standard growers, 40 standard processors, 10 incubator spaces, 80 standard 
dispensaries, 70 micro licensees, and zero on-site consumption locations, with 
200 standard grower, 400 standard processor, 100 incubator space, 1,600 standard 
dispensary, and 1,400 micro license applications received for these licenses; 
 
during the second round (fiscal 2024), the administration will award licenses to 
25 standard growers, 25 standard processors, zero incubator spaces, 120 standard 
dispensaries, 140 micro licensees, and 15 on-site consumption locations, with 
250 standard grower, 250 standard processor, 2,400 standard dispensary, 
2,800 micro license, and 300 on-site consumption license applications received for 
these licenses; and 

END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
    
HB 556/ Page 31 
 
during any subsequent round(s), all remaining licenses are offered for award 
(fiscal 2025 or later as determined by the administration), resulting in 12 standard 
growers, 18 standard processors, zero incubator spaces, 3 standard dispensaries, 
35 on-site consumption locations, and zero micro licensees receiving licenses, with 
120 standard growers, 180 standard processor, 60 standard dispensary, and 
700 on-site consumption license applications submitted for these licenses. 
 
Thus, special fund revenues increase by $31.7 million in fiscal 2024 and by $5.3 million 
in total beginning as early as fiscal 2025 from application fee revenues, depending on when 
the administration begins accepting applications for the licenses remaining after rounds 1 
and 2.  
 
Special fund revenues also increase from licensing fees. The maximum licensing fee that 
may be set is $50,000 for standard licenses; licensing fees must be reduced by at least 50% 
for social equity, micro, on-site consumption, and incubator licenses.  
 
Under the emergency regulations adopted pursuant to this legislation, the administration 
has set the following standard licensing fees:  $50,000 for standard growers; $25,000 for 
standard processors and dispensaries; and $10,000 for micro licenses, incubator spaces, 
and on-site consumption licenses. According to statute, these licensing fees must be 
reduced by 50% for licenses awarded to social equity applicants.  
 
While the exact number of social equity licenses cannot be accurately determined, this 
analysis estimates the revenues generated using the following assumptions:  
 
 
the number of licenses issued are equal to the number of licenses authorized for 
award in rounds 1 and 2 (fiscal 2024) as discussed above (i.e., 45 standard growers, 
65 standard processors, 10 incubator spaces, 200 standard dispensaries, 210 micro 
licenses, and 15 on-site consumption licenses);  
 
the number of licenses issued in fiscal 2025 or later are also as discussed above (i.e., 
12 standard growers, 18 standard processors, zero incubator spaces, 3 standard 
dispensaries, 35 on-site consumption licenses, and zero micro license types); and 
 
all license fees are paid upon the licensee becoming operational, assumed to take 
4 months for micro licensees, incubator spaces, and on-site consumption licensees 
and 18 months for standard grower, processor, and dispensary licensees.  
 
Thus, special fund revenues increase by $400,000 in fiscal 2024 and by $775,000 in 
fiscal 2025 and $4.4 million in fiscal 2026 from the round one and two license issues (if 
all licensees are social equity applicants) or by $1.5 million in fiscal 2025 and $6.9 million 
in fiscal 2026 (if none of the licensees beyond the first round are social equity applicants). 
Beginning as early as fiscal 2026, special fund revenues from subsequent licensing rounds 

END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
    
HB 556/ Page 32 
increase by at least $737,500 and as much as $1.5 million, depending on the number of 
social equity licensees.  
 
Special fund revenues increase further from other fees set by the administration pursuant 
to the emergency regulations (e.g., registration fees, permit fees, and renewal fees) and 
credited to CREF. An estimate of such revenues cannot be made at this time.  
 
Special fund revenues from the balance transfer of the MMCC special fund are sufficient 
to cover the entire estimated cost of the administration in fiscal 2023. Application and 
licensing fees are sufficient to cover the entire estimated cost of the administration in 
fiscal 2024 and 2025. Beginning in fiscal 2026, special fund revenues increase further due 
to the sales and use tax revenues distributed to CREF in an amount sufficient to defray the 
entire cost of the administration. Exhibit 5 details these effects. To the extent that special 
fund revenues increase further due to the other fees set by the administration that cannot 
be estimated at this time (as noted above), the sales and use tax distribution to CREF 
decreases correspondingly. 
 
 
Exhibit 5 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund Finances and the 
Estimated Distribution of Sales and Use Tax Revenues to Defray Costs 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
MMCC SF Balance Transfer 
$12.3 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Application Fee Revenues 
0.0 
31.7 
- 
- 
- 
Licensing Fee Revenues 
0.0 
0.4 
0.8 
4.4 
- 
Cumulative Revenues1 
12.3 
41.9 
18.3 
5.3 
- 
Total Expenditures 
$2.5 
$24.4 
$17.4 
$17.8 
$18.1 
Net Effect2 
9.8 
17.5 
0.8 
(12.5) 
(18.1) 
SUT Distribution to CREF 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
12.5 
18.1 
 
CREF:  Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund 
MMCC:  Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission 
SF:  special funds 
SUT:  sales and use tax 
 
1 Cumulative revenues do not include revenues distributed to CREF from the sales and use tax. 
2 Net effect represents whether a deficiency exists from revenue sources prior to the distribution of sales 
and use tax revenues to CREF. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
    
HB 556/ Page 33 
Maryland Cannabis Administration 
 
Operations and Staffing:  The administration is responsible for administering, regulating, 
and enforcing the laws related to medical and adult-use cannabis in the State. The bill 
generally establishes the administration as the successor to MMCC and requires the 
transfer of MMCC personnel to the administration on April 8, 2023, (the effective date of 
the bill); however, as noted above, budget language transfers the funding and positions for 
MMCC to the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission in fiscal 2024, contingent on the 
enactment of this bill or its cross file. Despite the conflicting provisions of the bill and the 
fiscal 2024 budget, this analysis assumes that MMCC personnel transfer immediately to 
the administration upon enactment, as required by the bill. This analysis further assumes 
that all equipment, supplies, office space, and other expenses attributed to MMCC also 
transfer to the administration effective April 8, 2023. Notwithstanding the transfer of 
MMCC personnel to the administration, MMCC indicates that significant additional staff 
resources are necessary to implement the adult-use cannabis industry established under the 
bill.  
 
The fiscal 2024 budget includes $1.1 million in special funds for fiscal 2023 and 
approximately $4.8 million in special funds for fiscal 2024 as follows:  (1) $922,420 to 
convert 38 MMCC contractual staff to regular positions in fiscal 2023; (2) $207,179 to hire 
seven regular positions for MMCC in fiscal 2023 (which, under the bill, transfer to the 
administration on the bill’s effective date of April 8, 2023); (3) $952,781 to convert an 
additional eight contractual staff to regular positions in fiscal 2024; (4) $3.8 million for 
24 regular positions in fiscal 2024 for the Cannabis Regulatory and Enforcement Division 
(contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file, appropriated to the Cannabis 
Regulatory and Enforcement Division in the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission in the 
budget, but assumed in this analysis to be transferred to the administration, given the 
administration’s role in regulating and enforcing medical and adult-use cannabis under the 
bill); and (5) $3.2 million for 13 regular positions (contingent on the enactment of this bill 
or its cross file, appropriated to the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission in the budget, but 
assumed to be transferred to the administration).  
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for the administration from CREF increase by 
approximately $2.5 million in fiscal 2023, which accounts for the bill’s emergency status, 
to hire seven new staff for MMCC to promulgate emergency regulations and process 
license conversions, convert 38 full-time contractual employees to full-time merit 
employees, and transfer MMCC personnel to the administration immediately. Special fund 
expenditures increase by $24.4 million in fiscal 2024, reflecting ongoing expenses for the 
seven staff from fiscal 2023, the conversion of an additional eight full-time contractual 
employees to full-time merit employees, the need for 37 additional staff, vehicles for  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
    
HB 556/ Page 34 
specified staff, and other one-time costs. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
seven staff begin on April 8, 2023, to promulgate emergency regulations by  
July 1, 2023, (included in the budget for MMCC, as detailed above, for fiscal 2023); 
 
38 MMCC contractual staff convert to full-time merit staff immediately, (included 
in the budget for MMCC, as detailed above, for fiscal 2023) and transfer to the 
administration;   
 
31 existing MMCC merit staff transfer to the administration; 
 
37 positions begin within the administration on July 1, 2023, to carry out various 
functions as required under the bill (the funding for which is provided in the 
fiscal 2024 budget, contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file, as 
specified above); 
 
eight remaining MMCC contractual staff convert to full-time merit staff effective 
July 1, 2023, (included in the budget for MMCC, as detailed above, for fiscal 2024) 
and transfer to the administration under the bill; 
 
one-time expenditures in fiscal 2024 include (1) $310,000 for a seed to sale tracking 
contract (included in the fiscal 2024 budget for MMCC); (2) $2.0 million for 
cannabis banking service contract procurement; (3) $1.0 million in licensing 
software upgrades; (4) $1.0 million in contracts for outreach to potential social 
equity applicants; (5) nine vehicles for the cannabis inspection division; 
(6) $150,000 for a contract to study wholesale cannabis licenses; (7) $50,000 for a 
contract to study on-site consumption; and (8) $1.0 million to procure equipment 
for an existing MMCC State laboratory to transition to a State cannabis testing 
laboratory (discussed in more detail below) under the bill; and 
 
ongoing expenditures beginning in fiscal 2024 include rent for 5,000 square feet of 
additional office space; fuel and maintenance for purchased vehicles; and 
$1.8 million in contractual services for application reviews and post award financial 
reviews.   
 
 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Regular Positions (New) 
7.0 
37.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$209,646 
$5,695,492 
Contractual Services 
0 
7,890,703 
Transfer MMCC Staff as Merit  
2,270,771 
9,247,652 
Additional State Lab Equipment 
0 
1,000,000 
Office Space (Rent) 
0 
125,000 
Vehicle Purchase and Related Costs 
0 
239,083 
Other Operating Expenses 
       48,005 
       205,705 
CREF Exp. For the Administration 
$2,528,422 
$24,403,635 
 

END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
    
HB 556/ Page 35 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, continued rent payments and 
contractual services, and the elimination of one-time costs.  
 
State Testing Laboratory:  The administration must also establish and maintain a 
State cannabis testing laboratory, unless MDA or MDH enter into an MOU with the 
administration to test cannabis at an existing State-owned laboratory by July 1, 2023. The 
Joint Report on the Transition of Medical Cannabis Personnel to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission indicates that MMCC incurred significant expenditures during fiscal 2023 to 
construct and equip a state reference laboratory for cannabis testing. Thus, the State 
laboratory can likely be established within existing budgeted resources. Special fund 
expenditures from CREF increase by $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 only to further equip the 
reference library (as discussed and included in the expenditure estimate for the 
administration above) beyond what MMCC had previously budgeted; special fund 
expenditures increase further beginning in fiscal 2024 for any ongoing costs associated 
with maintaining the State laboratory. Personnel expenditures to hire a director for the State 
laboratory are included in the personnel expenditures for the administration above. 
 
Office of Social Equity:  The bill establishes OSE as an independent office that functions 
within the administration. While the bill establishes significant functions for OSE related 
to diversity and equity within the cannabis industry, this analysis assumes that the 
significant staff resources allocated to the administration (including current MMCC staff 
that transfers to the administration and the additional staff allocated to the administration 
in the fiscal 2024 budget, as discussed above) are sufficient to staff OSE and carry out its 
responsibilities under the bill.  
 
Social Equity Partnership Grant Program:  General fund expenditures increase by 
$2.0 million in fiscal 2024 for initial capitalization of the Social Equity Partnership Grant 
Program administered by OSE, which reflects funding included in the fiscal 2024 budget 
(contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file). General fund expenditures 
increase by $5.0 million annually thereafter due to the bill’s mandated appropriation to the 
grant program beginning in fiscal 2025. It is assumed that OSE spends the full amount of 
the appropriations provided to the grant program each year as grants are awarded. 
 
Medical Cannabis Compassionate Use Fund:  The Medical Cannabis Compassionate Use 
Fund is recodified to be administered by the administration (rather than by MDH). The bill 
also expands the authorized uses of the fund to include supplementing the cost of certifying 
provider assessments for specified qualifying patients. MMCC advises that this additional 
authorization significantly increases the usefulness of the fund, as few expenditures occur 
from the fund currently due to the difficulty in identifying at the dispensary level which 
qualifying patients are enrolled in the specified medical assistance programs. MMCC 

END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
    
HB 556/ Page 36 
anticipates that identifying the specified qualifying patients at the provider level will be 
more feasible. 
 
Thus, special fund revenues for the administration increase by approximately $1.9 million 
in fiscal 2023 from transferring the administration of the special fund from MMCC to the 
administration. As discussed below, special fund revenues for MDH decrease by a 
corresponding amount. Special fund revenues to the fund within the administration 
increase as early as fiscal 2024 from any fine revenues assessed; special fund revenues 
increase further beginning in fiscal 2026 to the extent the administration imposes fees on 
cannabis licensees to provide revenues for the purposes of the fund. 
 
Special fund expenditures for the administration increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in fiscal 2023 due to the transfer of the fund and the expanded authorization 
under the bill to pay qualifying providers rather than dispensaries. MDH special fund 
expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission 
 
As discussed above, the fiscal 2024 budget includes funding and positions for the Alcohol 
and Tobacco Commission to implement cannabis reform, contingent on the enactment of 
this bill or its cross file. Specifically, the fiscal 2024 budget includes $317,000 in general 
funds for 3 positions in fiscal 2023 and $4.7 million ($1.5 million in general funds and 
$3.2 million in special funds) for 22 positions in fiscal 2024. This bill does not, however, 
allow ATCC costs to be paid for with special funds from CREF. Thus, this analysis 
assumes that only the $1.5 million in budgeted general funds (and the 12 associated 
positions, including the continuation of the 3 positions that begin in fiscal 2023) are 
transferred to ATCC. The $3.2 million in contingent special funds (and the 13 associated 
positions) included in the fiscal 2024 budget are not available to ATCC and are instead 
transferred to the administration, as discussed above.  
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for ATCC increase by $317,000 in fiscal 2023, 
which accounts for the bill’s emergency status and reflects the contingent funding included 
in the budget (described above); the estimate reflects costs for initial implementation of the 
bill by ATCC, including hiring three staff. In fiscal 2024, general fund expenditures for 
ATCC increase by $1.5 million, which reflects costs to hire an additional nine staff. The 
estimates include salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. The estimates also include contractual services totaling $62,619 in fiscal 2023 
and $241,546 in fiscal 2024.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
    
HB 556/ Page 37 
  
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Positions (New) 
3.0 
9.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$79,501 
$1,186,081 
Contractual Services 
62,619 
241,546 
Operating Expenses 
  174,880 
       72,373 
ATCC GF Expenditures 
$317,000 
$1,500,000 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover, 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and the elimination of one-time costs. 
 
Department of Commerce 
 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund:  While the impact of unspecified tax revenues on the 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund (as administered by Commerce) was assumed under 
the fiscal and policy note for Chapter 26 of 2022, this bill establishes the applicable tax 
rate on the sale of adult-use cannabis and requires that 5% of the sales and use tax revenues 
from adult-use cannabis be distributed to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund from 
fiscal 2024 through 2028. Based on estimated sales and use tax revenues available, special 
fund revenues from the required distribution are estimated to total $1.8 million in 
fiscal 2024, increasing to $6.4 million by fiscal 2027. Special fund expenditures increase 
correspondingly for the authorized purposes.   
 
Capital Access Program:  Commerce advises that since its implementation, there has been 
no interest in using the Maryland Capital Access Program, which is significantly similar to 
the program established under the bill. Commerce further advises that its other programs 
that specifically target historically underserved populations are more successful at meeting 
the capital needs of small and underserved businesses. Thus, Commerce advises that this 
provision likely has no impact on the agency. Nevertheless, to the extent the bill generates 
applications for participation in the Capital Access Program, special fund expenditures may 
increase to hire additional staff. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
Transfer of MMCC Personnel and Special Fund:  As mentioned earlier, the bill generally 
repeals MMCC and the associated special funds from the Health-General Article and 
transfers control of medical cannabis regulation from MDH to the administration. As such, 
MMCC personnel (assumed to include related office space, equipment, supplies, and 
contracts held by MMCC) transfer to the administration within ATCC, and the 
corresponding MMCC special fund balance transfers to CREF. Thus, MDH special fund 
revenues decrease by approximately $12.3 million in fiscal 2023 due to the transfer of the 
fund balance. Special fund revenues decrease further beginning in fiscal 2024 by 
approximately $10.7 million annually due to the repeal of the MMCC special fund and 

END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
    
HB 556/ Page 38 
associated revenue sources. Similarly, special fund expenditures for MDH decrease by 
approximately $2.4 million in fiscal 2023 and by $8.0 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2024 due to the transfer of MMCC personnel, associated expenditures, and the repeal 
of the MMCC special fund and its associated spending.   
 
As noted above, the fiscal 2024 budget assumes the transfer of MMCC funding and 
personnel to the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission in fiscal 2024. 
 
Cannabis Public Health Fund:  While the impact of unspecified tax revenues on the 
Cannabis Public Health Fund (as administered by MDH) was assumed under the fiscal and 
policy note for Chapter 26 of 2022, this bill establishes the applicable tax rate on the sale 
of adult-use cannabis and requires that 5% of the sales and use tax revenue be distributed 
to the Cannabis Public Health Fund. Based on estimated sales and use tax revenues 
available, special fund revenues from the required distribution are estimated to total 
$1.8 million in fiscal 2024, increasing to $6.4 million by fiscal 2027. Special fund 
expenditures increase correspondingly for the authorized purposes.   
 
Medical Cannabis Compassionate Use Fund:  Under current law, MMCC (within MDH) 
administers the fund; however, as noted earlier, the bill shifts responsibility for 
administering the fund to the administration. The current balance of the fund is 
approximately $1.9 million. As such, MDH special fund revenues decrease by an estimated 
$1.9 million in fiscal 2023 only due to the transfer. There are no ongoing revenues assumed 
for the fund in MDH in the absence of the bill.   
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation and Department of General Services – 
Maryland Incubator Program 
 
The bill requires MEDCO to identify sites for proposed use as incubator spaces across 
four specified regions of the State and report information about the proposed sites for each 
location by January 1, 2024. MEDCO advises that it can identify potential incubator space 
sites and prepare the associated report with existing budgeted resources. 
 
MEDCO must also, in consultation with the administration, acquire and construct or 
refurbish at least one facility to operate an incubator space. MEDCO advises that with the 
benefit of budgeted capital funds, it could act on behalf of the administration as a 
development agent or consultant to establish a State incubator space on a fee-for-service 
basis. Thus, special fund expenditures from CREF increase, likely in the out years, to pay 
any fees to MEDCO for this purpose; special fund revenues for MEDCO increase 
correspondingly. The fiscal 2024 capital budget includes $2.0 million in bond funding for 
MEDCO to acquire, plan, design, construct, repair, renovate, reconstruct, improve the site 
of, and capitally equip facilities to be used as incubator spaces (contingent on the enactment 
of this bill or its cross file). As such, bond expenditures for MEDCO increase by 

END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
    
HB 556/ Page 39 
$2.0 million in fiscal 2024. Additional capital expenditures for MEDCO are indeterminate 
but likely occur beginning in fiscal 2025.  
 
Following completion of the construction or refurbishment of the incubator space, 
ownership must transfer to DGS. While a timeline for the completion of either the 
construction or refurbishment of the incubator space is not contemplated by the bill, this 
analysis assumes that the transfer of ownership of the incubator space occurs beyond the 
first five fiscal years addressed in this fiscal and policy note. For illustrative purposes only, 
DGS advises that it costs approximately $500,000 annually to operate a 30,000-square foot 
office building, (including maintenance, repairs, utilities, housekeeping, security, and 
necessary personnel), and costs are higher to the extent that any building contains 
specialized spaces (e.g., manufacturing and secure storage). Thus, general fund 
expenditures for DGS increase by at least $500,000 annually, assumed to begin sometime 
after fiscal 2027. 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
The bill requires the administration to give notice and hold hearings pursuant to Title 10, 
Subtitle 2 of the State Government Article for contested cannabis license or registration 
denials or specified violations. The bill specifically authorizes the administration to 
delegate its hearing authority to an employee within the administration. The Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH) advises that MMCC currently delegates contested case 
hearings to OAH. MMCC currently oversees 152 licensees. The bill authorizes growth in 
the cannabis industry to a maximum of 750 cannabis licensees, serving both the medical 
and adult-use cannabis markets, which is nearly five times the current size of the medical 
cannabis industry in the State. To date, OAH has held three hearings for cases delegated 
by MMCC. Each has involved multi-day proceedings that included prehearing conferences 
with written decisions. OAH further advises that due to the complexity of the types of cases 
potentially delegated to OAH under the bill, the increased size of the cannabis industry 
may result in the need for OAH to hire an additional Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).   
 
To the extent that the administration delegates cases to OAH, reimbursable fund 
expenditures for OAH and special fund expenditures for the Comptroller from CREF may 
increase beginning as early as fiscal 2024, assuming the number of hearings increases to 
the point where existing OAH staff cannot handle the increase in workload. Offsetting 
reimbursable fund revenues for OAH increase correspondingly. For illustrative purposes 
only, the cost to hire one ALJ for the first full fiscal year is approximately $175,800.   
 
Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
The bill requires that a cannabis licensee comply with the State’s MBE program, to the 
extent legal and practicable. Before a cannabis business participates with the MBE 

END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
    
HB 556/ Page 40 
program, it is necessary to identify existing MBE capacity and or potential disparities 
(usually accomplished through conducting or reanalyzing a disparity study for a specified 
industry). MDOT, which is the designated certification agency for MBE program, is in the 
process of conducting a statewide disparity study that will include an analysis of 
Maryland’s cannabis industry pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022. 
 
If a disparity study determines that remedial measures are required, GOSBA must set 
cannabis licensee standards for procurements. This analysis assumes that GOSBA can 
establish a general goal for each license type and apply that standard to new licenses of the 
same type (similar to what GOSBA does when setting the statewide MBE program goals). 
As this is a standard practice for GOSBA, the bill’s requirements related to MBE 
participation can likely be absorbed within existing budgeted resources.   
 
Office of Legislative Audits 
 
The bill establishes CREF, a special fund administered by the Comptroller at the direction 
of the administration, which is subject to audit by OLA. The bill also recodifies the Medical 
Cannabis Compassionate Use Fund administered by the administration (rather than by 
MMCC) and continues to subject the fund to audit by OLA. OLA advises that if the funds 
have significant activity, an equally significant audit effort may be required. OLA further 
advises that it plans to audit the funds during the regularly scheduled fiscal compliance 
audits of each fund’s administering entity (the Comptroller or ATCC, as applicable). While 
the expansion of OLA’s audit responsibilities may have an operational impact, it is 
assumed to be absorbable within existing budgeted resources.   
 
Judiciary 
 
General fund revenues may increase minimally from the bill’s monetary penalty provisions 
from cases heard in the District Court. It is assumed that the bill does not otherwise 
materially affect the operations or finances of the Judiciary.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase from the required distribution to each county 
of 5% of the revenue collected from the sales and use tax on adult-use cannabis sales in the 
county. Based on the estimated sales and use tax revenues available, the required 
distribution to counties is estimated to total $1.8 million in fiscal 2024, increasing to 
$6.4 million by fiscal 2027. County expenditures increase correspondingly as funds are 
expended and/or distributed. A political subdivision is authorized by the bill to decide how 
to distribute its allocation of such revenue for the authorized purposes. However, each 
county must distribute to a municipality located in the county 50% of the county’s 
allocation that is attributable to the cannabis sales and use tax revenue generated by a 
dispensary located in that municipality.  
 

END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
    
HB 556/ Page 41 
While the potential effects of CRRF on local jurisdictions were assumed in the fiscal and 
policy note for Chapter 26 of 2022, this bill establishes a funding source for CRRF through 
fiscal 2033, so local revenues increase from distributions from CRRF under the bill. As 
noted in the fiscal and policy note for Chapter 26 of 2022, local expenditures likely increase 
for each county to (1) adopt a law establishing the purpose for which money received from 
the CRRF may be used; (2) use the funds received subject to the authorized purposes under 
the bill; and (3) issue a report on how these funds were spent every two years beginning 
December 1, 2024. 
 
Local revenues and expenditures also increase, potentially significantly, to the extent that 
local governments receive funding from the Cannabis Public Health Fund (1) to support 
local health departments with substance abuse disorder counseling and treatment for 
individuals; (2) to provide training and equipment for local law enforcement to recognize 
impairments due to cannabis; and (3) for educational programs to be used in schools. While 
this impact was assumed in the fiscal and policy note for Chapter 26 of 2022, the bill 
establishes an ongoing funding source for the fund. 
 
Local expenditures may increase minimally to the extent that (1) local jurisdictions incur 
administrative costs to affirmatively authorize on-site consumption establishments to 
operate in the jurisdiction and (2) additional contested hearings are appealed to the circuit 
courts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill establishes a significant business opportunity for 
individuals to enter the cannabis industry as a small business, particularly by the 
establishment of micro licenses and the Maryland Incubator Program. The bill also 
establishes an opportunity for particular types of existing small businesses (e.g., 
transporters, security guard companies, and waste disposal companies) to register with the 
administration and participate in the cannabis industry. 
 
Existing small businesses that are MMCC-licensed medical cannabis growers, processors, 
or dispensaries convert to a cannabis business license under the bill, authorizing 
participation in the adult-use and medical cannabis industry. 
 
Small businesses also benefit from the further capitalization of both the Cannabis Business 
Assistance Fund and the Cannabis Public Health Fund under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
    
HB 556/ Page 42 
Designated Cross File:  SB 516 (Senators Feldman and Hayes) - Finance and Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Commerce; Governor’s Office of Small, 
Minority, and Women Business Affairs; Maryland Economic Development Corporation; 
Office of Administrative Hearings; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ 
Association; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of 
General Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland 
Insurance Administration; Prince George’s County; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - May 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - July 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - July 18, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 42