START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 755

Chapter 755

(House Bill 587)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – 41st District – Alcoholic Beverages – ~~Class~~ ~~A–7~~ ~~Beer,~~ ~~Wine,~~ ~~and~~
~~Liquor~~ ~~License~~ ~~Licenses~~ Licenses

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City to
exchange a Class B–D–7 beer, wine, and liquor license in a certain area for a Class
A–7 beer, wine, and liquor license under certain circumstances for a certain period
of time; repealing certain geographic and temporal restrictions on the issuance of
Class A–7 beer, wine, and liquor licenses in Baltimore City; altering a certain period
of time during which a certain alcoholic beverages license may be issued; and
generally relating to alcoholic beverages for Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–902.1 and 12–1001.4(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–902.1.

(a) ~~This~~ ~~section~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~apply~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~43rd~~ ~~legislative~~ ~~district.~~

~~(b)~~ There is a Class A–7 beer, wine, and liquor license.

(c) (B) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
at retail at the place described in the license, for off–premises consumption.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 755 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) (C) (1) Subject to [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of this
subsection, a license holder who holds a valid Class B–D–7 beer, wine, and liquor license
issued on or before July 1, 2018, may apply to the Board to exchange the license for a Class
A–7 license if the license holder first obtains approval by resolution of the Baltimore City
Council.

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A A
LICENSE HOLDER WHO HOLDS A VALID CLASS B–D–7 BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
LICENSE FOR PREMISES LOCATED ON THE ODD SIDE OF THE 4000 BLOCK OF
FREDERICK AVENUE MAY APPLY TO THE BOARD TO EXCHANGE THE LICENSE FOR A
CLASS A–7 LICENSE.

(3) The Board may not issue a Class A–7 license on or after July 1, 2022.

(e) (D) A holder of a Class A–7 license may sell beer, wine, and liquor on
Monday through Sunday from 10 a.m. to midnight.

(f) (E) The annual license fee is $1,500.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

12–1001.4.

(a) In this section, “marketplace” means premises that:

(1) accommodate the public; and

(2) are made up of at least three food and beverage establishments, at least
one of which is licensed to conduct off–premises sales, that opened to the public on or before
July 1, 2022, or are expected to open within [6] 24 months of issuance of the marketplace
license under this section.

(d) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor from one
or more establishments within the marketplace by the drink or by the bottle for on–premises
OR OFF–PREMISES consumption.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023. ~~It~~ Section 1 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the
end of June 30, 2024, Section 1 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect. Section 2 of this Act shall
remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of June 30, 2025, Section 2 of this Act,

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 755

with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3