START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 430

Chapter 430

(House Bill 552)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program and Fund
(Innovation Economy Infrastructure Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program in the
Department of Commerce to provide funding for certain costs for infrastructure
projects in eligible technology sectors; requiring certain grantees to provide matching
funds and to demonstrate certain abilities; establishing the Build Our Future Grant
Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; and generally relating to the Build Our Future
Grant Pilot Program and Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–2301 through 5–2307 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 23. Build Our
Future Grant Pilot Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 430 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

5–102.

The Department shall administer the State’s economic development and financial
assistance programs and funds including:

(1) the BRAC Revitalization and Incentive Zone Program, under Subtitle
13 of this title;

(2) THE BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT PILOT PROGRAM, UNDER
SUBTITLE 23 OF THIS TITLE;

(3) the Enterprise Fund, under Subtitle 6 of this title;

[(3)] (4) the Enterprise Zones Program, under Subtitle 7 of this title;

[(4)] (5) the Make Office Vacancies Extinct Program, under Subtitle 15 of
this title;

[(5)] (6) the Maryland Economic Adjustment Fund, under Subtitle 2 of
this title;

[(6)] (7) the Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority and
Fund, under Subtitle 3 of this title;

[(7)] (8) the Maryland Industrial Development Financing Authority,
under Subtitle 4 of this title;

[(8)] (9) the Maryland Small Business Development Financing Authority,
under Subtitle 5 of this title;

[(9)] (10) the Appalachian Regional Development Program, under Title 13,
Subtitle 1 of this article;

[(10)] (11) jointly with the Department of Housing and Community
Development, the Community Development Block Grant for Economic Development;

[(11)] (12) the Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program
under Subtitle 14 of this title; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 430

[(12)] (13) any other programs or funds designated by statute, the
Governor, or the Secretary.

SUBTITLE 23. BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT PILOT PROGRAM.

5–2301.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “FUND” MEANS THE BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT FUND.

(C) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT PILOT PROGRAM.

5–2302.

(A) THERE IS A BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT PILOT PROGRAM IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE GRANT FUNDING FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS INTENDED TO SUPPORT INNOVATION IN AN ELIGIBLE
TECHNOLOGY SECTOR.

(C) GRANTS MAY BE AWARDED TO PRIVATE COMPANIES, NONPROFIT
ENTITIES, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, OR COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES IN THE STATE.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

5–2303.

(A) TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT
MAY AWARD GRANTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE TO APPROVED
RECIPIENTS CARRYING OUT INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS INTENDED TO SUPPORT
INNOVATION IN ANY OF THE FOLLOWING ELIGIBLE TECHNOLOGY SECTORS:

(1) ADVANCED MANUFACTURING;

(2) AEROSPACE;

(3) AGRICULTURE;

(4) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE;

(5) BIOTECHNOLOGY;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 430 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) BLUE TECHNOLOGY;

(7) CYBERSECURITY;

(8) DEFENSE;

(9) ENERGY AND SUSTAINABILITY;

(10) LIFE SCIENCES;

(11) QUANTUM; AND

(12) SENSOR AND ROBOTICS.

(B) EXAMPLES OF ELIGIBLE PROJECTS INCLUDE:

(1) SECURE COMPARTMENTALIZED SENSITIVE COMPARTMENTED
INFORMATION FACILITIES;

(2) WET LABORATORIES;

(3) CYBER RANGES;

(4) PROTOTYPE MANUFACTURING CENTERS; AND

(5) OTHER SPECIALIZED WORKFORCE TRAINING, SKILL
CERTIFICATION, OR RESEARCH–RELATED SPACES.

(C) GRANT AWARDS MAY BE USED TO DEFRAY THE COST A GRANTEE INCURS
TO ACQUIRE, CONSTRUCT, REHABILITATE, INSTALL, IMPROVE, OR EQUIP AN
ELIGIBLE INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT.

(D) (1) A SINGLE ENTITY MAY BE AWARDED NOT MORE THAN $2,000,000
IN GRANT FUNDS IN A FISCAL YEAR.

(2) (I) FOR A GRANT AWARD UP TO $1,000,000, A GRANTEE SHALL
PROVIDE MATCHING FUNDS THAT ARE AT LEAST 200% OF THE GRANT AMOUNT.

(II) FOR A GRANT AWARD EXCEEDING $1,000,000, AND UP TO
$2,000,000, A GRANTEE SHALL PROVIDE MATCHING FUNDS THAT ARE AT LEAST
400% OF THE GRANT AMOUNT.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 430

(III) FUNDS RECEIVED BY A GRANTEE THROUGH OTHER STATE
GRANT PROGRAMS ARE NOT COUNTED TOWARD THE GRANTEE’S MATCHING FUNDS
REQUIREMENT.

(3) A GRANTEE MUST DEMONSTRATE AN ABILITY TO COVER THE FULL
ESTIMATED COSTS OF THE PROJECT FOR WHICH THE GRANT IS AWARDED.

(4) (I) NOT MORE THAN 50% OF THE APPROPRIATION TO THE
FUND IN A FISCAL YEAR MAY BE AWARDED TO COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES IN
THAT FISCAL YEAR.

(II) GRANTS TO COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES FROM THE FUND
MUST BE AWARDED TO PROJECTS THAT:

1. ARE PERFORMED IN COLLABORATION WITH PRIVATE
INDUSTRY; OR

2. OFFER THE PROSPECT OF SIGNIFICANT ECONOMIC
IMPACT AND THE OPPORTUNITY TO DEVELOP ENTREPRENEURSHIP OR CLUSTERS
OF TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION IN THE STATE.

5–2304.

A GRANTEE MAY BE SUBJECT TO REPAYMENT OF THE GRANT IN AN AMOUNT
DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT IF THE GRANTEE FAILS TO:

(1) COMPLY WITH REPORTING REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY THE
DEPARTMENT; OR

(2) DEMONSTRATE APPROPRIATE USE OF GRANT FUNDS.

5–2305.

(A) THERE IS A BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT FUND.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE GRANTS FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS TO SUPPORT INNOVATION IN ELIGIBLE TECHNOLOGY
SECTORS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO REVERSION UNDER § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 430 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) (1) THE FUND MAY BE USED TO:

(I) PROVIDE GRANTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE;
AND

(II) PAY THE ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF THE PROGRAM.

(2) DURING EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT MAY USE NOT
MORE THAN 10% OF THE MONEY APPROPRIATED TO THE FUND TO ADMINISTER THE
PROGRAM.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(H) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

5–2306.

ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE
GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE PROJECTS FUNDED THROUGH AND THE
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF THE PROGRAM.

5–2307.

THE SECRETARY MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 430

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on termination of this Act,
all funds remaining in the Build Our Future Grant Fund under § 5–2305 of the Economic
Development Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall revert to the General Fund
of the State.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2027,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7