START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 529 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 529 
(Delegates Rosenberg and Attar) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Gaming - Video Lottery Terminals - Local Impact Grants and Pimlico 
Community Development Authority Membership - Baltimore City 
 
   
This bill alters the distribution of video lottery terminal (VLT) local impact grants within 
Baltimore City. From fiscal 2024 to 2032, 85% (instead of 75% under current law) of 
certain revenues are to be distributed primarily for capital projects benefitting economic 
and community development in a manner that is consistent with the Park Heights Master 
Plan. The increase in distributions for this purpose results in a decrease in distributions for 
capital projects in other specified Baltimore City areas and neighborhoods. The bill also 
provides that certain members of the Pimlico Community Development Authority (PCDA) 
appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore City are appointed with the advice and consent of the 
Senate. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.    
  
Local Effect:  The total of annual local impact grants distributed to Baltimore City is not 
affected. While the total of local impact grants to be distributed within Baltimore City is 
not altered, the amount distributed in a manner consistent with the Park Heights Master 
Plan increases, beginning in FY 2024, and the amount distributed to other specified areas 
within Baltimore City decreases by an equivalent amount. This shift in distributions 
amounts to $363,500 in FY 2024 and $424,200 by FY 2028. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 529/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, local impact grants must go to the local jurisdictions with video 
lottery facilities to be used for infrastructure improvements; facilities; public safety; 
sanitation; economic and community development, including housing; and other public 
services and improvements primarily in the communities in immediate proximity to the 
video lottery facilities. 
 
From the gross VLT proceeds from a video lottery facility, 5.5% is allocated for local 
impact grants. After deducting the 5.5% shares for Allegany, Cecil, and Worcester 
counties, and additional distributions totaling $720,000 to Allegany, Cecil, and Worcester 
counties, as well as the Town of Perryville and the Town of Forest Heights, 82% of the 
VLT local impact grants are split by Baltimore City, Anne Arundel and Prince George’s 
counties. The remaining 18% is distributed for 20 years (starting in fiscal 2012 and ending 
in 2032) to Baltimore City and to Prince George’s County for the community surrounding 
Rosecroft ($1.0 million annually). Beginning with fiscal 2015, $500,000 of that 18% is 
distributed to communities within three miles of Laurel Race Course. For fiscal 2022 to 
2032, $3.5 million of that 18% is provided to the State Lottery Fund.   
 
From the remaining revenues from the 18% Baltimore City share, the greater of 24% or 
$2.4 million goes to Park Heights Renaissance, Inc. and the remainder to Baltimore City 
with the PCDA acting as the local development council, to be distributed primarily for 
capital projects benefiting economic and community development. Of this latter portion, 
75% is distributed in a manner that is consistent with the Park Heights Master Plan, and 
25% is distributed to specified neighborhoods in Baltimore City, excluding the area 
covered by the Park Heights Master Plan.  
 
In addition, 5% of table game revenues are distributed to local jurisdictions where a video 
lottery facility is located. 
 
The PCDA uses certain funding to pay for facilities and services in the communities in the 
Baltimore City limits within two miles of the Pimlico Race Course. The PCDA consists of 
15 members, 10 of whom are appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore City after consultation 
with the members of the Baltimore City Delegation representing Districts 40 and 41.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The sum of VLT local impact grants, including those to 
Baltimore City, is not altered. The portion of these grants that are distributed to 
Baltimore City with the PCDA acting as the local development council is an estimated 
$3.6 million in fiscal 2024. Under current law, 75% of this amount, or $2.7 million, is 
distributed in a manner that is consistent with the Park Heights Master Plan. Under the bill, 
85%, or $3.1 million, is distributed in this manner. This amounts to an increase of 
approximately $363,500. Consequently, the portion of the $3.6 million to be distributed 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 529/ Page 3 
elsewhere in Baltimore City is reduced by $363,500. By fiscal 2028, the increase in funds 
distributed in a manner that is consistent with the Park Heights Master Plan is projected to 
be approximately $424,200, and therefore funds available to other specified areas within 
Baltimore City are reduced by this amount.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming 
Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 13, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 13, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3