START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 543 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 543 
(Delegate Tomlinson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement - Small Procurement - Definition 
 
 
This bill raises the maximum dollar value threshold for most “small procurements” from 
$50,000 to $100,000 and makes conforming changes to other specialized small 
procurement thresholds. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material effect on State finances, but State agencies may experience 
administrative efficiencies to the extent that they can procure more goods and services 
using small procurement methods. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill raises the maximum dollar threshold for the following categories 
of small procurements:   
 
 
for specified revenue-generating contracts, from $50,000 to $100,000; 
 
for specified expenses for independent medical evaluations and physician testimony 
on behalf of the State Retirement Agency, from $50,000 to $100,000; 
 
for construction contracts by the Department of General Services (DGS) and 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), from $100,000 to $200,000; and 
 
for capital or maintenance contracts by the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR), from $100,000 to $200,000. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 543/ Page 2 
Current Law:  In general, procurement law defines a small procurement to be a 
procurement for which an agency spends $50,000 or less, or for which a contractor 
provides specified services with expected annual revenues of $50,000 or less. These limits 
were raised from $25,000 by Chapters 588 and 589 of 2017. Procurement law specifies 
additional thresholds for specialized procurements, including (1) $100,000 for construction 
contracts by DGS or MDOT and (2) $100,000 for capital or maintenance projects by DNR. 
 
All small procurements must seek competition to the extent practicable. Each procurement 
agency must solicit bids or offers from a sufficient number of certified minority-owned 
businesses and attempt to solicit bids or offers from small businesses. 
 
Procurement regulations further divide small procurements into three categories:   
 
 
Category I – $5,000 or less:  Either oral or written solicitations, or both, allowed; 
posting on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) not required; single bid or offer 
acceptable; and awarded based on the judgment of procurement officer. 
 
Category II – more than $5,000 and up to $15,000:  Either oral or written 
solicitations, or both, allowed; at least two bids or offers; posting on eMM not 
required; and awarded based on most favorable bid price, evaluated bid price, or 
most advantageous offer. 
 
Category III – more than $15,000 and up to $50,000 (or up to $100,000 for specified 
construction or maintenance projects):  Written solicitation only; must be posted on 
eMM; at least two bids or offers; and awarded based on most favorable bid price, 
evaluated bid price, or most advantageous offer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; State 
Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 543/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3