START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 162

Chapter 162

(House Bill 509)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Elections – Municipal Elections – Publication of Results on
Website

FOR the purpose of requiring the State Board of Elections ~~to~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~a~~ ~~portal~~ ~~on~~ ~~its~~
~~website~~ ~~through~~ ~~which~~ ~~municipalities~~ ~~submit~~ ~~election~~ ~~results;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
~~Board~~ to publish municipal election results on its website; and generally relating to
the publication of municipal election results by the State Board of Elections.

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 4–108.5
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

4–108.5.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “STATE BOARD” MEANS THE STATE BOARD OF
ELECTIONS.

(B) (1) THE STATE BOARD SHALL:

(1) ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN AN ELECTRONIC PORTAL ON THE
STATE BOARD’S WEBSITE THROUGH WHICH MUNICIPALITIES SUBMIT ELECTION
RESULTS; AND

(2), IMMEDIATELY AFTER A MUNICIPALITY SUBMITS ITS ELECTION
RESULTS, PUBLISH THE ELECTION RESULTS ON THE STATE BOARD’S WEBSITE.

(2) THE ELECTION RESULTS PUBLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE ORGANIZED BY ELECTION YEAR AND THE NAME OF THE
MUNICIPALITY.

(C) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE RESULTS OF A MUNICIPAL ELECTION IS
HELD ARE CERTIFIED, THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE STATE BOARD AN

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 162 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ELECTRONIC COPY OF THE ELECTION RESULTS FOR EACH OFFICE OR QUESTION
VOTED ON AT THE ELECTION, INCLUDING:

(1) VOTE TOTALS FOR EACH OFFICE OR QUESTION REPORTED
SEPARATELY BY EACH OF THE FOLLOWING VOTING METHODS, IF APPLICABLE:

(I) IN–PERSON EARLY VOTING;

(II) MAIL–IN VOTING OR VOTE–BY–MAIL;

(III) PROVISIONAL VOTING; AND

(IV) IN–PERSON ELECTION DAY VOTING; AND

(2) IF THE MUNICIPALITY CONDUCTS PARTISAN ELECTIONS, THE
PARTY AFFILIATION OF EACH CANDIDATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2