START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 502 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 502 
(Delegates R. Lewis and Watson) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Department of Human Services - Electronic Benefits Transfer Cards - Theft of 
Benefits (Prevent Electronic Benefits Theft Act of 2023) 
 
 
This emergency bill generally requires the Department of Human Services (DHS) to restore 
any lost benefits to a household due to theft, as specified, including theft related to the use 
of an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card. Among other provisions, the bill also 
(1) specifies requirements relating to the procurement process for electronic benefits 
distribution or administration and (2) requires DHS, in consultation with local law 
enforcement agencies in the State, to report specified information related to EBT theft to 
the General Assembly each year by December 1.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (general/federal funds) increase by up to $1.9 million in 
FY 2023, $6.2 million in FY 2024, and $4.2 million annually thereafter for benefit 
reimbursements, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. The 
FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a total of $11.4 million in 
general/federal funds in FY 2023 and 2024 for the reimbursement of benefits for victims 
of EBT fraud.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FF Revenue 
$1.13 
$4.40 
$0.82 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0.76 
$1.78 
$3.38 
$4.20 
$4.20 
FF Expenditure 
$1.13 
$4.40 
$0.82 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($0.76) 
($1.78) 
($3.38) 
($4.20) 
($4.20)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local law enforcement agencies can assist with the bill’s reporting 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to 
materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 502/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Select Definitions 
 
“Skimming practices” includes (1) use of a skimming device, including a scanner, 
skimmer, reader, or other electronic device used to access, read, scan, obtain, memorize, 
or store, temporarily or permanently, personal identifying information or (2) adding 
malicious code illegally to a website to capture EBT card data or personal identifying 
information. 
 
“Theft” includes physical theft of an EBT card, identify fraud, and theft through skimming 
practices. 
 
Restoration of Benefits 
 
The bill requires DHS to automatically restore the benefits of a household without requiring 
further action from the household if a DHS investigation shows a household’s correctly 
issued benefits were lost due to theft. As soon as is practicable, but within 10 days after a 
household informs DHS of the loss of benefits, DHS must:   
 
 
notify the household in writing of the decision as to whether to restore benefits, the 
amount of benefits to be restored, and the right to and method of requesting a hearing 
on the decision, as specified; 
 
restore benefits to the household in the amount of benefits lost (if DHS determines 
that the household receives benefits); and 
 
provide the household with a new EBT card. 
 
DHS may not (1) require a household to provide a police report as a condition of restoration 
of benefits or (2) limit the number of months in which a household can receive restoration 
of benefits lost due to theft. 
 
DHS may: 
 
 
restore benefits to any household that lost benefits due to theft that occurred between 
January 1, 2021, and October 1, 2022, if DHS confirms the household lost benefits 
due to theft during that time period; and 
 
support innovative practices required to support beneficiaries during the time period 
between reporting theft of benefits and the restoration of benefits. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 502/ Page 3 
However, DHS must issue benefits to households eligible to receive funds under the 
provisions specified above (for losses between January 1, 2021, and October 1, 2022) by 
September 1, 2023. 
 
Right to Administrative Hearing and Benefits 
 
If a household disputes the amount of benefits restored or a DHS determination that no 
restoration is due, the household may request a hearing with DHS within 90 days after the 
date of the determination. If a household requests a hearing, DHS must automatically 
restore the benefits for which the household claims entitlement while the hearing is 
pending. If the hearing decision is unfavorable to the household, any benefits improperly 
restored may be recovered by DHS by reducing the household’s benefit at a rate of up to 
the lesser of $10 or 5% of the household’s monthly allotment of benefits. 
 
Procurement Process for Electronic Benefits Distribution or Administration 
 
The bill requires that, in the procurement process for electronic benefits distribution or 
administration, the State or State‐aided or State‐controlled entity must give preference to a 
vendor that (1) holds a form of insurance that can be used to reimburse a beneficiary for 
identity fraud or theft and (2) provides identity access protections to protect an eligible 
beneficiary against identity fraud and theft, which may include multifactor authentication. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 1 each year, DHS, in consultation with local law enforcement agencies in 
the State, must report specified information to the General Assembly, including:   
 
 
accessibility and security of EBT cards; 
 
actions taken to reduce the fraudulent use of EBT cards; 
 
number of EBT cards reissued due to fraud in the immediately preceding year; 
 
number of households reporting theft of benefits, by jurisdiction and program; 
 
total dollar amount of benefits reported lost due to theft, by jurisdiction and 
program; 
 
number of determinations made by DHS that theft did not occur, by jurisdiction; 
 
number of households reimbursed for theft and the total dollar amount of benefits 
restored, by jurisdiction and program; 
 
number of hearings requested and the number of households that received a 
restoration of benefits as an outcome of a hearing, by jurisdiction; and 
 
demographic data on households that experienced theft, including race, gender, 
number of households with children younger than age 18, and number of households 
with a member at least age 60. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 502/ Page 4 
Requirements to Reduce Electronic Benefits Transfer Card Theft 
 
DHS must coordinate with vendors to implement available precautions to reduce the 
vulnerability of EBT cards to theft, including:   
 
 
inclusion of an embedded microchip in all EBT cards issued on or after 
October 1, 2023; 
 
use of two‐way fraud alerts, as specified;  
 
connectivity for universal benefits cards; 
 
providing, at initial benefit approval and each redetermination of eligibility, written 
notice of fraud risk and instructions on how to reduce the risk of theft, as specified; 
 
enabling EBT cardholders to place limits on the use of their cards, including limiting 
transactions, as specified; and 
 
monitoring transactions for suspicious activity, as specified. 
 
DHS must consider innovative financial and software services offered by both current and 
potential vendors to improve the administration and security of EBT programs.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Electronic Benefit Transfer System (EBTS) 
 
DHS operates an EBTS under agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services and pursuant to U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations. The Maryland 
EBT Card is called the Independence Card. It operates like a bank debit card and holds the 
benefits that are deposited into a recipient’s account. DHS programs – Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA), Temporary 
Disability Assistance Program (TDAP), Public Assistance to Adults (PAA) – use the 
EBT card to provide monthly benefits to eligible recipients. 
 
Department of Human Services – Guidance and Procedures on Electronic Benefits 
Transfer Card Fraud and Reimbursement 
 
DHS has a page on its website dedicated to EBT fraud and reimbursement, including 
information explaining how a customer can file a claim for reimbursement if EBT card 
theft has occurred on or after October 1, 2022, and tips on how to protect the EBT card 
from fraud, including skimming practices. A customer may call a 1‐800 number, available 
24 hours/7 days a week, to report that an EBT card is stolen or lost, and request that the 
EBT card be frozen (and that a new EBT replacement card be issued, which can be picked 
up at a local department of social services). The customer is encouraged to report the crime 
to the local police and submit a copy of the police report to the local department, which 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 502/ Page 5 
must report the incident to the DHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) by email. Under 
State regulations, the OIG within DHS must identify, investigate, and resolve suspicions 
of fraud, waste, and abuse. The Program Fraud Division investigates suspected fraud within 
DHS programs.  
 
Federal Law – Temporary Replacement Benefits for Electronic Benefits Transfer Card 
Fraud 
 
The federal Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2023, enacted in December 2022, requires 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) to issue ongoing 
guidance on the security measures states must take to detect and prevent EBT card fraud 
through card skimming, card cloning, or other similar fraudulent methods, and to issue 
regulations on requiring state agencies to implement procedures for replacement benefits 
to SNAP households victimized by EBT card fraud. 
 
The Act also requires states to issue replacement SNAP benefits stolen from households 
between October 1, 2022, and September 30, 2024, due to card skimming, card cloning, or 
other similar fraudulent methods (and authorizes the use of federal funds to do so). States 
must replace the lesser of the full amount stolen or two months of stolen benefits. Each 
state agency is limited to providing replacement benefits twice per federal fiscal year for 
each household. By February 28, 2023, state SNAP agencies were required to submit plans, 
as specified, to FNS detailing procedures about how to validate stolen SNAP benefit claims 
and replace benefits. However, the Act does not apply to stolen benefits from EBT cards 
used in other DHS cash assistance programs, such as TCA, TDAP, or PAA, and is limited 
in scope to the aforementioned time period. On February 27, 2023, DHS received federal 
approval of its comprehensive plan to reimburse SNAP benefits to victims of EBT card 
fraud. As stated above, DHS established a specific website with a form and instructions for 
filing an EBT fraud claim for benefits stolen on or after October 1, 2022. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State expenditures increase by up to $1.9 million in fiscal 2023 (which 
reflects the emergency status of the bill), $6.2 million in fiscal 2024, and $4.2 million 
annually thereafter for restoration of benefits due to theft. As discussed in additional detail 
below, this estimate generally (1) accounts for actual lost benefits (cash assistance and 
SNAP) – as reported to DHS – that occurred between January 1, 2021, and April 1, 2023, 
and (2) otherwise assumes that monthly benefits lost to theft do not exceed $350,000 (based 
on the maximum monthly amount of lost benefits reported in calendar 2022). Because 
federal funds may be used to reimburse SNAP benefits lost between October 1, 2022, and 
September 30, 2024, federal funds are used for the majority of the expenditures in 
fiscal 2023 and 2024 ($1.1 million and $4.4 million, respectively) and a small portion of 
the expenditures in fiscal 2025 ($817,200). Beginning in fiscal 2026, the first full 
fiscal year in which federal funding is no longer available for SNAP reimbursements, 
general fund expenditures increase by up to $4.2 million annually. The Department of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 502/ Page 6 
Legislative Services (DLS) notes that, even in the absence of the bill, a portion of the 
expenditures in the first several years of implementation would be incurred due to the new 
federal requirements regarding the reimbursement for the fraudulent use of SNAP benefits 
during the limited time period. 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $11.4 million in 
general/federal funds for reimbursement of lost benefits due to EBT card fraud for 
fiscal 2023 and 2024. Specifically, the budget includes approximately $757,000 in general 
funds and $2.6 million in federal funds for fiscal 2023 and $1.8 million in general funds 
and $6.3 million in federal funds for fiscal 2024. Based on the data and assumptions 
discussed below, this funding is presumed to be more than sufficient to meet the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
Restoration of Benefits – Benefits Lost Between January 1, 2021, and October 1, 2022 
 
Based on updated information from DHS, between January 1, 2021, and October 1, 2022, 
there were 1,099 total incidents of fraudulent EBT card use, with the value of associated 
benefits (cash assistance and SNAP) estimated at approximately $808,300. Most of these 
lost benefits are likely eligible for reimbursement from DHS, which is required to restore 
benefits lost during this time period, as specified, by September 1, 2023. Accordingly, this 
estimate accounts for general fund expenditures increasing by $808,300 over fiscal 2023 
and 2024 to provide restoration of lost benefits due to theft for these households. This 
analysis assumes that the affected households have their benefits restored, even if the 
household is no longer eligible to receive benefits at the time of restoration.  
 
Restoration of Benefits – Benefits Lost After October 1, 2022 
 
Reported Benefits Lost:  According to DHS, between October 1, 2022, and April 1, 2023, 
there were 2,715 total incidents of fraudulent EBT card use, with the value of associated 
benefits exceeding $1.8 million (approximately $410,500 of cash assistance and 
$1,448,200 of SNAP lost benefits reported). DLS notes that, although the bill establishes 
specific provisions (discussed above) for benefits lost between January 1, 2021, and 
October 1, 2022, the bill does not include a retroactive provision or otherwise specifically 
address the restoration of benefits lost after October 1, 2022, but before the bill’s effective 
date. (As an emergency bill, the bill is effective upon enactment; the Governor signed the 
bill April 24, 2023.) However, for purposes of this fiscal and policy note, it is assumed 
such benefits are eligible for restoration under the bill, with associated general/federal fund 
expenditures occurring in fiscal 2023 and 2024. Furthermore, as noted above, DHS is 
already processing claims for certain benefits stolen after October 1, 2022. As previously 
stated, federal funds may be used for the reimbursement of SNAP benefits lost during this 
time period. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 502/ Page 7 
Future Benefits Lost:  Although this fiscal and policy note incorporates data from actual 
benefits lost (as reported by DHS) through the first quarter of calendar 2023, ongoing State 
expenditures to replace lost benefits may fluctuate significantly on a monthly basis. 
However, for purposes of this estimate, it is assumed that monthly expenditures associated 
with the restoration of benefits that occur after April 1, 2023, do not exceed $350,000, 
which reflects the maximum monthly amount of reimbursements incurred during 
calendar 2022 ($77,545 for cash assistance‐related reimbursements and $272,394 for 
SNAP reimbursements). Based on this assumption, reimbursements as required by the bill 
are as much as $4.2 million on an annual basis beginning in fiscal 2024 (with approximately 
$1.0 million in additional expenditures assumed to occur over fiscal 2023 and 2024 to 
account for benefits lost between April and June 2023). As noted above, federal funds may 
be used for the restoration of SNAP benefits lost between October 1, 2022, and 
September 30, 2024.  
 
Additional Provisions Related to the Department of Human Services 
 
The bill also authorizes DHS to support innovative practices to support beneficiaries during 
the time period between the reporting of the loss of benefits due to theft and the restoration 
of benefits. This fiscal and policy note does not specifically account for any costs that may 
be incurred to support such practices. 
 
DHS further advises that the bill’s requirements can be handled with existing staff. 
 
Department of General Services and Impact on Procurement 
 
The Department of General Services (DGS) advises that it needs to establish templates and 
guidelines for DHS so that DHS may include the appropriate language in solicitations 
related to EBT distribution/administration. Furthermore, training will need to be developed 
and provided by DGS. DLS advises that these are procedural requirements that can be 
accommodated using existing resources. 
 
To the extent that the bill’s provision regarding a procurement preference results in a 
contract being awarded based on criteria other than lowest price, State expenditures may 
increase. However, a reliable estimate of any such effect is not feasible until the 
procurement is finalized. Furthermore, if any vendor holds insurance that can be used to 
reimburse beneficiaries for identity fraud or theft (and is subsequently awarded a contract 
related to EBT services), expenditures for State‐provided reimbursements, as discussed 
above, may be reduced. Nevertheless, it is assumed that the potential for such insurance 
reimbursements would be factored into the vendor contract, thus likely increasing contract 
costs.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 502/ Page 8 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 2 (Senator Hester) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Carroll, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties; Department of General Services; Department of Human Services; Department of 
State Police; Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 30, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 8, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8