START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 565 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 565 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - Class 9 Limited Distillery License - Self-Distribution 
 
 
This bill authorizes a holder of a Class 9 limited distillery to apply for and obtain a Class 8 
liquor wholesaler’s license, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase minimally beginning in FY 2024, for each 
Class 8 liquor wholesaler’s license issued under the bill, as discussed below. The Alcohol 
and Tobacco Commission (ATC) can monitor additional licenses with existing budgeted 
resources.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A Class 9 limited distillery license may be issued only to a holder of a  
Class D or Class B beer, wine, and liquor license for use on the premises for which the  
Class D or B license was issued. The limited distillery license authorizes the holder to 
distill, rectify, and bottle brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits, acquire bulk 
alcoholic beverages, store the manufactured products, sell to licensed wholesalers or 
authorized out-of-state entities, sell at retail, conduct guided tours, and serve samples to 
tour participants. The holder may not possess a wholesaler’s license, sell bottled products 
on the distillery premises, exceed 100,000 gallons of production per year, sell more than 
31,000 gallons of products at retail, or be affiliated with another manufacturer. To produce 
more than 100,000 gallons, the holder must divest the Class D or B retail license and obtain 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 565/ Page 2 
a Class 1 distillery license. The holder must abide by trade practice restrictions and pay an 
annual fee of $500. 
 
A Class 8 liquor wholesaler’s license holder may be issued only to a person that holds a  
Class 1 distillery license and produces in the aggregate from all of its locations not more 
than 100,000 gallons of liquor annually. A license holder may sell and deliver its own 
liquor produced at the license holder’s premises to a holder of a retail license that is 
authorized to acquire liquor from a wholesaler; and a holder of a permit that is authorized 
to acquire liquor from a wholesaler. However, the holder may not distribute more than  
27,500 gallons of its own liquor annually. The annual license fee is $100. The license 
holder may use an additional location for the warehousing, sale, and delivery of liquor, as 
specified. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ATC advises there are currently six Class 9 limited distillery licenses 
in the State. If all six license holders obtain a Class 8 liquor wholesaler’s license under the 
bill, general fund revenues increase by $1,800 in fiscal 2024, and $780 annually thereafter 
from license, application, and renewal fees. This estimate reflects an annual license fee of 
$100 for each Class 8 liquor wholesaler’s license as well as an initial application fee of 
$200 for each license. License renewal fees are $30 annually in subsequent years.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Revenues may increase significantly for small business holders of 
a Class 9 limited distillery license that obtain a Class 8 liquor wholesaler’s license under 
the bill. Conversely, authorizing the holders of a Class 9 limited distillery license to directly 
ship their alcoholic beverages after obtaining a Class 8 liquor wholesaler’s license could 
negatively impact the revenues of small business wholesalers and retailers in the State as 
their ability to sell certain products would be centralized with the holder of the Class 8 
liquor wholesaler’s license.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 431 (Washington County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 565/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3