START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 741

Chapter 741

(House Bill 689)

AN ACT concerning

Pathways in Technology Early College High (P–TECH) School Program – High
School Diplomas

FOR the purpose of requiring that each memorandum of understanding establishing a
certain P–TECH school ensures that each P–TECH student receives a high school
diploma immediately following completion of high school graduation requirements;
and generally relating to the Pathways in Technology Early College High School
Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–1801(a), (d), (f), (h), and (i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–1802(b) and 7–1804
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–1801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) “County board” includes a consortium of county boards that have an
agreement to operate a P–TECH school that serves the students in the local school systems
that are part of the consortium.

(f) “P–TECH school” means a Pathways in Technology Early College High school
that:

(1) Is a public secondary school selected by the Department;

(2) Partners with a college partner;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 741 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Partners with an industry partner; and

(4) Has executed a memorandum of understanding in accordance with §
7–1802(b)(2) of this subtitle.

(h) “P–TECH student” means a student enrolled in a P–TECH school.

(i) “Pathway sequence” means a curriculum or course of study at a P–TECH
school that leads to a high school diploma and an associate’s degree that may be completed
within a 6–year time period.

7–1802.

(b) (1) A P–TECH school:

(i) Shall:

1. Reserve at least 50% of its available space for students
who meet the free and reduced price meal income criteria; and

2. Be established through a memorandum of understanding
executed between one or more industry partners, one or more college partners, and a county
board; and

(ii) May be established as a school within a school.

(2) The memorandum of understanding executed in accordance with
paragraph (1)(i)2 of this subsection shall include provisions ensuring that:

(i) Each P–TECH student receives:

1. Substantive mentoring by an industry partner; [and]

2. At least one paid summer internship of at least 6 weeks’
duration with an industry partner; and

3. A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA FROM THE COUNTY BOARD
IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE P–TECH SCHOOL IS LOCATED IMMEDIATELY
FOLLOWING COMPLETION OF ALL HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS,
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE P–TECH STUDENT HAS COMPLETED A PATHWAY
SEQUENCE; AND

(ii) P–TECH students are first in line for consideration for a job at
the industry partner after graduation.

7–1804.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 741

(a) A P–TECH student may not be required to pay any cost that is related to
enrollment and participation in the Program, including tuition and mandatory fees.

(b) P–TECH students shall be included in the full–time equivalent enrollment
under [§ 5–202] § 5–201 of this article as follows:

(1) Multiply the number of students who are enrolled in the fifth year of
the Program by 0.50; and

(2) Multiply the number of students who are enrolled in the sixth year of
the Program by 0.25.

(c) Student credit hours earned at a community college by a P–TECH student
shall be included in the full–time equivalent student calculation established in §§ 16–305
and 16–502 of this article.

(d) (1) (i) A P–TECH supplemental college grant is an amount equal to the
tuition and mandatory fees that would normally be charged for the classes in which the
P–TECH student is enrolled.

(ii) The State share of a P–TECH supplemental college grant shall
be calculated and distributed by the State to college partners and equals:

1. 50% for counties that received a grant under § 16–501 of
the Local Government Article in the prior fiscal year; or

2. 25% for counties that did not receive a grant under §
16–501 of the Local Government Article in the prior fiscal year.

(iii) The local share of a P–TECH supplemental college grant shall be
calculated and distributed by a county board to college partners and equals the amount not
paid by the State under this paragraph.

(2) (i) The State share of a P–TECH supplemental school grant is not
less than $750 per P–TECH student per school year and shall be used for P–TECH school
costs.

(ii) The State share of a P–TECH supplemental school grant shall be
calculated and distributed by the Department to county boards.

(iii) A county board that receives a P–TECH supplemental school
grant shall match 100% of the State share.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act may not be construed
to alter any funding calculations under Titles 5, 7, or 16 of the Education Article.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 741 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4