START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 630 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 630 
(Delegate Queen, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Utility Account Holders - Victims of Abuse - Protections 
 
 
This bill authorizes a utility account holder to terminate the account holder’s future liability 
under a utility contract if the individual is a victim of abuse, subject to specified notice and 
documentation requirements. The utility must allow for the termination, provided that the 
bill’s requirements are met. An account holder who terminates a utility contract under the 
bill is responsible for utility charges only up to and including the billing cycle during which 
written notice is submitted to the utility as part of the termination process. Additionally, 
the utility must allow the account holder to open a new utility account for a new premises, 
notwithstanding an account balance or arrearage at the former premises. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Public Service Commission (PSC) can handle the bill’s requirements 
with existing budgeted resources. The bill does not otherwise materially affect State 
finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that the bill alters existing processes, local utilities can likely 
handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Utility” means an electric company, an electricity supplier, a gas 
company, a gas supplier, a sewage disposal company, a water company, or any 
combination of these companies. “Abuse” has the meaning stated in § 4-501(b) of the 
Family Law Article. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 630/ Page 2 
The written notification required for an account holder to terminate future liability under a 
utility contract must include information documenting the abuse; more specifically, the 
notification must include either a copy of a certain enforceable final peace or protective 
order issued under specified provisions of current law or a copy of a report by a “qualified 
third party” that describes the incident, subject to additional specified requirements. A 
“qualified third party” is a licensed physician or psychologist, a social worker or 
caseworker, or an advocate from a domestic violence or sexual assault prevention or 
assistance program. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Service Commission and Utility Accounts 
 
PSC regulates gas, electric, telephone, water, sewage disposal, and certain passenger 
transportation companies doing business in Maryland. No current law or regulations 
adopted by PSC specifically address the release from a contract in the event of an account 
holder being a victim of domestic violence. 
 
A cursory review of various utility websites by the Department of Legislative Services did 
not reveal a utility policy directly addressing the release from a contract in the event of an 
account holder being a victim of domestic violence. However, that does not preclude the 
existence of such policies – whether formal or informal. 
 
The bill applies to gas and electric companies, gas and electricity suppliers (under customer 
choice), and for-profit water and sewer companies. Among similar entities not included in 
the bill, based on existing definitions in the Public Utilities Article, are telephone 
companies, government-owned water/sewer companies, and the Washington Suburban 
Sanitary Commission. 
 
Victims of Abuse 
 
An individual may generally seek relief from abuse by filing a petition for a protective 
order with the court or, if the clerk’s office is closed, with a District Court commissioner. 
Under limited circumstances, a petition may also be filed electronically from specified 
locations. 
 
Section 4-501(b) of the Family Law Article defines “abuse” as:   
 
 
an act that causes serious bodily harm; 
 
an act that places a person eligible for relief in fear of imminent serious bodily harm; 
 
assault in any degree; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 630/ Page 3 
 
rape or sexual offense under specified statutory provisions or attempted rape;  
 
sexual offense in any degree; 
 
false imprisonment; 
 
stalking; or 
 
revenge porn. 
 
If the person for whom relief is sought is a child, “abuse” may also include abuse of a child, 
as defined in statute. “Abuse” may also include abuse of a vulnerable adult, as defined in 
statute, if the person for whom relief is sought is a vulnerable adult. 
 
Additional Comments:  State data indicates about 30,000 to 35,000 domestic violence 
incidents were reported each year from 2015 through 2020. There are approximately 
2.4 million retail electric customer accounts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services; Office of People’s Counsel; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
Enrolled - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - April 12, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3