START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 674 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 674 
(Delegate Watson) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Historic Trust - Historic Preservation Loan Fund - Qualified 
Cooperating Nonprofit Organizations - Transfers 
 
 
This bill alters the uses of the Historic Preservation Loan Fund (Loan Fund) of the 
Maryland Historical Trust (MHT) by authorizing the fund to be used to make a transfer to 
a qualified cooperating nonprofit organization, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures may increase and special fund revenues may 
decrease in FY 2024 and/or future years, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “qualified cooperating nonprofit organization” means a nonprofit 
organization in good standing with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation that  
(1) is based in the State; (2) operates statewide; and (3) has demonstrated experience 
rehabilitating historic structures, managing preservation funds, and holding preservation 
easements. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 674/ Page 2 
A qualified cooperating nonprofit organization may use funds provided by MHT only: 
 
 
to pay for the qualified cooperating nonprofit organization to acquire historic 
properties or interests in historic properties for resale or lease; 
 
to pay costs, including preparation and administrative costs, to restore or rehabilitate 
historic properties owned by the qualified cooperating nonprofit organization for 
resale or lease; 
 
to make loans to other nonprofit organizations, political subdivisions, and business 
entities to acquire, rehabilitate, restore, or refinance historic properties;  
 
to make loans to individuals to rehabilitate or restore historic properties recognized 
by the National Park Service as National Historic Landmarks; or 
 
for necessary administrative and programmatic expenses associated with carrying 
out the transfer of funds. 
 
A qualified cooperating nonprofit organization must (1) develop a competitive process for 
making awards of financial assistance with funds received from MHT; (2) adopt 
appropriate guidelines, in coordination with the director of MHT, for the use of the funds 
received from MHT; and (3) make specified information available on its website regarding 
the availability and use of the funds. 
 
A qualified cooperating nonprofit organization must provide a report to MHT by 
June 30 each year outlining all funds received. The annual financial review or audit of the 
qualified cooperating nonprofit organization must be provided at the request of MHT to 
confirm the intended use of the transferred funds. 
 
Current Law:  There is a Historic Preservation Loan Program (Loan Program) and 
Loan Fund in MHT (which is within the Maryland Department of Planning). The purpose 
of the Loan Program is to implement and encourage the preservation of historic properties. 
The Loan Fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Loan Program; 
(2) money received as interest or repayment of principal on loans made under the 
Loan Program or the Capital Revolving Fund for Historic Preservation; (3) proceeds from 
the resale or lease of property originally acquired by MHT with money from the Loan Fund 
or the Capital Revolving Fund for Historic Preservation; (4) money received from other 
public or private sources for the benefit of the Loan Fund; or (5) money received from the 
sale of general obligation bonds. 
 
The Loan Fund may be used to, among other things, pay administrative costs directly 
related to the Loan Program and make loans to nonprofit organizations, political 
subdivisions, business entities, and individuals to (1) acquire, rehabilitate, restore, or 
refinance historic properties or (2) provide short-term financing for costs, including 
preparation costs, directly related to work that MHT or the State Historic Preservation 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 674/ Page 3 
Officer requires or recommends to be undertaken before a construction project financed 
with federal or State money is begun or continued. 
 
An individual or business entity may receive a loan only if the recipient can document that 
private financing is unavailable. 
 
MHT must ensure that no loan is made under the Loan Program to acquire, restore, or 
rehabilitate a historic property unless the historic property is listed in or eligible to be listed 
in the Maryland Register of Historic Properties. MHT must require the recipient of a loan 
from the Loan Program to enter into an agreement to preserve and maintain the property, 
and if the property is real property, the agreement must be a recordable historic preservation 
easement. The Secretary of Planning may waive the agreement requirement if the Secretary 
finds that an agreement is impracticable. 
 
MHT’s board of trustees must review and make recommendations to the Secretary of 
Planning about loans and expenditures from the Loan Fund, and the Secretary must 
approve each loan and expenditure from the Loan Fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund expenditures may increase in fiscal 2024 and/or future 
years for MHT to make transfers from the Loan Fund to a qualified cooperating nonprofit 
organization. The extent of any increase in special fund expenditures cannot be reliably 
determined at this time. However, for context, MHT estimates that, in fiscal 2024, the  
Loan Fund will have a beginning balance of $563,370, with fiscal 2024 revenues and 
expenditures of $176,208 and $204,000 respectively, and a fiscal 2024 ending balance of 
$535,578. The estimated $204,000 in expenditures consists of $150,000 for loans under 
the Loan Program and $54,000 for administrative expenses. An increase in special fund 
expenditures in fiscal 2024, to make a transfer from the Loan Fund to a qualified 
cooperating nonprofit organization, results in a reduced fiscal 2024 ending balance. 
 
Special fund revenues to the Loan Fund from loan payments decrease in fiscal 2024 and/or 
future years to the extent that money in the Loan Fund is spent on transfers to a qualified 
cooperating nonprofit organization rather than on loans made under the Loan Program. It 
does not appear that money transferred to a qualified cooperating nonprofit organization 
under the bill is recovered by the Loan Fund whereas funding used for loans under the 
Loan Program is recovered through loan payments to the fund. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 674/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 425 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Maryland Department of Planning; Board of Public Works; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4