START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 676 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 676 
(Delegate Wivell, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Cemeteries - Interment - Pet Remains 
 
   
This bill establishes that a registered cemeterian, registered crematory operator, or permit 
holder who sells (or offers to sell) to the public certain services for pet remains 
(i.e., cremation services, a burial lot, or a burial right) owes a duty of perpetual care for the 
cemetery in which the pet remains are interred. The bill defines “pet remains” as the body 
of a deceased animal that was kept as a pet, including the body of a pet (or a part of a pet’s 
body) in any state of decomposition or the body of a pet after having been cremated. 
Additionally, the bill makes certain provisions of law governing cemeteries applicable to 
pet cemeteries, such as redefining “interment” to include the final disposition of pet 
remains (in addition to human remains). The Director of the Office of Cemetery Oversight 
(OCO) must adopt regulations, as specified, to enforce the bill’s requirements. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on OCO within the Maryland Department of Labor is likely 
minimal. OCO can adopt the required regulations and enforce the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. Special fund revenues may be minimally affected to the extent pet 
cemeteries in the State register with OCO.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Perpetual care” means the maintenance, including the cutting of grass 
abutting memorials or monuments, as well as the administration, supervision, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 676/ Page 2 
embellishment of a cemetery and its grounds, roads, and paths. Additionally, it includes 
the repair and renewal of buildings, including columbaria and mausoleums, and the 
property of the cemetery. 
 
“Cemetery” is defined as land used or to be used for interment. “Interment” means all final 
disposition of human remains. “Cremation” means the process of reducing human remains 
to bone fragments through intense heat and evaporation. 
 
“Preneed burial contract” means a written instrument under which preneed goods or 
preneed services (i.e., services sold before the buyer’s death in connection with burial or 
cremation) are to be sold and delivered or performed.  
 
Preneed Burial Contracts 
 
A preneed burial contract must contain (1) the name the buyer; (2) the name of the seller; 
(3) the name of each individual (other than the buyer) as to whom the preneed goods or 
services are to be furnished; (4) a description of the preneed goods or services; and (5) the 
amount of the buyer’s financial obligation. 
 
If a preneed burial contract provides, for two or more individuals, preneed goods or preneed 
services to which trust requirements in State law apply, a seller may designate in the seller’s 
records the consideration paid for each individual. 
 
Office of Cemetery Oversight 
 
The primary objective of OCO is to register and monitor individuals and businesses 
engaged in the operation of cemeteries and burial goods businesses in Maryland. This 
includes individuals and companies that sell funerary monuments and memorials on a retail 
basis. OCO also regulates and provides registration for crematories under its jurisdiction 
in the State. 
 
Responsibilities of OCO include the investigation and mediation of consumer complaints 
involving registrants and permit holders. To protect Maryland citizens from unfair and 
unscrupulous practices, OCO determines and enforces the ethical standards related to the 
operation of cemeteries and those related to the provision of burial goods and services 
within the State. OCO also regulates and monitors the funds held in perpetual care and 
preneed trusts by its licensees. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 676/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3