START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 689 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 689 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Pathways in Technology Early College High (P–TECH) School Program – High 
School Diplomas 
 
 
This bill requires that each Pathways in Technology Early College High (P-TECH)  student 
receive a high school diploma immediately following completion of high school graduation 
requirements, by adding to the requirements of memoranda of understanding establishing 
P-TECH schools. The bill must not be construed to alter any funding calculations under 
Titles 5, 7, or 16 of the Education Article. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $14,000 in FY 2024 to 
update the student accountability system. As the bill is not anticipated to materially impact 
P-TECH enrollment and specifically does not alter the education funding formulas, State 
education funding expenditures are not materially affected. Revenues are not materially 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
14,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($14,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures may increase minimally to update their 
student accountability systems. Otherwise, local school systems can award a high school 
diploma to a P-TECH student immediately following completion of high school graduation 
requirements using existing resources. Revenues and expenditures from education funding 
formulas are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 689/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 144 of 2016 established P-TECH schools in Maryland, which are 
public schools that offer grades 9 through 14 and that integrate high school, college, and 
the workplace. The result is intended to be a seamless pathway that enables students to 
graduate in six years or less with a high school diploma, an associate degree, and relevant 
professional experience. One of the goals of P-TECH schools, which distinguishes them 
from other early college programs, is for students to earn a credential and workplace skills 
that are aligned with industry needs and expectations. P-TECH students are required to 
receive at least one paid summer internship of at least six weeks duration with an industry 
partner. The P-TECH program is open admission and has no cost to students. 
 
The P-TECH funding mechanisms established in Chapter 591 of 2017 include (1) inclusion 
of P-TECH students in the K-12 Foundation Program funding formula for public schools; 
(2) P-TECH planning grants; (3) P-TECH supplemental college grants; (4) P-TECH 
supplemental school grants; and (5) inclusion of P-TECH students in the 
Senator John A. Cade Funding Formula for local community colleges and the 
Baltimore City Community College funding formula. Through these formulas, funding is 
provided for P-TECH students in all years of the program, including in years five and 
six when the majority are anticipated to have completed their high school graduation 
requirements. 
 
High School Diploma Requirements 
 
With the advice of the State Superintendent of Schools, the State Board of Education (SBE) 
must establish minimum requirements for issuing certificates and diplomas by public and 
private high schools. Local school systems may establish graduation requirements beyond 
the minimum requirements established by the board. 
 
SBE must establish high school curriculum, college and career readiness standards, and 
graduation requirements for all public schools. 
 
According to State regulations, beginning with the 2022-2023 school year, to be awarded 
a Maryland high school diploma, a student must (1) complete the enrollment, credit, 
assessment, and service requirements, as specified and (2) complete local school system 
requirements. Beginning with the 2021-2022 school year, State regulations require a 
student to earn a minimum of 22 credits as specified, including four credits in mathematics. 
 
According to guidance provided by Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), 
P-TECH students should meet all Maryland high school graduation requirements by the 
fourth year of the program; thus, it is not recommended that required high school courses 
be held back. Further, the high school diploma should be kept “on file” with the local school 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 689/ Page 3 
system until the associate degree has been earned. It further states that a letter from the 
school principal or the local superintendent of schools should be used as proof that a 
P-TECH student in the fifth or sixth year of the program is in an early college program and 
has met all high school graduation requirements. 
 
Education Funding Formulas – Titles 5, 7, and 16 
 
Several education funding formulas are established in the Education Article. Title 5 
contains the major funding formulas for elementary and secondary education, including 
the foundation formula. Title 7 contains P-TECH funding formulas. Title 16 contains the 
community college funding formulas, including the Baltimore City Community College 
funding formula. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $14,000 in 
fiscal 2024 for MSDE to update the student accountability system. MSDE advises that, 
currently, students are removed from the accountability system once they graduate from 
high school. Thus, for local school systems to receive State aid for education funding for 
P-TECH students in the fifth and sixth years of the program, the system must be updated. 
Likewise, local school system expenditures may increase minimally to update their student 
accountability systems; however, any such impact cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Otherwise, MSDE can alter guidance on the awarding of high school diplomas to P-TECH 
students using existing resources. Likewise, local school systems can award a high school 
diploma to a P-TECH student immediately following completion of high school graduation 
requirements using existing resources. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially impact enrollment of students in P-TECH programs, 
and the bill specifically states that it must not be construed to alter any funding calculations 
under Titles 5, 7, or 16 of the Education Article. Thus, the funding for P-TECH students is 
not materially affected. A few students may choose to enter or leave P-TECH programs 
due to the bill; however, the overall impact is not anticipated to be material. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 822 (Senator McKay) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 689/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Baltimore City Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4