START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 341

Chapter 341

(House Bill 675)

AN ACT concerning

Commission to Study Trauma Center Funding in Maryland

FOR the purpose of establishing the Commission to Study Trauma Center Funding in
Maryland to study the adequacy of trauma center funding across the State for
operating, capital, and workforce costs; and generally relating to the Commission to
Study Trauma Center Funding in Maryland.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) In this section, “MIEMSS” means the Maryland Institute for Emergency
Medicine Services Systems.

(b) There is a Commission to Study Trauma Center Funding in Maryland.

(c) The Commission consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate;

(2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
House;

(3) the Secretary of Health, or the Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Executive Director of MIEMSS, or the Executive Director’s
designee;

(5) the Executive Director of the Maryland Health Care Commission, or the
Executive Director’s designee; and

(6) the following members, appointed by the Secretary of Health:

(i) one representative of MIEMSS;

(ii) one representative of the Maryland Trauma Center Network;

(iii) one representative of the Maryland Patient Safety Center;

(iv) one representative of the Health Services Cost Review
Commission;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 341 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v) one representative of the Maryland Health Care Commission;
and

(vi) five representatives of trauma centers in the State located in
geographically diverse regions, to the extent practicable, including:

1. one representative from a primary adult resource center;

2. one representative from a level I trauma center;

3. one representative from a level II trauma center;

4. one representative from a level III trauma center; and

5. one representative from a pediatric trauma center.

(d) The Executive Director of MIEMSS, or the Executive Director’s designee, and
the Executive Director of the Maryland Health Care Commission, or the Executive
Director’s designee, shall be the co–chairs of the Commission.

(e) MIEMSS and the Maryland Health Care Commision jointly shall provide staff
for the Commission.

(f) A member of the Commission:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Commission; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(g) The Commission shall study the adequacy of trauma center funding across the
State for operating, capital, and workforce costs, including:

(1) current funding sources for trauma centers in the State;

(2) Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund expenditures and revenues
since its inception;

(3) statutory and regulatory requirements for trauma centers at the time
the Fund was established;

(4) changes to statutory and regulatory requirements for trauma centers
since the Fund was established;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 341

(5) changes in staffing, recruitment, compensation, or other factors that
would impact the funding needed to operate a trauma center in the State;

(6) changes to approved uses of the Fund over time;

(7) the amount of funding needed to adequately fund trauma centers in the
State;

(8) the funding mechanisms available to adequately fund trauma centers;
and

(9) funding criteria that would impact the receipt of funds by existing or
new trauma centers.

(h) The Commission shall make findings and recommendations regarding:

(1) changes in staffing, recruitment, compensation, or other factors that
would impact the funding needed to operate a trauma center in the State;

(2) changes to approved uses of the Fund over time;

(3) the amount of funding needed to adequately fund trauma centers in the
State;

(4) the funding mechanisms available to adequately fund trauma centers;
and

(5) funding criteria that would impact the receipt of funds by existing or
new trauma centers.

(i) On or before December 1, 2023, the Commission shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
30, 2024, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3