START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 131

Chapter 131

(House Bill 677)

AN ACT concerning

Pride of Baltimore II – Appropriations – ~~Increase~~ ~~and~~ Extension

FOR the purpose of ~~increasing~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~amount~~ extending the appropriation from the
Transportation Trust Fund in certain fiscal years that the Governor is required to
include in the annual State budget for the operation of the replica sailing vessel
known as the Pride of Baltimore II; extending the fiscal years to which the mandated
appropriation applies; and generally relating to operating funding for the Pride of
Baltimore II.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 2–801
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 854 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

2–801.

(a) For fiscal years [2020] 2024 through [2023] 2028, the Governor shall include
in the annual State budget an appropriation of [$500,000] $600,000 from the
Transportation Trust Fund for the operation of the replica sailing vessel known as the Pride
of Baltimore II.

(b) On or before December 1, [2019] 2023, and on or before December 1 each year
thereafter, any person or entity receiving funds under this section shall submit a report to
the Department and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Appropriations Committee that
includes:

(1) An accounting of how the funds were expended, supported by properly
executed records, receipts, vouchers, invoices, and contracts that evidence the nature of the
expenditures;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 131 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) An itinerary and any other information that demonstrates that the
Pride of Baltimore II was operated solely for the purposes of promoting historical maritime
education, fostering economic development and tourism, and representing the citizens of
Maryland in every port visited; and

(3) A strategic business plan that includes:

(i) A goal to decrease or eliminate the need for State funds;

(ii) An annual operating budget and plan FOR THE CURRENT YEAR
AND THE FOLLOWING YEAR; and

(iii) To the extent practicable, the itinerary of the Pride of Baltimore
II.

Chapter 854 of the Acts of 2018

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2018. It shall remain effective for a period of [5] 10 years and, at the end of June 30,
[2023] 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2