START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 625 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 625 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill makes various changes to the existing Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining 
Financial Assistance Program within the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD). Among other things, DHCD is authorized to issue loans and related 
financial instruments for eligible projects, and financial assistance may be provided to 
affordable housing developers in sustainable communities. The bill also repeals the 
requirement that, on application by specified entities to the program, DHCD must provide 
financial assistance. Instead, the bill requires DHCD to accept the application for financial 
assistance from an individual or business entity that proposes to develop a qualified project. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes do not directly affect State operations or finances. 
Funding for the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program has 
not been budgeted since the program’s enactment. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 625/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program 
 
Chapters 702 and 703 of 2021 established the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining 
Financial Assistance Program within DHCD. The purpose of the program is to provide 
financial assistance to affordable housing developers working in low-income census tracts 
to help close appraisal gaps that occur in historically redlined neighborhoods. Under the 
bill, the purpose of the program is expanded to include providing financial assistance to 
affordable housing developers working in sustainable communities. 
 
Under current law, in the fiscal year in which a qualified project is completed, an individual 
or business entity may apply to DHCD for financial assistance to cover the appraisal gap 
for the project, as specified. Under the bill, applicants to the program may apply to 
DHCD when the qualified project is proposed. 
 
Under current law, the amount of the financial assistance provided must not exceed 35% of 
the lesser of (1) the total cost of eligible construction expenses or (2) 80% of the national 
median sale price for new homes on the date of sale, as determined by the most recent 
census data available. The bill repeals the specified amounts, and DHCD must instead 
develop by regulation an application form and a process for the distribution of financial 
assistance under the program. 
 
The bill establishes that a qualified project receiving financial assistance under the program 
must be in compliance with local development and land use plans. 
 
Under current law, “affordable” means that monthly housing costs do not exceed 30% of 
a household’s income, where the household’s income does not exceed 80% of the statewide 
median income for a household of like size. Under the bill, “affordable” means that 
monthly housing costs are affordable to a family of limited income, as determined by the 
Community Development Administration. 
 
The bill also modifies the definition of “eligible construction expenses,” which is currently 
defined as any amount that is expended on the construction or substantial rehabilitation of 
a qualified property, including any amount expended on specified acquisition and 
construction costs and related improvement activities. Under the bill, “eligible construction 
expenses” includes infrastructure and other expenses as determined by the Secretary of 
Housing and Community Development. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 625/ Page 3 
Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program Report 
 
Chapters 702 and 703 also require DHCD to conduct a study, aggregated by race, zip codes, 
and census tracts, of housing values, appraisals, and refinancing rates across the State over 
the past 30 years, including the impact of State and federal policies, such as infrastructure 
(road, park, and water and sewer) and other investments, on those communities. 
DHCD was required to submit the findings of the study to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by June 30, 2022; as of the writing of this fiscal and policy note, the 
report is not yet available. 
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas 
 
Under current law, a sustainable community is defined as a part of a priority funding area 
that (1) is designated by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the 
Secretary of Housing and Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base 
Realignment and Closure Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a 
transit-oriented development.  
 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 445 (Senator Hayes) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 625/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4