START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 669 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 669 
(Delegate Holmes, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Real Estate Appraisers - Licensing and Certification - Qualifications 
 
 
This bill establishes an alternative pathway for obtaining (1) licensure as a real estate 
appraiser and (2) certification as a residential or general real estate appraiser. Specifically, 
it allows applicants for licensure or certification to complete the Real Property Appraiser 
Qualification Criteria of the Practical Applications of Real Estate Appraisal program 
adopted by the Appraisal Foundation Appraiser Qualifications Board. Completion of the 
program may be substituted for the existing statutory requirement that an applicant for 
licensure or certification complete at least 1,000 or 1,500 hours, respectively, providing 
real estate appraiser services as a trainee under the supervision of a certified appraiser. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures likely increase due to an influx of 
additional licensure and certification applicants, but a reliable estimate is not feasible, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute requires that, in addition to other requirements, an applicant for 
initial licensure or certification must have completed at least 1,000 hours of real estate 
appraiser services as a trainee under the supervision of a certified appraiser. However, 
regulations specify requirements of 1,000 hours for licensure, 1,500 hours for residential 
certification, and 3,000 hours for general real estate certification. Additional requirements 
for licensure include being at least 18 years of age and passing an examination given by 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 669/ Page 2 
the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and 
Home Inspectors, or the commission’s designee. These requirements still apply to 
applicants who complete the alternative program.  
 
Licensing fees accrue to the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal 
Management Companies, and Home Inspectors Fund. They must be set to produce funds 
to approximate the cost of maintaining the commission. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal 
Management Companies, and Home Inspectors advises that the bill is expected to 
significantly increase the number of individuals qualifying for licensure/certification but is 
unable to provide a reliable estimate of any such increase. As a result, the commission’s 
revenues likely increase from licensing/certification fees, and it likely incurs additional 
expenses to manage licensing/certification, renewals, and complaints. Additional 
personnel may also be required if the increase in licensees and certified appraisers results 
in a higher volume of consumer complaints that must be investigated and processed. 
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services cannot reliably estimate the impact on 
the commission at this time due to uncertainty regarding the number of individuals who 
may qualify as a result of the alternative pathway to licensure/certification. However, it is 
assumed that the commission adjusts licensing/certification and other fees to accommodate 
any increase in operating expenses, as required by statute. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 455 (Senator Hayes, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2