START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 615 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 615 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Workgroup on Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, and Other 
Underrepresented Behavioral Health Professionals - Extension of Dates 
 
 
This bill extends by one year the reporting and termination dates for the Workgroup on 
Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, and Other Underrepresented Behavioral 
Health Professionals. The workgroup must submit a report on its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by July 1, 2024. The 
workgroup terminates June 30, 2025. The bill takes effect June 1, 2022, and terminates 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional expense reimbursements for members of the workgroup or a 
subgroup of the workgroup and staffing costs for the University System of 
Maryland (USM) and the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) from extending the 
workgroup are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  USM and MDH must jointly provide staff for the workgroup. The 
workgroup may establish a subgroup within the workgroup to assist in carrying out the 
workgroup’s duties, including conducting research and producing reports. A subgroup may 
include an individual who is not a member of the workgroup. A member of the workgroup 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 615/ Page 2 
or any established subgroup may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement 
for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The workgroup must identify and study the shortage of behavioral health professionals in 
the State who are Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, or otherwise 
underrepresented in the behavioral health profession. The workgroup must also assess and 
make recommendations on incentives, or other methods to increase the number of 
(1) specified or underrepresented students who study at an institution of higher education 
in the State to be behavioral health professionals and (2) specified or underrepresented 
behavioral health professionals who provide behavioral health services in the State, 
especially in underserved communities. 
 
The workgroup must submit a report on its findings and recommendations to the Governor 
and the General Assembly by July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2