START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 614 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 614 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Department of Aging - Long-Term Care and Dementia Care Navigation 
Programs 
 
 
This bill requires each area agency on aging (AAA), subject to the limitations of the 
funding provided, to develop a long-term care and dementia care navigation program that 
consists of new or existing services. The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) must 
oversee and train navigation program staff and disseminate best practices and collect 
interaction data to ensure statewide program integrity. By October 1, 2024, and annually 
thereafter, MDOA must submit a report on navigation services, as specified, and publish 
the report on the MDOA website. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must include in 
the annual budget bill an appropriation of $2.4 million to manage the navigation programs 
statewide and fund the programs locally, distributed as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOA general fund expenditures increase by $79,700 in FY 2024 for 
personnel; future years reflect ongoing costs and the bill’s mandated appropriation, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
79,700 
2,400,000 
2,400,000 
2,400,000 
2,400,000 
Net Effect 
($79,700) 
($2,400,000) 
($2,400,000) 
($2,400,000) 
($2,400,000)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  For those AAAs that are units of local government, revenues and 
expenditures increase beginning in FY 2025 from mandated funding to establish navigation 
programs.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 614/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Long-Term Care and Dementia Care Navigation Programs 
 
Each AAA may staff its navigation program using existing resources or hire an individual 
for the program. The duties of the navigation program include:   
 
 
providing information and referrals to long-term care and chronic disease services;  
 
providing cognitive screening for individuals concerned with their cognition; 
 
providing programs that engage individuals who demonstrate symptoms of 
dementia that interfere with activities of daily living (ADLs), regular exercise, and 
social activities; 
 
providing support for caregivers of individuals who demonstrate symptoms of 
dementia that interfere with ADLs; 
 
consulting with and providing technical assistance to AAA staff who interact with 
individuals with dementia diagnoses or cognitive changes that may be associated 
with dementia; and 
 
establishing relationships with health care providers to facilitate contact between 
health care providers and individuals who demonstrate symptoms of dementia that 
interfere with ADLs as well as the caregivers of such individuals. 
 
The services provided by the navigation programs must be provided along with single 
point-of-entry programs and services for frail or health-impaired seniors. The work of the 
navigation programs must be guided by the recommendations of the State Plan on Aging 
and the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Council. 
 
Funding from the mandated appropriation must be distributed proportionally to each AAA 
based on a formula that considers the number of individuals who will likely need long-term 
care or dementia care services in each jurisdiction. 
 
Current Law:  In Maryland, each of the 23 counties and Baltimore City designate an 
AAA. The agency may be a unit of local government or a private, nonprofit corporation. 
AAAs provide a variety of adult services, incorporating assisted living, protective services, 
and temporary disability programs. 
 
Each AAA must operate a single point-of-entry program to access the needs of seniors and 
their caregivers and provide appropriate services, including (1) providing current 
information on available programs, services, or benefits; (2) determining the service needs 
of each senior who requests service; (3) processing requests for service from seniors; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 614/ Page 3 
(4) providing access to available public and private programs and services for seniors; 
(5) monitoring the outcome of requests for service or information; and (6) arranging for 
individual screenings to determine the service needs of a frail or health-impaired senior. 
 
MDOA must administer the system for the Interagency Committee on Aging Services to 
develop a system to provide services to frail or health-impaired seniors at risk of 
institutionalization and coordinate the system among the agencies represented on the 
committee. Provided services must include (1) integrated screening and evaluation; 
(2) development of an individual plan of care; (3) in-home services; and (4) community 
services such as day care, congregate meals, and other programs to assist seniors or adult 
caregivers in providing care for seniors. 
 
Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Council 
 
Chapters 305 and 306 of 2013 established the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and 
Related Disorders Council for a three-year period. Chapters 410 and 411 of 2019 required 
the council to submit an annual report and extended the council’s termination date to 
September 30, 2024. The council must (1) update the State Plan on Alzheimer’s Disease 
and Related Disorders and advocate for the State plan; (2) examine the needs for 
individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders (ADRDs) and their caregivers 
and identify methods through which the State can most effectively and efficiently assist in 
meeting those needs; (3) advise the Governor and the General Assembly on policy, 
funding, regulatory, and other issues related to individuals with ADRDs and their 
caregivers; and (4) develop and promote strategies to encourage brain health and reduce 
cognitive decline. 
 
Chapters 349 and 350 of 2021 require the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in 
partnership with MDOA, the council, and the Greater Maryland Chapter of the Alzheimer’s 
Association, to incorporate specified information regarding cognitive impairment, 
Alzheimer’s disease, and other types of dementia into relevant public health outreach 
programs to educate health care providers and increase public understanding and 
awareness. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDOA general fund expenditures increase by $79,733 in 
fiscal 2024, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective 
date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager to oversee and train the 
staff of navigation programs, disseminate best practices, collect interaction data, and 
submit the required annual report (the first of which is due by October 1, 2024). It includes 
a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. Although 
fiscal 2024 funding is discretionary, it is assumed the position is funded to prepare for 
implementation the following year. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 614/ Page 4 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$72,324 
Operating Expenses 
    7,409 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$79,733 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $2.4 million to manage the navigation programs statewide and fund the 
programs locally. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $2.4 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025, to reflect the mandated appropriation. This analysis assumes that 
MDOA personnel costs are paid using the mandated appropriation, with the remainder of 
funds (approximately $2.3 million annually) distributed to AAAs to fund local navigation 
programs. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, funds must be distributed proportionally to each AAA 
based on a formula determined by MDOA that considers the number of individuals who 
will likely need long-term care or dementia care services in each jurisdiction. AAAs must 
use the funds to manage the navigation programs. Therefore, beginning in fiscal 2025, for 
those AAAs that are units of local governments, local revenues increase from funds 
provided under the mandated appropriation. Local expenditures increase to fund navigation 
programs. Implementation of the navigation programs is subject to the limitation of the 
funding provided to each AAA under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $3.5 million in general funds for Family Health and Chronic Disease Services 
within MDH to implement the Maryland State Plan to Address Alzheimer’s Disease and 
Related Dementias:  2022-2026 submitted by the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease 
and Related Disorders Council. The plan includes the following five goals:  (1) expand 
efforts to support public awareness, prevention, and early detection of ADRDs; (2) enhance 
quality, access, and coordination of ADRD care; (3) enhance and expand supports for 
family caregivers; (4) advance ADRD research and encourage evidence-based practices; 
and (5) enhance data capabilities related to dementia and dementia impact and effects of 
interventions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 505 and HB 731 of 2022 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 614/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 228 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, and 
Queen Anne’s counties; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5