START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 636 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 636 
(Delegate Guzzone) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Information Act - Inspection of E-Mail Addresses and Telephone 
Numbers 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “personal information” under the Maryland Public 
Information Act (PIA) to include an individual’s email address. The bill makes other 
changes under PIA that establishes when a custodian is prohibited from allowing, or 
authorized to allow, the inspection of records related to email addresses and telephone 
numbers, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on PIA-related activities is not expected to materially affect 
State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Any impact on PIA-related activities is not expected to materially affect 
local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Student Records 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, a custodian must deny inspection 
of a school district record about the specified personal information of a student, including 
their home telephone number. However, a custodian may allow inspection of the specified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 636/ Page 2 
personal information of the student, including their home telephone number, by specified 
entities (such as institutions of higher education or school board employees). 
 
Under the bill, a custodian must deny inspection of a school district record about, among 
other things, a student’s telephone number and personal email address. The bill authorizes 
a custodian to allow inspection of, among other things, the student’s telephone number and 
personal email address by specified entities. 
 
State and Local Government Employees 
 
Subject to specified provisions under the State Personnel and Pensions Article regarding 
the release of retiree information to public employee organizations, a custodian must, under 
current law, deny inspection of the part of a public record that contains the home address 
or telephone number of an employee in a unit or an instrumentality of the State or of a 
political subdivision unless (1) the employee gives permission for the inspection, or (2) the 
unit or instrumentality that employs the individual determines that inspection is needed to 
protect the interest of the public. 
 
Under the bill, the part of the public record the custodian must deny inspection of also 
includes the personal telephone number or the personal email address of a specified 
employee. 
 
Notaries Public 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, a custodian must deny inspection 
of the part of a public record that contains information about the application and 
commission of a person as a public notary. However, a custodian must allow inspection of 
the part of a public record that gives specified information regarding the public notary, 
such as their name, business address, or business telephone number. 
 
Under the bill, a custodian must also allow inspection of the part of a public record that 
gives the notary public’s business email address or, if a business email address is not 
provided to the custodian by the notary public, the notary public’s personal email address. 
 
Licensing Records 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, a custodian must deny inspection 
of the part of a public record that contains information about the licensing of an individual 
in an occupation or profession. However, a custodian must allow inspection of the part of 
a public record that gives specified business information, such as the name of the licensee, 
the business address, or the business telephone number of the licensee. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 636/ Page 3 
Under the bill, a custodian must also allow inspection of the part of a public record that 
gives the business email address of the licensee, if the email address is identified by the 
licensee as a business email address. 
 
Maryland Public Information Act 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
Denials 
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the Maryland 
Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for specified 
personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, personnel and 
student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial information, and shielded 
criminal and police records. Chapter 62 of 2021 specifies that a record relating to an 
administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police officer is not a protected 
personnel record under PIA and requires a custodian to allow access to such records by 
federal and State prosecutors. 
 
Discretionary Denials:  Unless otherwise specified, if a custodian believes that inspection 
of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to the public interest, the 
custodian may deny inspection to the applicant of that part of the record. PIA specifies the 
types of records and information that are eligible for discretionary denials, including 
documents that would not be available through discovery in a lawsuit. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 636/ Page 4 
Procedure for Denial:  A custodian who denies inspection of a public record must, within 
10 working days, provide a written statement to the applicant that gives (1) the reason for 
denial; (2) if denying a part of a record on a discretionary basis, a brief explanation of why 
the denial is necessary and why redacting information would not address the reasons for 
the denial; (3) the legal authority for the denial; (4) a brief description of the undisclosed 
record (without disclosing the protected information); and (5) notice of the available 
statutory remedies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal League; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Baltimore City Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4