START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 665 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 665 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Comptroller and State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Enhancing 
Access to Property Tax Benefits - Report 
 
   
This bill requires the Comptroller and the State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
(SDAT) to confer during the 2023 legislative interim to identify ways the Comptroller 
could collaborate with SDAT to enhance access and raise awareness to specified property 
tax benefits available to taxpayers. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and terminates 
June 30, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $18,000 in FY 2024 for SDAT to hire 
a consultant. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires the Comptroller and SDAT to confer during the 2023 
legislative interim to identify ways the Comptroller could collaborate with SDAT to: 
 
 
enhance access to the property tax benefits administered by SDAT;  
 
raise awareness of the property tax benefits and encourage taxpayers to apply; and  
 
make the application process for the homeowners’ and renters’ tax credits simpler 
and more user-friendly by reducing or eliminating the need for the applicant to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 665/ Page 2 
separately report income information to SDAT on the homeowners’ and renters’ tax 
credit applications that the applicant has already reported to the Comptroller. 
 
The Comptroller and SDAT must submit a joint report of their findings and 
recommendations to the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Budget and 
Taxation Committee by December 1, 2023. The report must include the amount of funding 
required and the timeline to implement any changes in policies or procedures 
recommended in the report.         
 
Current Law:    
 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program 
 
The Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program is a State-funded program that provides 
credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who qualify based on 
a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. Counties and municipalities have the 
authority to enact local supplements to the program; the cost of such supplemental credits 
must be borne by the local governments. The fiscal 2024 State budget includes 
$56.5 million in funding for the program. 
 
Homestead Property Tax Credit Program 
 
The Homestead Property Tax Credit Program provides tax credits against State, county, 
and municipal real property taxes for owner-occupied residential properties for the amount 
of real property taxes attributable to assessed values that exceed an annual assessment 
percentage increase or “cap” in any given year. The amount of the annual assessment cap 
is (1) 10%, for purposes of the credit against State property taxes; (2) 10% or less, as set 
by each county, for purposes of the credit against county property taxes; and (3) 10% or 
less, as set by the municipality (otherwise the county cap applies), for the municipal 
property tax credit. The cost of the credits against local property taxes is assumed by the 
local government. The effect of the homestead property tax credit is to smooth tax 
collections so that taxes increase more slowly than the increase in property values when 
values are appreciating substantially. When property values increase moderately, 
collections “catch up” as the homestead property tax credit available to taxpayers declines. 
This gives property owners tax relief and makes revenue estimates more predictable.        
 
Renters’ Property Tax Credit Program 
 
The Renters’ Property Tax Credit Program provides financial assistance for elderly, 
disabled, and certain low-income renters from the cost attributable to State and local real 
property taxes. The concept behind the program is that renters indirectly pay property taxes 
as part of their rent and, thus, should have some protection, as do homeowners. The 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 665/ Page 3 
program makes payments directly to eligible renters to provide relief for the “assumed 
property tax” that renters indirectly pay as part of their rent. The fiscal 2024 State budget 
includes $4.4 million for the program.   
 
Property Tax Exemption for Disabled Veterans and Surviving Spouses. 
 
The real property owned by disabled veterans, as their legal residence, is exempt from 
taxation, if specified requirements are met. A disabled veteran is an individual who is 
honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service in any 
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. To qualify for the tax exemption, the disabled veteran 
must have a 100% service-connected disability rating. Real property owned by the 
surviving spouse of a disabled veteran and the surviving spouse of an individual who died 
in the line of duty while in active military, naval, or air service of the United States is 
exempt from taxation. In addition, a home owned by the surviving spouse of a veteran of 
the U.S. Armed Forces who receives Dependency and Indemnity Compensation from the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is eligible for a property tax exemption under 
specified circumstances. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SDAT advises that general fund expenditures will increase by 
$18,000 in fiscal 2024 to hire a consultant to assist in conducting the required report. The 
Comptroller’s Office can assist with the report with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3