START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 648 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 648 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Garrett County - Tax Sales - Auctioneer Fees 
 
 
This bill increases the auctioneer’s fee that is allowed as an expense of a tax sale in 
Garrett County, from $8 to $10 for each property sold. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Garrett County finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The auctioneer’s fee for properties sold at a tax sale auction in 
Garrett County that may be included as an expense of the sale, is $8 for each property sold. 
Expenses relating to the sale of a property are liens on the property. Except in the case of 
certain abandoned property, the expenses of the sale of a property are included in the sale 
price and paid by the purchaser, and the liens for the expenses are passed to the purchaser. 
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report, 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. The office was established in 2020, pursuant 
to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 648/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 384 (Senator McKay) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - May 15, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2