START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

Chapter 715

(House Bill 687)

AN ACT concerning

Estates and Trusts – Trusts – Decanting
(Maryland Trust Decanting Act)

FOR the purpose of establishing rules governing the exercise of the decanting power to
distribute the property of a first trust to one or more second trusts or modify the
terms of a first trust; applying this Act retroactively; and generally relating to the
Maryland Trust Decanting Act.

BY adding to
Article – Estates and Trusts
Section 14–601 through 14–625 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 6. Maryland
Trust Decanting Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Estates and Trusts

SUBTITLE 6. MARYLAND TRUST DECANTING ACT.

14–601.

(A) THE DEFINITIONS IN § 14.5–103 OF THIS ARTICLE APPLY IN THIS
SUBTITLE.

(B) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(C) (1) “AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY” MEANS A TRUSTEE OR OTHER
FIDUCIARY, OTHER THAN A SETTLOR, WHO HAS DISCRETION TO DISTRIBUTE OR
DIRECT A TRUSTEE TO DISTRIBUTE ALL OR PART OF THE PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST
TRUST TO A BENEFICIARY.

(2) “AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY” INCLUDES:

(I) A SPECIAL FIDUCIARY APPOINTED UNDER § 14–606 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A SPECIAL NEEDS FIDUCIARY, AS DEFINED IN § 14–610 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) “CHARITABLE INTEREST” MEANS AN INTEREST IN A TRUST THAT:

(1) IS HELD BY AN IDENTIFIED CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION AND
MAKES THE ORGANIZATION A QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY;

(2) BENEFITS ONLY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS AND, IF THE
INTEREST WERE HELD BY AN IDENTIFIED CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION, WOULD
MAKE THE ORGANIZATION A QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY; OR

(3) IS HELD SOLELY FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES AND, IF THE
INTEREST WERE HELD BY AN IDENTIFIED CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION, WOULD
MAKE THE ORGANIZATION A QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY.

(E) “CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION” MEANS:

(1) A PERSON, OTHER THAN AN INDIVIDUAL, ORGANIZED AND
OPERATED EXCLUSIVELY FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES; OR

(2) A GOVERNMENT OR GOVERNMENTAL SUBDIVISION, AGENCY, OR
INSTRUMENTALITY THAT HOLDS FUNDS EXCLUSIVELY FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES.

(F) “COURT” MEANS THE COURT IN THIS STATE HAVING JURISDICTION IN
MATTERS RELATING TO TRUSTS.

(G) (1) “CURRENT BENEFICIARY” MEANS A BENEFICIARY THAT, ON THE
DATE THE BENEFICIARY’S QUALIFICATION IS DETERMINED, IS A DISTRIBUTEE OR
PERMISSIBLE DISTRIBUTEE OF TRUST INCOME OR PRINCIPAL.

(2) “CURRENT BENEFICIARY” INCLUDES A PERSON WHO IS A
BENEFICIARY SOLELY BECAUSE THE PERSON HOLDS A PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE
GENERAL POWER OF APPOINTMENT.

(3) “CURRENT BENEFICIARY” DOES NOT INCLUDE A PERSON WHO IS
A BENEFICIARY ONLY BECAUSE THE PERSON HOLDS A POWER OF APPOINTMENT
OTHER THAN A PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE GENERAL POWER OF APPOINTMENT.

(H) “DECANTING POWER” MEANS THE POWER OF AN AUTHORIZED
FIDUCIARY TO DISTRIBUTE PROPERTY OF A FIRST TRUST TO ONE OR MORE SECOND
TRUSTS OR TO MODIFY THE TERMS OF A FIRST TRUST.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(I) “EXPANDED DISTRIBUTIVE DISCRETION” MEANS A DISCRETIONARY
POWER OF DISTRIBUTION THAT IS NOT LIMITED TO AN ASCERTAINABLE STANDARD
OR A REASONABLY DEFINITE STANDARD.

(J) “FIRST TRUST” MEANS A TRUST OVER WHICH AN AUTHORIZED
FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE DECANTING POWER.

(K) “FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT” MEANS THE TRUST INSTRUMENT OF A
FIRST TRUST.

(L) “POWERHOLDER” MEANS A PERSON IN WHICH A SETTLOR CREATES A
POWER OF APPOINTMENT.

(M) (1) “PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE POWER OF APPOINTMENT” MEANS A
POWER OF APPOINTMENT EXERCISABLE BY THE POWERHOLDER AT THE RELEVANT
TIME.

(2) “PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE POWER OF APPOINTMENT” INCLUDES
A POWER OF APPOINTMENT EXERCISABLE ONLY AFTER THE OCCURRENCE OF A
SPECIFIED EVENT, THE SATISFACTION OF AN ASCERTAINABLE STANDARD, OR THE
PASSAGE OF A SPECIFIED TIME ONLY AFTER:

(I) THE OCCURRENCE OF THE SPECIFIED EVENT;

(II) THE SATISFACTION OF THE ASCERTAINABLE STANDARD; OR

(III) THE PASSAGE OF THE SPECIFIED TIME.

(3) “PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE POWER OF APPOINTMENT” DOES NOT
INCLUDE A POWER EXERCISABLE ONLY AT THE POWERHOLDER’S DEATH.

(N) “REASONABLY DEFINITE STANDARD” MEANS A CLEARLY MEASURABLE
STANDARD UNDER WHICH A HOLDER OF A POWER OF DISTRIBUTION IS LEGALLY
ACCOUNTABLE WITHIN THE MEANING OF 26 U.S.C. § 674(B)(5)(A) AND ANY
APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.

(O) “RECORD” MEANS INFORMATION THAT IS:

(1) INSCRIBED ON A TANGIBLE MEDIUM; OR

(2) (I) STORED IN AN ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEDIUM; AND

(II) RETRIEVABLE IN PERCEIVABLE FORM.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(P) “SECOND TRUST” MEANS:

(1) A FIRST TRUST WHICH HAS BEEN MODIFIED UNDER THIS TITLE;
OR

(2) A TRUST TO WHICH A DISTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY FROM A FIRST
TRUST HAS OR MAY BE MADE UNDER THIS TITLE.

(Q) “SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT” MEANS THE TRUST INSTRUMENT OF A
SECOND TRUST.

14–602.

(A) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, THIS SUBTITLE
APPLIES TO ANY EXPRESS TRUST THAT:

(1) IS IRREVOCABLE OR REVOCABLE BY THE SETTLOR ONLY WITH
THE CONSENT OF THE TRUSTEE OR A PERSON HOLDING AN ADVERSE INTEREST; AND

(2) (I) HAS ITS PRINCIPAL PLACE OF ADMINISTRATION IN THIS
STATE, INCLUDING A TRUST WHOSE PRINCIPAL PLACE OF ADMINISTRATION HAS
BEEN CHANGED TO THIS STATE; OR

(II) IS GOVERNED BY THE LAW OF THIS STATE FOR THE
PURPOSE OF:

1. ADMINISTRATION, INCLUDING ADMINISTRATION OF A
TRUST WHOSE GOVERNING LAW FOR PURPOSES OF ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN
CHANGED TO THE LAW OF THIS STATE;

2. CONSTRUCTION OF THE TERMS OF THE TRUST; OR

3. DETERMINING THE MEANING OR EFFECT OF THE
TERMS OF THE TRUST.

(B) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO A TRUST HELD SOLELY FOR
CHARITABLE PURPOSES.

(C) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, A TRUST
INSTRUMENT MAY RESTRICT OR PROHIBIT THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING
POWER.

(D) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT LIMIT THE POWER OF A TRUSTEE, A
POWERHOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PERSON TO:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(1) DISTRIBUTE OR APPOINT PROPERTY IN FURTHER TRUST; OR

(2) MODIFY A TRUST UNDER THE TRUST INSTRUMENT, LAW OF THIS
STATE OTHER THAN THIS TITLE, COMMON LAW, A COURT ORDER, OR A NONJUDICIAL
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT.

(E) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT LIMIT THE ABILITY OF A SETTLOR TO
PROVIDE IN A TRUST INSTRUMENT FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OR APPOINTMENT IN
FURTHER TRUST OF TRUST PROPERTY OR THE MODIFICATION OF THE TRUST
INSTRUMENT.

14–603.

(A) IN EXERCISING THE DECANTING POWER, AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY
SHALL ACT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS FIDUCIARY DUTIES, INCLUDING THE DUTY TO
ACT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PURPOSES OF THE FIRST TRUST.

(B) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT CREATE OR IMPLY A DUTY TO EXERCISE THE
DECANTING POWER OR GIVE NOTICE TO BENEFICIARIES OF THE APPLICABILITY OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN A FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT, FOR
PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE AND §§ 14.5–801 AND 14.5–802(A) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE
TERMS OF THE FIRST TRUST ARE DEEMED TO INCLUDE THE DECANTING POWER.

14–604.

A TRUSTEE OR OTHER PERSON WHO REASONABLY RELIES ON THE VALIDITY
OF A DISTRIBUTION OF TRUST PROPERTY TO ANOTHER TRUST OR ON A
MODIFICATION OF A TRUST UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE LAW OF THIS STATE, OR THE
LAW OF ANY OTHER JURISDICTION IS NOT LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR ANY ACT OR
FAILURE TO ACT AS A RESULT OF THE RELIANCE.

14–605.

(A) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, AN AUTHORIZED
FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF ANY
PERSON AND WITHOUT COURT APPROVAL.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION AND
PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY SHALL GIVE
NOTICE IN A RECORD OF ANY INTENDED EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER AT
LEAST 60 DAYS BEFORE THE EXERCISE TO:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) EACH SETTLOR OF THE FIRST TRUST, IF LIVING OR THEN IN
EXISTENCE;

(II) EACH QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST AND
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL IF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL HAS THE RIGHTS OF A
QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY UNDER § 14–611 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(III) EACH HOLDER OF A PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE POWER OF
APPOINTMENT OVER ANY PART OF THE FIRST TRUST;

(IV) EACH PERSON THAT CURRENTLY HAS A RIGHT TO REMOVE
OR REPLACE THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY; AND

(V) ANY OTHER FIDUCIARY OF THE FIRST OR SECOND TRUSTS.

(2) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY IS NOT REQUIRED TO GIVE NOTICE
TO ANY PERSON UNDER THIS SUBSECTION IF THE PERSON IS NOT KNOWN TO THE
FIDUCIARY OR IS KNOWN TO THE FIDUCIARY AND CANNOT BE LOCATED AFTER
REASONABLE DILIGENCE.

(C) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL:

(1) SPECIFY THE MANNER IN WHICH THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY
INTENDS TO EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER;

(2) SPECIFY THE PROPOSED EFFECTIVE DATE FOR THE EXERCISE OF
THE POWER; AND

(3) INCLUDE A COPY OF THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT AND ALL
SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENTS.

(D) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER
SOONER THAN 60 DAYS AFTER PROVIDING THE NOTICE REQUIRED BY SUBSECTION
(B) OF THIS SECTION IF ALL PERSONS ENTITLED TO RECEIVE THE NOTICE WAIVE
THE PERIOD IN A SIGNED RECORD.

(E) THE RECEIPT OF NOTICE, WAIVER OF THE NOTICE PERIOD, OR
EXPIRATION OF THE NOTICE PERIOD DOES NOT AFFECT THE RIGHT OF A PERSON TO
FILE AN APPLICATION ASSERTING THAT:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(1) AN ATTEMPTED EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER IS
INEFFECTIVE BECAUSE THE EXERCISE:

(I) DID NOT COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(II) WAS AN ABUSE OF DISCRETION; OR

(III) WAS A BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY; OR

(2) § 14–619 OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES TO THE EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER.

(F) AN EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER IS NOT INEFFECTIVE BECAUSE
AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY FAILED TO GIVE NOTICE AS REQUIRED BY SUBSECTION
(B) OF THIS SECTION IF THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY ACTED WITH REASONABLE
CARE TO COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

14–606.

ON APPLICATION OF AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY OR A PERSON ENTITLED TO
RECEIVE NOTICE UNDER § 14–605 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A COURT MAY:

(1) PROVIDE INSTRUCTIONS TO THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY
REGARDING DETERMINE WHETHER A PROPOSED OR ATTEMPTED EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER IS ALLOWED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND CONSISTENT WITH THE
FIDUCIARY DUTIES OF THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY;

(2) APPOINT A SPECIAL FIDUCIARY AND AUTHORIZE THE SPECIAL
FIDUCIARY TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE DECANTING POWER SHOULD BE
EXERCISED AND TO EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER;

(3) APPROVE THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER;

(4) DETERMINE THAT THE PROPOSED OR ATTEMPTED EXERCISE OF
THE DECANTING POWER IS INEFFECTIVE:

(I) DUE TO A FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF
THIS SUBTITLE;

(II) AS AN ABUSE OF THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY’S
DISCRETION; OR

(III) AS A BREACH OF THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY’S FIDUCIARY
DUTIES;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) DETERMINE THE EXTENT TO WHICH § 14–619 OF THIS SUBTITLE
APPLIES TO A PRIOR EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER;

(6) PROVIDE INSTRUCTIONS TO THE TRUSTEE REGARDING
DETERMINE THE APPLICATION OF § 14–619 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO A PRIOR
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER; OR

(7) ORDER OTHER RELIEF TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS
TITLE.

14–607.

(A) ANY EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER SHALL BE MADE IN A
RECORD SIGNED BY AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY.

(B) (1) THE RECORD REQUIRED BY THIS SUBSECTION SHALL IDENTIFY:

(I) THE FIRST TRUST;

(II) ANY SECOND TRUST;

(III) ANY PROPERTY BEING DISTRIBUTED TO A SECOND TRUST;
AND

(IV) ANY PROPERTY REMAINING IN THE FIRST TRUST.

(2) THE RECORD REQUIRED BY THIS SUBSECTION MAY INCLUDE
INFORMATION BY REFERENCE TO THE NOTICE REQUIRED BY § 14–605 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

14–608.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “NONCONTINGENT RIGHT” MEANS A RIGHT THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO THE EXERCISE OF DISCRETION OR THE OCCURRENCE OF A SPECIFIED
EVENT THAT IS NOT CERTAIN TO OCCUR.

(II) “NONCONTINGENT RIGHT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A RIGHT
HELD BY A BENEFICIARY IF ANY OTHER PERSON HAS DISCRETION TO DISTRIBUTE
PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THE RIGHT TO ANY PERSON OTHER THAN THE BENEFICIARY
OR THE BENEFICIARY’S ESTATE.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(3) “PRESUMPTIVE REMAINDER BENEFICIARY” MEANS A QUALIFIED
BENEFICIARY OTHER THAN A CURRENT BENEFICIARY.

(4) (I) “SUCCESSOR BENEFICIARY” MEANS A BENEFICIARY THAT
IS NOT A QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY ON THE DATE THAT THE BENEFICIARY’S
QUALIFICATION IS DETERMINED.

(II) “SUCCESSOR BENEFICIARY” DOES NOT INCLUDE A PERSON
THAT IS A BENEFICIARY SOLELY BECAUSE THE PERSON HOLDS A NONGENERAL
POWER OF APPOINTMENT.

(5) “VESTED INTEREST” MEANS:

(I) A RIGHT TO A MANDATORY DISTRIBUTION THAT IS A
NONCONTINGENT RIGHT AS OF THE DATE OF THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING
POWER;

(II) A CURRENT AND NONCONTINGENT RIGHT, AT LEAST
ANNUALLY, TO A MANDATORY DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME, A SPECIFIED DOLLAR
AMOUNT, OR A PERCENTAGE VALUE OF SOME OR ALL OF THE TRUST PROPERTY;

(III) A CURRENT AND NONCONTINGENT RIGHT, AT LEAST
ANNUALLY, TO WITHDRAW INCOME, A SPECIFIED DOLLAR AMOUNT, OR A
PERCENTAGE VALUE OF SOME OR ALL OF THE TRUST PROPERTY;

(IV) A PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE GENERAL POWER OF
APPOINTMENT; OR

(V) A RIGHT TO RECEIVE AN ASCERTAINABLE PART OF TRUST
PROPERTY ON TERMINATION OF THE TRUST THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO THE EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION OR THE OCCURRENCE OF A SPECIFIED EVENT THAT IS NOT CERTAIN
TO OCCUR.

(B) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN § 14–610 OF THIS SUBTITLE, AN
AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY THAT HAS EXPANDED DISTRIBUTIVE DISCRETION OVER
THE PRINCIPAL OF A FIRST TRUST FOR THE BENEFIT OF ONE OR MORE CURRENT
BENEFICIARIES MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER OVER THE PRINCIPAL OF
THE FIRST TRUST.

(C) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN § 14–610 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IN
EXERCISING THE DECANTING POWER, A SECOND TRUST MAY NOT:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION,
INCLUDE AS A CURRENT BENEFICIARY A PERSON THAT IS NOT A CURRENT
BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST;

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION,
INCLUDE AS A PRESUMPTIVE REMAINDER BENEFICIARY OR SUCCESSOR
BENEFICIARY A PERSON THAT IS NOT A CURRENT BENEFICIARY, PRESUMPTIVE
REMAINDER BENEFICIARY, OR SUCCESSOR BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST; OR

(3) REDUCE OR ELIMINATE A VESTED INTEREST.

(D) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C)(3) OF THIS SECTION AND § 14–611 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, IN THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER UNDER THIS SECTION, ONE
OR MORE SECOND TRUSTS MAY BE CREATED OR ADMINISTERED UNDER THE LAW OF
ANY JURISDICTION AND MAY:

(1) RETAIN A POWER OF APPOINTMENT GRANTED IN THE FIRST
TRUST;

(2) OMIT A POWER OF APPOINTMENT GRANTED IN THE FIRST TRUST,
OTHER THAN A PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE GENERAL POWER OF APPOINTMENT;

(3) CREATE OR MODIFY A POWER OF APPOINTMENT IF THE
POWERHOLDER IS A CURRENT BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST AND THE
AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY HAS EXPANDED DISTRIBUTIVE DISCRETION TO
DISTRIBUTE PRINCIPAL TO THAT BENEFICIARY; OR

(4) CREATE OR MODIFY A POWER OF APPOINTMENT IF THE
POWERHOLDER IS A PRESUMPTIVE REMAINDER BENEFICIARY OR SUCCESSOR
BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST AND THE EXERCISE OF THE POWER MAY TAKE
EFFECT ONLY AFTER THE POWERHOLDER BECOMES, OR WOULD HAVE BECOME IF
THEN LIVING, A CURRENT BENEFICIARY.

(E) (1) A POWER OF APPOINTMENT DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF
THIS SECTION MAY BE GENERAL OR NONGENERAL.

(2) THE CLASS OF PERMISSIBLE APPOINTEES IN FAVOR OF WHICH A
POWER OF APPOINTMENT DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION MAY BE
EXERCISED MAY BE BROADER THAN OR DIFFERENT FROM THE BENEFICIARIES OF
THE FIRST TRUST.

(F) IF AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY HAS EXPANDED DISTRIBUTIVE
DISCRETION OVER PART BUT NOT ALL OF THE PRINCIPAL OF A FIRST TRUST, THE

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER UNDER THIS
SECTION ONLY OVER THE PART OF THE PRINCIPAL OVER WHICH THE AUTHORIZED
FIDUCIARY HAS EXPANDED DISTRIBUTIVE DISCRETION.

14–609.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DEFERRED DISTRIBUTION” MEANS A PROVISION IN A SECOND
TRUST THAT DEFERS OR POSTPONES, AS COMPARED WITH THE FIRST TRUST, A
CONTINGENT RIGHT OF A BENEFICIARY TO RECEIVE AN OUTRIGHT DISTRIBUTION
OF ASSETS ON THE ATTAINMENT OF A CERTAIN AGE OR THE OCCURRENCE OF A
SPECIFIED EVENT.

(3) “LIMITED DISTRIBUTIVE DISCRETION” MEANS A DISCRETIONARY
POWER OF DISTRIBUTION THAT IS LIMITED TO AN ASCERTAINABLE STANDARD OR A
REASONABLY DEFINITE STANDARD.

(B) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY WHO HAS LIMITED DISTRIBUTIVE
DISCRETION OVER THE PRINCIPAL OF A FIRST TRUST MAY EXERCISE THE
DECANTING POWER OVER THE PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST TRUST.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO § 14–611 OF THIS SUBTITLE, ONE OR MORE SECOND
TRUSTS MAY BE CREATED OR ADMINISTERED UNDER THE LAW OF ANY
JURISDICTION.

(2) THE SECOND TRUSTS, IN THE AGGREGATE, SHALL GRANT EACH
BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST BENEFICIAL INTERESTS THAT ARE
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO THE BENEFICIARY’S BENEFICIAL INTERESTS UNDER
THE FIRST TRUST.

(3) NOTWITHSTANDING PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
SECOND TRUST MAY:

(I) INCLUDE A DEFERRED DISTRIBUTION, IF THE SECOND
TRUST PROVIDES THAT:

1. DURING THE LIFETIME OF THE BENEFICIARY, NO
PORTION OF THE INCOME OR PRINCIPAL ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE DEFERRED
DISTRIBUTION MAY BE DISTRIBUTED TO, OR FOR THE BENEFIT OF, ANY PERSON
OTHER THAN THE BENEFICIARY; AND

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. A. THE BENEFICIARY SHALL HAVE A
TESTAMENTARY QUALIFIED POWER OF APPOINTMENT EXERCISABLE IN FAVOR OF
THE BENEFICIARY’S ESTATE OVER THE DEFERRED DISTRIBUTION; OR

B. THE DEFERRED DISTRIBUTION SHALL BE PAYABLE
TO THE BENEFICIARY’S ESTATE IF THE SECOND TRUST DOES NOT TERMINATE
DURING THE BENEFICIARY’S LIFETIME;

(II) EXPAND A POWER OF APPOINTMENT EXISTING IN THE FIRST
TRUST TO INCLUDE AS PERMISSIBLE APPOINTEES THE CREDITORS OF THE
POWERHOLDER’S ESTATE; OR

(III) NARROW A POWER OF APPOINTMENT EXISTING IN THE
FIRST TRUST THAT IS NOT PRESENTLY EXERCISABLE TO REMOVE AS PERMISSIBLE
APPOINTEES ANY OF THE FOLLOWING:

1. THE POWERHOLDER;

2. THE POWERHOLDER’S ESTATE;

3. THE CREDITORS OF THE POWERHOLDER; OR

4. THE CREDITORS OF THE POWERHOLDER’S ESTATE.

(D) (1) A POWER TO MAKE A DISTRIBUTION UNDER A SECOND TRUST FOR
THE BENEFIT OF A BENEFICIARY WHO IS AN INDIVIDUAL IS SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR
TO A POWER UNDER THE FIRST TRUST TO MAKE A DISTRIBUTION DIRECTLY TO THE
BENEFICIARY.

(2) A DISTRIBUTION IS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE BENEFICIARY IF:

(I) THE DISTRIBUTION IS APPLIED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE
BENEFICIARY;

(II) 1. THE BENEFICIARY IS UNDER A LEGAL DISABILITY OR
THE TRUSTEE REASONABLY BELIEVES THE BENEFICIARY IS INCAPACITATED; AND

2. THE DISTRIBUTION IS MADE AS ALLOWED BY THIS
TITLE; OR

(III) THE DISTRIBUTION IS MADE AS ALLOWED UNDER THE
TERMS OF THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT AND THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE BENEFICIARY.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(E) IF AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY HAS LIMITED DISTRIBUTIVE
DISCRETION OVER PART OF BUT NOT ALL OF THE PRINCIPAL OF A FIRST TRUST, THE
AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER UNDER THIS
SECTION ONLY OVER THE PART OF THE PRINCIPAL OVER WHICH THE AUTHORIZED
FIDUCIARY HAS LIMITED DISTRIBUTIVE DISCRETION.

14–610.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY” MEANS A BENEFICIARY OF A
FIRST TRUST WHO THE SPECIAL NEEDS FIDUCIARY REASONABLY BELIEVES
QUALIFIES FOR GOVERNMENTAL BENEFITS BASED ON DISABILITY, WHETHER OR
NOT THE BENEFICIARY CURRENTLY RECEIVES GOVERNMENTAL BENEFITS OR HAS
BEEN ADJUDICATED INCAPACITATED.

(3) “GOVERNMENTAL BENEFITS” MEANS FINANCIAL AID OR
SERVICES FROM A STATE, FEDERAL, OR OTHER PUBLIC AGENCY.

(4) “SPECIAL NEEDS FIDUCIARY” MEANS, WITH RESPECT TO A TRUST
THAT HAS A BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY:

(I) A TRUSTEE OR OTHER FIDUCIARY, OTHER THAN A SETTLOR,
THAT HAS DISCRETION TO DISTRIBUTE PART OR ALL OF THE PRINCIPAL OF A FIRST
TRUST TO ONE OR MORE CURRENT BENEFICIARIES;

(II) IF NO TRUSTEE OR FIDUCIARY HAS DISCRETION UNDER
ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A TRUSTEE OR OTHER FIDUCIARY, OTHER THAN A
SETTLOR, THAT HAS DISCRETION TO DISTRIBUTE PART OR ALL OF THE INCOME OF
THE FIRST TRUST TO ONE OR MORE CURRENT BENEFICIARIES; OR

(III) IF NO TRUSTEE OR FIDUCIARY HAS DISCRETION UNDER
ITEM (I) OR (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A TRUSTEE OR OTHER FIDUCIARY, OTHER
THAN A SETTLOR, THAT IS REQUIRED TO DISTRIBUTE PART OR ALL OF THE INCOME
OR PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST TRUST TO ONE OR MORE CURRENT BENEFICIARIES.

(5) “SPECIAL NEEDS TRUST” MEANS A TRUST THAT THE TRUSTEE
REASONABLY BELIEVES WOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A RESOURCE FOR THE
PURPOSE OF DETERMINING WHETHER A BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY IS
ELIGIBLE FOR GOVERNMENTAL BENEFITS.

(B) A SPECIAL NEEDS FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER
OVER THE PRINCIPAL OF A FIRST TRUST AS IF THE FIDUCIARY HAD AUTHORITY TO
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DISTRIBUTE PRINCIPAL TO A BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY SUBJECT TO
EXPANDED DISTRIBUTED DISCRETION, IF:

(1) A SECOND TRUST IS A SPECIAL NEEDS TRUST THAT BENEFITS THE
BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY; AND

(2) THE SPECIAL NEEDS FIDUCIARY DETERMINES THAT THE
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER WILL FURTHER PURPOSES OF THE FIRST
TRUST.

(C) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION TO THE CONTRARY, IN AN
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER UNDER THIS SECTION:

(1) THE INTEREST IN A SECOND TRUST OF A BENEFICIARY WITH A
DISABILITY MAY, BUT IS NOT REQUIRED TO:

(I) BE A POOLED TRUST, AS DEFINED IN TITLE 42 OF THE
UNITED STATES CODE, FOR A BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY; OR

(II) CONTAIN PAYBACK PROVISIONS COMPLYING WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR REIMBURSEMENT IN TITLE 42 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE;

(2) A SECOND TRUST MAY REDUCE OR ELIMINATE A VESTED
INTEREST OF A BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY; AND

(3) EXCEPT AS AFFECTED BY ANY CHANGE TO THE INTERESTS OF THE
BENEFICIARY WITH A DISABILITY, A SECOND TRUST, OR SECOND TRUSTS IN THE
AGGREGATE, SHALL GRANT EACH OTHER BENEFICIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST
BENEFICIAL INTERESTS IN THE SECOND TRUSTS THAT ARE SUBSTANTIALLY
SIMILAR TO THE BENEFICIARY’S BENEFICIAL INTERESTS IN THE FIRST TRUST.

14–611.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DETERMINABLE CHARITABLE INTEREST” MEANS A CHARITABLE
INTEREST THAT IS A RIGHT TO A MANDATORY DISTRIBUTION CURRENTLY,
PERIODICALLY, ON THE OCCURRENCE OF A SPECIFIED EVENT, OR AFTER PASSAGE
OF A SPECIFIED TIME AND THAT IS UNCONDITIONAL OR WILL BE HELD SOLELY FOR
CHARITABLE PURPOSES.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(3) (I) “UNCONDITIONAL” MEANS NOT SUBJECT TO THE
OCCURRENCE OF A SPECIFIED EVENT THAT IS NOT CERTAIN TO OCCUR.

(II) “UNCONDITIONAL” INCLUDES AN INTEREST SUBJECT TO
THE SOLE, OTHER THAN A REQUIREMENT THAT A CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION BE IN
EXISTENCE OR QUALIFY UNDER ANY A PARTICULAR PROVISION OF TITLE 26 OF THE
UNITED STATES CODE ON THE DATE OF THE DISTRIBUTION, IF THE CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION MEETS THE REQUIREMENT ON THE DATE OF DETERMINATION.

(B) (1) IF A FIRST TRUST CONTAINS A DETERMINABLE CHARITABLE
INTEREST, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL HAS THE RIGHTS OF A QUALIFIED
BENEFICIARY AND MAY REPRESENT AND BIND THE CHARITABLE INTEREST.

(2) IF A FIRST TRUST CONTAINS A CHARITABLE INTEREST, A SECOND
TRUST MAY NOT:

(I) DIMINISH THE CHARITABLE INTEREST;

(II) DIMINISH THE INTEREST OF AN IDENTIFIED CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION THAT HOLDS THE CHARITABLE INTEREST;

(III) ALTER ANY CHARITABLE PURPOSE STATED IN THE FIRST
TRUST INSTRUMENT; OR

(IV) ALTER ANY CONDITION OR RESTRICTION RELATED TO THE
CHARITABLE INTEREST.

(3) IF A FIRST TRUST CONTAINS A DETERMINABLE CHARITABLE
INTEREST, THE SECOND TRUST SHALL BE ADMINISTERED UNDER THE LAW OF THIS
STATE, UNLESS:

(I) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE OF
THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER, DOES NOT OBJECT WITHIN 60 DAYS
AFTER RECEIVING THE NOTICE;

(II) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL CONSENTS IN A SIGNED RECORD
TO THE SECOND TRUST BEING ADMINISTERED UNDER THE LAW OF ANOTHER
JURISDICTION; OR

(III) A COURT APPROVES THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING
POWER.

(C) IF THERE ARE TWO OR MORE SECOND TRUSTS, THE SECOND TRUSTS
SHALL BE TREATED AS ONE TRUST FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING WHETHER THE
– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER DIMINISHES THE CHARITABLE INTEREST OR
DIMINISHES THE INTEREST OF AN IDENTIFIED CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION FOR
PURPOSES OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

14–612.

(A) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY NOT EXERCISE THE DECANTING
POWER TO THE EXTENT THAT THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT EXPRESSLY
PROHIBITS EXERCISE OF:

(1) THE DECANTING POWER; OR

(2) A POWER GRANTED BY STATE LAW TO THE FIDUCIARY TO
DISTRIBUTE ALL OR PART OF THE TRUST TO ANOTHER TRUST OR TO MODIFY THE
TRUST.

(B) EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER IS SUBJECT TO ANY RESTRICTION
IN THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT THAT EXPRESSLY APPLIES TO EXERCISE OF:

(1) THE DECANTING POWER; OR

(2) A POWER GRANTED BY STATE LAW TO THE FIDUCIARY TO
DISTRIBUTE ALL OR PART OF THE TRUST TO ANOTHER TRUST OR TO MODIFY THE
TRUST.

(C) EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER IS NOT PROHIBITED BY:

(1) A GENERAL PROHIBITION OF THE AMENDMENT OR REVOCATION
OF A FIRST TRUST;

(2) A SPENDTHRIFT CLAUSE; OR

(3) A CLAUSE RESTRAINING THE VOLUNTARY OR INVOLUNTARY
TRANSFER OF A BENEFICIARY’S INTEREST.

(D) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (A) AND (B) OF THIS SECTION, AN
AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER EVEN IF THE FIRST
TRUST INSTRUMENT ALLOWS THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY OR ANOTHER PERSON
TO MODIFY THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT OR TO DISTRIBUTE PART OR ALL OF THE
PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST TRUST TO ANOTHER TRUST.

(E) IF A FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT CONTAINS AN EXPRESS PROHIBITION OR
RESTRICTION DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A) OR (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE SAME

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTION SHALL BE INCLUDED IN ANY SECOND TRUST
INSTRUMENT.

14–613.

AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY NOT EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER TO
INCREASE THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY’S COMPENSATION, UNLESS:

(1) ALL QUALIFIED BENEFICIARIES OF THE SECOND TRUST CONSENT
TO THE INCREASE IN A SIGNED RECORD;

(2) A COURT APPROVES THE INCREASE; OR

(3) THE INCREASE IS INCIDENTAL TO OTHER CHANGES MADE BY THE
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER.

14–614.

(A) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, A SECOND TRUST
INSTRUMENT MAY NOT:

(1) RELIEVE AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY FROM LIABILITY FOR
BREACH OF TRUST TO A GREATER EXTENT THAN A FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT; OR

(2) REDUCE FIDUCIARY LIABILITY IN THE AGGREGATE.

(B) A SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY PROVIDE FOR INDEMNIFICATION
OF AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST OR ANOTHER PERSON ACTING
AS A FIDUCIARY OF THE FIRST TRUST FOR ANY LIABILITY OR CLAIM THAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN PAYABLE FROM THE FIRST TRUST IF THE DECANTING POWER HAD NOT
BEEN EXERCISED.

(C) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION, A SECOND TRUST
INSTRUMENT MAY DIVIDE AND REALLOCATE FIDUCIARY POWERS AMONG
FIDUCIARIES, INCLUDING ONE OR MORE TRUSTEES, DISTRIBUTION ADVISORS,
INVESTMENT ADVISORS, TRUST PROTECTORS, OR OTHER PERSONS, AND RELIEVE A
FIDUCIARY FROM LIABILITY FOR AN ACT OR FAILURE TO ACT OF ANOTHER
FIDUCIARY AS ALLOWED BY THE LAW OF THIS STATE OTHER THAN THIS TITLE.

14–615.

AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY NOT EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER TO
MODIFY A PROVISION IN A FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT GRANTING ANOTHER PERSON
THE POWER TO REMOVE OR REPLACE THE AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY UNLESS:
– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) IF THE MODIFICATION APPLIES ONLY TO THE PERSON, THE
PERSON HOLDING THE POWER CONSENTS TO THE MODIFICATION IN A SIGNED
RECORD;

(2) THE PERSON HOLDING THE POWER AND THE QUALIFIED
BENEFICIARIES OF THE SECOND TRUST CONSENT TO THE MODIFICATION IN A
SIGNED RECORD AND THE MODIFICATION GRANTS A SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR
POWER TO ANOTHER PERSON; OR

(3) A COURT APPROVES THE MODIFICATION AND THE MODIFICATION
GRANTS A SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR POWER TO ANOTHER PERSON.

14–616.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “GRANTOR TRUST” MEANS A TRUST AS TO WHICH A SETTLOR OF A
FIRST TRUST IS CONSIDERED THE OWNER UNDER 26 U.S.C. §§ 671 THROUGH 677
OR § 679.

(3) “INTERNAL REVENUE CODE” MEANS TITLE 26 OF THE UNITED
STATES CODE.

(4) “NONGRANTOR TRUST” MEANS A TRUST THAT IS NOT A GRANTOR
TRUST.

(5) “QUALIFIED BENEFITS PROPERTY” MEANS PROPERTY SUBJECT
TO THE MINIMUM DISTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS OF 26 U.S.C. § 401(A)(9), ANY
APPLICABLE REGULATIONS, OR SIMILAR REQUIREMENTS.

(6) (I) “TAX BENEFIT” MEANS A FEDERAL OR STATE TAX
DEDUCTION, EXEMPTION, EXCLUSION, OR OTHER BENEFIT.

(II) “TAX BENEFIT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A BENEFIT ARISING
FROM BEING A GRANTOR TRUST.

(B) (1) IF THE FIRST TRUST CONTAINS PROPERTY THAT QUALIFIED, OR
WOULD HAVE QUALIFIED BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE OTHER THAN
THIS SECTION, FOR A MARITAL DEDUCTION FOR PURPOSES OF THE GIFT TAX OR
ESTATE TAX UNDER THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OR A STATE GIFT, ESTATE, OR
INHERITANCE TAX, THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT INCLUDE OR OMIT

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

ANY TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED IN OR OMITTED FROM THE TRUST INSTRUMENT FOR
THE TRUST TO WHICH PROPERTY WAS TRANSFERRED, WOULD HAVE PREVENTED
THE TRANSFER FROM QUALIFYING FOR THE DEDUCTION OR WOULD HAVE REDUCED
THE AMOUNT OF THE DEDUCTION UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THE INTERNAL
REVENUE CODE OR STATE LAW UNDER WHICH THE TRANSFER QUALIFIED.

(2) IF THE FIRST TRUST CONTAINS PROPERTY THAT QUALIFIED, OR
WOULD HAVE QUALIFIED BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE OTHER THAN
THIS SECTION, FOR A CHARITABLE DEDUCTION FOR PURPOSES OF THE INCOME,
GIFT, OR ESTATE TAX UNDER THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OR A STATE INCOME,
GIFT, ESTATE, OR INHERITANCE TAX, THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT
INCLUDE OR OMIT ANY TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED IN OR OMITTED FROM THE TRUST
INSTRUMENT FOR THE TRUST TO WHICH THE PROPERTY WAS TRANSFERRED,
WOULD HAVE PREVENTED THE TRANSFER FROM QUALIFYING FOR THE DEDUCTION
OR WOULD HAVE REDUCED THE AMOUNT OF THE DEDUCTION UNDER THE SAME
PROVISIONS OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OR STATE LAW UNDER WHICH THE
TRANSFER QUALIFIED.

(3) (I) IF THE FIRST TRUST CONTAINS PROPERTY THAT
QUALIFIED, OR WOULD HAVE QUALIFIED BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS
SUBTITLE OTHER THAN THIS SECTION, FOR THE EXCLUSION FROM THE GIFT TAX
DESCRIBED IN 26 U.S.C. § 2503(B), THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT
INCLUDE OR OMIT A TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED OR OMITTED FROM THE TRUST
INSTRUMENT FOR THE TRUST TO WHICH THE PROPERTY WAS TRANSFERRED,
WOULD HAVE PREVENTED THE TRANSFER FROM QUALIFYING UNDER 26 U.S.C. §
2503(B).

(II) IF THE FIRST TRUST CONTAINS PROPERTY THAT
QUALIFIED, OR WOULD HAVE QUALIFIED BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS
SUBTITLE OTHER THAN THIS SECTION, FOR THE EXCLUSION FROM THE GIFT TAX
DESCRIBED IN 26 U.S.C. § 2503(B) BY APPLICATION OF 26 U.S.C. § 2503(C), THE
SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT INCLUDE OR OMIT A TERM THAT, IF
INCLUDED OR OMITTED FROM THE TRUST INSTRUMENT FOR THE TRUST TO WHICH
THE PROPERTY WAS TRANSFERRED, WOULD HAVE PREVENTED THE TRANSFER
FROM QUALIFYING UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 2503(C).

(4) (I) IF THE PROPERTY OF THE FIRST TRUST INCLUDES SHARES
OF STOCK IN AN S CORPORATION, AS DEFINED IN THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE,
AND THE FIRST TRUST IS, OR WOULD BE BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE
OTHER THAN THIS SECTION, A PERMITTED SHAREHOLDER UNDER ANY PROVISION
OF 26 U.S.C. § 1361, AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING
POWER WITH RESPECT TO PART OR ALL OF THE S CORPORATION STOCK ONLY IF ANY

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECOND TRUST RECEIVING THE STOCK IS A PERMITTED SHAREHOLDER UNDER 26
U.S.C. § 1361(C)(2).

(II) IF THE PROPERTY OF THE FIRST TRUST INCLUDES SHARES
OF STOCK IN AN S CORPORATION, AS DEFINED IN THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE,
AND THE FIRST TRUST IS, OR WOULD BE BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE
OTHER THAN THIS SECTION, A QUALIFIED SUBCHAPTER S TRUST WITHIN THE
MEANING OF 26 U.S.C. § 1361(D), THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT
INCLUDE OR OMIT A TERM THAT PREVENTS THE SECOND TRUST FROM QUALIFYING
AS A QUALIFIED SUBCHAPTER S TRUST.

(5) IF THE FIRST TRUST CONTAINS PROPERTY THAT QUALIFIED, OR
WOULD HAVE QUALIFIED BUT FOR ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE OTHER THAN
THIS SECTION, FOR A ZERO INCLUSION RATIO FOR PURPOSES OF THE
GENERATION–SKIPPING TRANSFER TAX UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 2642(C), THE SECOND
TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT INCLUDE OR OMIT A TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED OR
OMITTED FROM THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT, WOULD HAVE PREVENTED THE
TRANSFER TO THE FIRST TRUST FROM QUALIFYING FOR A ZERO INCLUSION RATIO
UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 2642(C).

(6) (I) IF THE FIRST TRUST IS DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY THE
BENEFICIARY OF QUALIFIED BENEFITS PROPERTY, THE SECOND TRUST
INSTRUMENT MAY NOT INCLUDE OR OMIT ANY TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED IN OR
OMITTED FROM THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT, WOULD HAVE INCREASED THE
MINIMUM DISTRIBUTIONS REQUIRED WITH RESPECT TO THE QUALIFIED BENEFITS
PROPERTY UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 401(A)(9) AND ANY APPLICABLE REGULATION OR
SIMILAR REQUIREMENTS.

(II) IF AN ATTEMPTED EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER
VIOLATES THIS PARAGRAPH:

1. THE TRUSTEE IS DEEMED TO HAVE HELD THE
QUALIFIED BENEFITS PROPERTY AND ANY REINVESTED DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE
PROPERTY AS A SEPARATE SHARE FROM THE DATE OF THE EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER; AND

2. § 14–619 OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES TO THE
SEPARATE SHARE.

(7) IF THE FIRST TRUST QUALIFIES AS A GRANTOR TRUST BECAUSE
OF THE APPLICATION OF 26 U.S.C. § 672(F)(2)(A), THE SECOND TRUST MAY NOT
INCLUDE OR OMIT A TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED OR OMITTED FROM THE FIRST TRUST

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

INSTRUMENT, WOULD HAVE PREVENTED THE FIRST TRUST FROM QUALIFYING
UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 672(F)(2)(A).

(8) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (9) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A SECOND
TRUST INSTRUMENT MAY NOT INCLUDE OR OMIT A TERM THAT, IF INCLUDED OR
OMITTED FROM THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT, WOULD HAVE PREVENTED
QUALIFICATION FOR A TAX BENEFIT IF:

(I) 1. THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT EXPRESSLY
INDICATES AN INTENT TO QUALIFY FOR THE BENEFIT; OR

2. THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT IS CLEARLY
DESIGNED TO ENABLE THE FIRST TRUST TO QUALIFY FOR THE BENEFIT; AND

(II) THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE FIRST TRUST
OR THE FIRST TRUST QUALIFIED, OR WOULD HAVE QUALIFIED BUT FOR ANY
PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE OTHER THAN THIS SECTION, FOR THE TAX BENEFIT.

(9) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBSECTION, THE
SECOND TRUST MAY BE A NONGRANTOR TRUST OR A GRANTOR TRUST.

(10) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY NOT EXERCISE THE DECANTING
POWER IF A SETTLOR OBJECTS IN A SIGNED RECORD DELIVERED WITHIN THE
NOTICE PERIOD TO THE FIDUCIARY AND:

(I) 1. THE FIRST TRUST AND A SECOND TRUST ARE BOTH
GRANTOR TRUSTS, IN WHOLE OR IN PART;

2. THE FIRST TRUST GRANTS THE SETTLOR OR
ANOTHER PERSON THE POWER TO CAUSE THE FIRST TRUST TO CEASE TO BE A
GRANTOR TRUST; AND

3. THE SECOND TRUST DOES NOT GRANT AN
EQUIVALENT POWER TO THE SETTLOR OR OTHER PERSON; OR

(II) THE FIRST TRUST IS A NONGRANTOR TRUST AND A SECOND
TRUST IS A GRANTOR TRUST, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, WITH RESPECT TO THE
SETTLOR, UNLESS:

1. THE SETTLOR HAS THE POWER AT ALL TIMES TO
CAUSE THE SECOND TRUST TO CEASE TO BE A GRANTOR TRUST; OR

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. A. THE FIRST TRUST INSTRUMENT CONTAINS A
PROVISION GRANTING THE SETTLOR OR ANOTHER PERSON A POWER THAT WOULD
CAUSE THE FIRST TRUST TO CEASE TO BE A GRANTOR TRUST; AND

B. THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT CONTAINS THE
SAME PROVISION.

14–617.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A SECOND TRUST MAY
HAVE A DURATION THAT IS THE SAME AS OR DIFFERENT FROM THE DURATION OF
THE FIRST TRUST.

(B) TO THE EXTENT THAT THE PROPERTY OF A SECOND TRUST IS
ATTRIBUTABLE TO PROPERTY OF A FIRST TRUST, THE PROPERTY OF THE SECOND
TRUST IS SUBJECT TO ANY RULES GOVERNING MAXIMUM PERPETUITY,
ACCUMULATION, OR SUSPENSION OF THE POWER OF ALIENATION THAT APPLY TO
THE PROPERTY OF THE FIRST TRUST.

14–618.

AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY EXERCISE THE DECANTING POWER
WHETHER OR NOT UNDER THE FIRST TRUST’S DISCRETIONARY DISTRIBUTION
STANDARD THE FIDUCIARY WOULD HAVE MADE OR COULD HAVE BEEN COMPELLED
TO MAKE A DISCRETIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF PRINCIPAL AT THE TIME OF THE
EXERCISE.

14–619.

(A) IF AN EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER VIOLATES THE PROVISIONS
OF THIS SUBTITLE SOLELY BECAUSE A SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT IN PART DOES
NOT COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE EXERCISE IS
EFFECTIVE.

(B) IF AN EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER IS EFFECTIVE
NOTWITHSTANDING A FAILURE TO MEET ANY REQUIREMENT OF THIS SUBTITLE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, WITH RESPECT TO THE
PRINCIPAL OF THE SECOND TRUST ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE EXERCISE OF THE
POWER:

(1) ANY PROVISION IN THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT PROHIBITED
BY THIS SUBTITLE IS VOID TO THE EXTENT NECESSARY TO COMPLY WITH THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(2) THE SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT SHALL BE TREATED AS
CONTAINING ANY PROVISION WHICH IS REQUIRED BY THIS SUBTITLE BUT NOT
INCLUDED IN THE INSTRUMENT.

(C) IF A TRUSTEE OR OTHER FIDUCIARY OF A SECOND TRUST DETERMINES
THAT AN EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER IS EFFECTIVE NOTWITHSTANDING A
FAILURE TO MEET ANY REQUIREMENT OF THIS SUBTITLE UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION, THAT FIDUCIARY SHALL TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.

14–620.

(A) THE DECANTING POWER MAY BE EXERCISED FOR A TRUST
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14.5–407 OF THIS ARTICLE TO THE SAME EXTENT THAT THE
DECANTING POWER COULD BE EXERCISED IF EACH ANIMAL BENEFITTING FROM THE
TRUST WERE A PERSON.

(B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS TITLE, IN AN
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER UNDER THIS SECTION, THE SECOND TRUST
MUST PROVIDE THAT TRUST PROPERTY MAY BE APPLIED ONLY TO ITS INTENDED
PURPOSE FOR THE PERIOD THE FIRST TRUST BENEFITTED THE ANIMAL.

14–621.

A REFERENCE IN TITLE 14.5 OF THIS ARTICLE TO A TRUST INSTRUMENT OR
TERMS OF A TRUST INCLUDES A SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT AND THE TERMS OF A
SECOND TRUST.

14–622.

(A) A SETTLOR OF A FIRST TRUST IS DEEMED TO BE THE SETTLOR OF THE
SECOND TRUST WITH RESPECT TO ANY PORTION OF THE PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST
TRUST SUBJECT TO THE EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER.

(B) IN DETERMINING SETTLOR INTENT WITH RESPECT TO A SECOND TRUST,
A COURT MAY CONSIDER THE INTENT OF:

(1) A SETTLOR OF THE FIRST TRUST;

(2) A SETTLOR OF THE SECOND TRUST; AND

(3) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY.

14–623.

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 715 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, IF AN
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER WAS INTENDED TO DISTRIBUTE ALL THE
PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST TRUST TO ONE OR MORE SECOND TRUSTS,
LATER–DISCOVERED PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE FIRST TRUST AND PROPERTY
PAID TO OR ACQUIRED BY THE FIRST TRUST AFTER THE EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER IS PART OF THE TRUST ESTATE OF THE SECOND TRUST OR
TRUSTS.

(B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, IF AN
EXERCISE OF THE DECANTING POWER WAS INTENDED TO DISTRIBUTE LESS THAN
ALL OF THE PRINCIPAL OF THE FIRST TRUST TO ONE OR MORE SECOND TRUSTS,
LATER–DISCOVERED PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE FIRST TRUST OR PROPERTY
PAID TO OR ACQUIRED BY THE FIRST TRUST AFTER THE EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER REMAINS PART OF THE TRUST ESTATE OF THE FIRST TRUST.

(C) AN AUTHORIZED FIDUCIARY MAY PROVIDE IN AN EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER OR THE TERMS OF A SECOND TRUST INSTRUMENT FOR THE
DISPOSITION OF LATER–DISCOVERED PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE FIRST TRUST
OR PROPERTY PAID TO OR ACQUIRED BY THE FIRST TRUST AFTER THE EXERCISE OF
THE DECANTING POWER.

14–624.

A DEBT, LIABILITY, OR OTHER OBLIGATION ENFORCEABLE AGAINST
PROPERTY OF A FIRST TRUST IS ENFORCEABLE TO THE SAME EXTENT AGAINST THE
PROPERTY WHEN HELD BY A SECOND TRUST AFTER THE EXERCISE OF THE
DECANTING POWER.

14–625.

THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CITED AS THE MARYLAND TRUST DECANTING ACT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other
application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared severable.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply retroactively and shall be applied to and interpreted to affect any trust created before,
on, or after October 1, 2023, that:

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 715

(1) has its principal place of administration in this State, including a trust
whose principal place of administration has been changed to this State; or

(2) is governed by the law of this State or is governed by the law of this
State for the purpose of:

(i) administration, including administration of a trust whose
governing law for purposes of administration has been changed to the law of this State;

(ii) construction of the terms of the trust; or

(iii) determining the meaning or effect of the terms of the trust.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25