START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 107

Chapter 107

(House Bill 636)

AN ACT concerning

Public Information Act – Inspection of E–Mail Addresses and Telephone
Numbers

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “personal information” for purposes of certain
provisions of the Public Information Act to include an individual’s e–mail address;
requiring certain custodians to deny inspection of certain records of certain e–mail
addresses and certain telephone numbers except under certain circumstances;
requiring certain custodians to allow inspection of certain records of business e–mail
addresses under the same circumstances as inspection of certain records of business
addresses and telephone numbers; and generally relating to inspection of e–mail
addresses and telephone numbers under the Public Information Act.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 4–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 4–101(h), 4–313, and 4–331 through 4–333
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – General Provisions

4–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(h) (1) “Personal information” means information that identifies an individual.

(2) Except as provided in § 4–355 of this title, “personal information”
includes an individual’s:

(i) name;

(ii) address;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 107 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) E–MAIL ADDRESS;

[(iii)] (IV) driver’s license number or any other identification
number;

[(iv)] (V) medical or disability information;

[(v)] (VI) photograph or computer–generated image;

[(vi)] (VII) Social Security number; and

[(vii)] (VIII) telephone number.

(3) “Personal information” does not include an individual’s:

(i) driver’s status;

(ii) driving offenses;

(iii) five–digit zip code; or

(iv) information on vehicular accidents.

4–313.

(a) Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a custodian shall deny
inspection of a school district record about the home address, [home] telephone number,
PERSONAL E–MAIL ADDRESS, biography, family, physiology, religion, academic
achievement, or physical or mental ability of a student.

(b) A custodian shall allow inspection by:

(1) the person in interest; or

(2) an elected or appointed official who supervises the student.

(c) (1) A custodian may allow inspection of the home address [or home],
telephone number, OR PERSONAL E–MAIL ADDRESS of a student of a public school by:

(i) an organization of parents, teachers, students, or former
students, or any combination of those groups, of the school;

(ii) an organization or a force of the military;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 107

(iii) a person engaged by a school or board of education to confirm a
home address or home telephone number;

(iv) a representative of a community college in the State; or

(v) the Maryland Higher Education Commission.

(2) The Maryland Higher Education Commission or a person, an
organization, or a community college that obtains information under this subsection may
not:

(i) use this information for a commercial purpose; or

(ii) disclose this information to another person, organization, or
community college.

(3) When a custodian allows inspection under this subsection, the
custodian shall notify the Maryland Higher Education Commission, person, organization,
or community college of the prohibitions under paragraph (2) of this subsection regarding
use and disclosure of this information.

4–331.

Subject to § 21–504 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, a custodian shall
deny inspection of the part of a public record that contains the home address [or],
PERSONAL telephone number, OR PERSONAL E–MAIL ADDRESS of an employee of a unit
or an instrumentality of the State or of a political subdivision unless:

(1) the employee gives permission for the inspection; or

(2) the unit or instrumentality that employs the individual determines that
inspection is needed to protect the public interest.

4–332.

(a) Subject to subsections (b) through (e) of this section, a custodian shall deny
inspection of the part of a public record that contains information about the application and
commission of a person as a notary public.

(b) A custodian shall allow inspection of the part of a public record that gives:

(1) the name of the notary public;

(2) the notary public’s business address or, if a business address is not
provided to the custodian by the notary public, the notary public’s home address;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 107 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) the notary public’s business telephone number or, if a business
telephone number is not provided to the custodian by the notary public, the notary public’s
home telephone number;

(4) THE NOTARY PUBLIC’S BUSINESS E–MAIL ADDRESS OR, IF A
BUSINESS E–MAIL ADDRESS IS NOT PROVIDED TO THE CUSTODIAN BY THE NOTARY
PUBLIC, THE NOTARY PUBLIC’S PERSONAL E–MAIL ADDRESS;

[(4)] (5) the issue and expiration dates of the notary public’s commission;

[(5)] (6) the date the person took the oath of office as a notary public; or

[(6)] (7) the signature of the notary public.

(c) A custodian may allow inspection of other information about a notary public
if the custodian finds a compelling public purpose.

(d) A custodian may deny inspection of a record by a notary public or any other
person in interest only to the extent that the inspection could:

(1) interfere with a valid and proper law enforcement proceeding;

(2) deprive another person of a right to a fair trial or an impartial
adjudication;

(3) constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;

(4) disclose the identity of a confidential source;

(5) disclose an investigative technique or procedure;

(6) prejudice an investigation; or

(7) endanger the life or physical safety of an individual.

(e) A custodian who sells lists of notaries public shall omit from the lists the name
of any notary public, on written request of the notary public.

4–333.

(a) Subject to subsections (b) through (d) of this section, a custodian shall deny
inspection of the part of a public record that contains information about the licensing of an
individual in an occupation or a profession.

(b) A custodian shall allow inspection of the part of a public record that gives:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 107

(1) the name of the licensee;

(2) the business address of the licensee or, if the business address is not
available, the home address of the licensee after the custodian redacts any information that
identifies the location as the home address of an individual with a disability as defined in
§ 20–701 of the State Government Article;

(3) the business telephone number of the licensee;

(4) THE BUSINESS E–MAIL ADDRESS OF THE LICENSEE, IF THE E–MAIL
ADDRESS IS IDENTIFIED BY THE LICENSEE AS A BUSINESS E–MAIL ADDRESS;

[(4)] (5) the educational and occupational background of the licensee;

[(5)] (6) the professional qualifications of the licensee;

[(6)] (7) any orders and findings that result from formal disciplinary
actions; and

[(7)] (8) any evidence that has been provided to the custodian to meet the
requirements of a statute as to financial responsibility.

(c) A custodian may allow inspection of other information about a licensee if:

(1) the custodian finds a compelling public purpose; and

(2) the rules or regulations of the official custodian allow the inspection.

(d) Except as otherwise provided by this section or other law, a custodian shall
allow inspection by the person in interest.

(e) A custodian who sells lists of licensees shall omit from the lists the name of
any licensee, on written request of the licensee.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5