START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 392

Chapter 392

(House Bill 615)

AN ACT concerning

Workgroup on Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, and Other
Underrepresented Behavioral Health Professionals – Extension of Dates

FOR the purpose of extending the reporting and termination dates for the Workgroup on
Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, and Other Underrepresented
Behavioral Health Professionals; and generally relating to the Workgroup on Black,
Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, and Other Underrepresented Behavioral
Health Professionals.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 318 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Chapter 318 of the Acts of 2022

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Workgroup on Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, and
Other Underrepresented Behavioral Health Professionals.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(1) the President of Bowie State University, or the President’s designee;

(2) the President of Coppin State University, or the President’s designee;

(3) the President of Morgan State University, or the President’s designee;

(4) the President of University of Maryland Eastern Shore, or the
President’s designee; and

(5) the following members, appointed by the Secretary of Health:

(i) one representative each from at least three different hospital
networks in the State that primarily serve Black, Latino, or Asian American Pacific
Islander communities;

(ii) three representatives from the behavioral health profession in
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 392 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the State;

(iii) three individuals who provide social services in the State; and

(iv) at least two but not more than four representatives of
organizations, networks, or associations of behavioral health professionals that:

1. are composed of a majority of Black, Latino, Asian
American Pacific Islander, or other underrepresented behavioral health professionals; and

2. primarily work to represent and support Black, Latino,
Asian American Pacific Islander, or other underrepresented behavioral health
professionals.

(c) The Secretary of Health shall designate the chair of the Workgroup.

(d) The University System of Maryland and the Maryland Department of Health
jointly shall provide staff for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup or any subgroup established under subsection (g)
of this section:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup or
subgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall:

(1) identify and study the shortage of behavioral health professionals in
the State who are Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander, or otherwise
underrepresented in the behavioral health profession; and

(2) assess and make recommendations on incentives or other methods to
increase the number of:

(i) students who are Black, Latino, Asian American Pacific Islander,
or otherwise underrepresented in the behavioral health profession who study at an
institution of higher education in the State to be behavioral health professionals; and

(ii) behavioral health professionals who are Black, Latino, Asian
American Pacific Islander, or otherwise underrepresented in the behavioral health
profession who provide behavioral health services in the State, especially in underserved
communities.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 392

(g) (1) The Workgroup may establish a subgroup within the Workgroup to
assist the Workgroup in carrying out its duties, including by conducting research and
producing reports.

(2) A subgroup established under paragraph (1) of this subsection may
include an individual who is not a member of the Workgroup, including a representative of
an insurance carrier or any other relevant expert.

(h) On or before July 1, [2023] 2024, the Workgroup shall report its findings
and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2022. It shall remain effective for a period of [2] 3 years and, at the end of June 30,
[2024] 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3