START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 693 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 693 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Pharmacy - Board Membership, Delegated Pharmacy Acts, and 
Sunset Extension 
 
 
This emergency bill (1) adds a registered pharmacy technician member to the State Board 
of Pharmacy (MBOP); (2) specifies that a licensed pharmacist may delegate certain data 
entry tasks to be performed at a remote location to a registered pharmacy technician or 
registered pharmacy intern, as specified; (3) prohibits a registered pharmacy technician or 
pharmacy technician trainee from making decisions that require the professional judgment 
of a pharmacist; (4) authorizes a registered pharmacy technician to administer only 
specified vaccinations to specified individuals; and (5) prohibits a pharmacy technician 
trainee from administering vaccinations. The bill also extends the termination date for 
MBOP by two years to July 1, 2025, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment 
provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for MBOP are maintained through 
FY 2025. Special fund expenditures may increase minimally to cover the per diem and 
related expenses of the additional board member; any other workload on MBOP under the 
bill can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 693/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  MBOP regulates the practice of pharmacy by licensing 
pharmacists, registering pharmacy technicians, issuing permits to individuals to establish 
or operate pharmacies in the State, setting pharmacy practice standards, and developing 
and enforcing laws and regulations to protect the public. 
 
Board Membership 
 
Under current law, the board comprises 12 members, 10 of whom must be licensed 
practicing pharmacists and 2 of whom must be consumers. Each pharmacist member must 
be skilled and competent in practicing pharmacy and have at least five years of active 
pharmacy experience. For each pharmacist vacancy, the board must notify all licensed 
pharmacists and other interested parties of the vacancy to solicit nominations to fill the 
vacancy and provide information for contacting a representative of the designated group 
that submits the list of names that the Governor may choose from in appointing a member 
to fill the vacancy. 
 
The bill adds an additional member who must be a registered pharmacy technician 
(1) skilled and competent in practicing pharmacy and (2) that has at least five years of 
active pharmacy practice. The Governor must appoint this member, with the advice of the 
Secretary of Health, from a list of all names submitted by the Maryland Society of 
Health-System Pharmacists (MSHP) and the Maryland Pharmacists Association (MPhA). 
For each registered pharmacy technician vacancy, the board must notify all registered 
pharmacy technicians in the State, solicit nominations for the vacancy, and disseminate 
information for contacting a representative of MSHP or MPhA about the vacancy. 
 
Delegated Pharmacy Acts  
 
Definition of Delegated Pharmacy Acts:  Under current law, a “delegated pharmacy act” is 
an activity that constitutes the practice of a pharmacy delegated by a licensed pharmacist 
under the Health Occupations Article and board regulations. A delegated pharmacy act 
does not include (1) an act within the parameters of a therapy management contract; (2) the 
administration of an influenza vaccination; (3) the delegation of a pharmacy act by a 
registered pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, or pharmacy technician trainee; (4) a 
pharmacy activity performed by a pharmacy student; or (5) a pharmacy activity performed 
by an applicant for a license to practice pharmacy in accordance with the board’s 
regulations.  
 
The bill specifies that a delegated pharmacy act does not include a decision-making task 
that requires the professional judgment of a pharmacist and expressly prohibits a registered 
pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician trainee from making decisions that require 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 693/ Page 3 
the professional judgment of a pharmacist. Additionally, the bill provides that a delegated 
pharmacy act does not include the administration of a vaccination, except for specified 
vaccinations administered by a registered pharmacy technician. 
 
Authorization to Administer Vaccinations:  The bill repeals the prohibition on a registered 
pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician trainee administering influenza vaccinations. 
The bill authorizes a registered pharmacy technician to administer only (1) an influenza, 
COVID-19, or pneumonia vaccination to an individual age 18 or older and (2) a respiratory 
syncytial virus or shingles vaccination to an individual age 50 or older. The bill expressly 
prohibits a pharmacy technician trainee from administering vaccinations. 
 
Delegation of Pharmacy Acts:  Under current law, a licensed pharmacist may delegate 
pharmacy acts to a registered pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, or pharmacy 
technician trainee provided that the acts are (1) directly supervised by a licensed 
pharmacist; (2) are not required to be performed by a licensed pharmacist; (3) are within 
the education, training, experience, and area of practice of the delegating licensed 
pharmacist; and (4) are appropriate to the education, training, and experience of the 
registered pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, or pharmacy technician trainee.  
 
The bill authorizes a licensed pharmacist to delegate the entry of prescription-related data 
into databases or patient charts to be performed at a remote location to a registered 
pharmacy technician or registered pharmacy intern, if the following conditions are met: 
 
 
the registered pharmacy technician or registered pharmacy intern has immediate 
electronic access to a pharmacist who can provide assistance as needed; 
 
the data entry is not required to be performed by a licensed pharmacist; 
 
the data entry is within the education, training, experience, and area of practice of 
the delegating licensed pharmacist; 
 
the data entry is appropriate to the education, training, and experience of the 
registered pharmacy technician or registered pharmacy intern; and 
 
if the data entry involves access to protected patient information under the federal 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, it can be performed in 
a manner that maintains the confidentiality of patient information. 
 
Board Reauthorization 
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within the Department of Legislative Services prior to their 
termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 693/ Page 4 
entities or by legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2023; OPEGA was 
not asked to conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, reauthorizing 
legislation is being introduced, which extends the board’s termination date to July 1, 2025. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Independent and community pharmacies may benefit from 
increased flexibility for their staffing needs as the bill permits certain data entry tasks 
performed by registered pharmacy technicians to be done remotely. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 647 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4