START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 696 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 696 
(Delegate Addison) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Black Bass Conservation Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Black Bass Conservation Fund in the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) – consisting of voluntary monetary donations made by individuals at the 
time of purchasing a recreational fishing license – to be used for black bass stocking, habitat 
enhancement, tournaments, and conservation research. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes a Black Bass Conservation Fund, within and 
administered by DNR, for the purpose of furthering black bass management. The fund 
consists of (1) voluntary monetary donations made by individuals at the time of purchasing 
an angler’s license or a Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license through DNR’s 
electronic licensing system; (2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; 
(3) interest earnings; and (4) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. The bill requires DNR to (1) establish a process through which 
individuals may make donations through the electronic licensing system and (2) collect the 
donations and deposit them into the fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 696/ Page 2 
DNR may use money in the fund to (1) stock black bass; (2) enhance aquatic habitats for 
black bass; (3) support responsible black bass tournaments; and (4) support scientific 
research related to black bass conservation. 
 
Current Law:  DNR is authorized to develop and implement an electronic system for the 
sale and issuance of licenses, permits, and registrations and the recording and releasing of 
security interests. There are two existing requirements for DNR to establish a process 
through which individuals may make specified voluntary monetary donations when 
making a purchase through the electronic licensing system:   
 
 
Healing Hunting and Fishing Fund – The department is required to establish a 
process through which an individual who purchases an angler’s license, a 
Chesapeake and coastal sport fishing license, or a hunting license and any 
corresponding stamps through the electronic licensing system may make a voluntary 
monetary donation to the Healing Hunting and Fishing Fund at the time of purchase. 
The fund has the purpose of providing any of the following opportunities for 
Gold Star recipients, disabled veterans or other veterans who could benefit from 
one of the opportunities, disabled members of the U.S. Armed Forces or other 
members of the U.S. Armed Forces who could benefit from one of the opportunities, 
and permanently disabled persons who require the use of a wheelchair:  
(1) recreational hunting or fishing; (2) recreational water activities; (3) other 
recreational outdoor activities; (4) therapeutic outdoor activities; or (5) workforce 
training for green jobs, including outdoor agricultural jobs. 
 
Chesapeake Bay Trust and Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust 
Fund – The department is required to establish a process through which an 
individual who purchases a license, permit, or registration through the electronic 
licensing system may make a voluntary monetary donation to the Chesapeake Bay 
Trust and the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund (split evenly 
between the two and used for specified purposes) at the time the license, permit, or 
registration is purchased. 
 
Statute requires that the donation process established for those donations must be limited 
to providing not more than two options to which an individual may make a monetary 
donation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate 
amount beginning in fiscal 2024, reflecting receipt of donations and any interest earnings 
and spending of those revenues in accordance with the authorized uses of the fund. The 
extent of the increase in special fund revenues and expenditures cannot be reliably 
estimated. For context, DNR reports that the Healing Hunting and Fishing Fund 
(mentioned above) received $12,493 in donations from 2,597 contributors in fiscal 2021 
and $9,604 in donations from 2,040 individuals in fiscal 2022. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 696/ Page 3 
DNR can establish the donation process, and collect and deposit the donations in the fund, 
with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 422 (Senator Bailey, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3