START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 680 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 680 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credit - Alterations 
 
 
This bill (1) increases, from $9 million to $18 million, the maximum amount of student 
debt relief tax credits the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) may approve 
for any taxable year; (2) requires MHEC to annually reserve $9 million of the authorized 
credits for State employees, as specified; (3) requires MHEC to prioritize tax credit 
recipients and amounts based on whether the qualified taxpayers graduated from 
institutions of higher education in the State at which at least 40% of attendees are eligible 
to receive federal Pell Grants; (4) extends – from two to three years from the close of the 
tax year for which a credit is claimed – the timeframe within which the individual who 
claims the credit must use the credit for the repayment of the individual’s eligible student 
loan debt; and (5) requires MHEC to engage in specified outreach regarding the tax credit 
program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and beyond; 
the provision relating to the expanded timeframe for using the credit applies 
retroactively to credits claimed after tax year 2019. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $9 million annually beginning in 
FY 2024, as discussed below. The FY 2024 general fund revenue reduction is assumed in 
the FY 2024 budget. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
($9.0) 
($9.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 680/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  As noted above, MHEC must reserve $9 million of the authorized tax 
credits for State employees and must prioritize State employees who graduated from 
institutions of higher education in the State at which at least 40% of attendees are eligible 
to receive federal Pell Grants. If the total amount of tax credits applied for by State 
employees is less than $9 million for a given year, MHEC may make available the unused 
amount of credits for use by other qualified taxpayers. 
 
MHEC must encourage institutions of higher education in the State to advise new 
graduates, particularly those with an interest in public service, of the availability of the tax 
credit. In addition, the Office of Student Financial Assistance within MHEC must inform 
recipients of specified scholarships of the availability of the tax credit. 
 
By January 1 annually, MHEC must report to the Governor and the General Assembly 
(1) the number of applicants for the tax credit; (2) the number and amounts of tax credits 
awarded to qualified taxpayers; (3) a breakdown of the age, gender, race, income, and 
counties of residency of credit recipients; and (4) any additional information that MHEC 
deems relevant. 
 
Current Law:  An individual who has incurred at least $20,000 in undergraduate and/or 
graduate student loan debt and has at least $5,000 in outstanding undergraduate and/or 
graduate student loan debt may be eligible for the student loan debt relief tax credit, a 
refundable credit of up to $5,000. Chapter 419 of 2018 increased, from $5 million to 
$9 million, the maximum amount of student loan debt relief tax credits MHEC may 
approve each year. 
 
To claim the credit, an individual must apply to MHEC by September 15 each year. Upon 
application, the individual must submit an assurance that the individual will use any credit 
approved by MHEC for the repayment of the individual’s undergraduate or graduate 
student loan debt as soon as practicable. The total amount of the credit claimed must be 
recaptured if the individual does not use the credit for the repayment of the individual’s 
student loan debt within two years from the close of the tax year for which the credit is 
claimed. 
 
MHEC must prioritize tax credit recipients and amounts based on qualified taxpayers who: 
 
 
have higher debt burden to income ratios;  
 
graduated from an institution of higher education located in the State;  
 
did not receive a tax credit in a prior year; or  
 
were eligible for in-State tuition.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 680/ Page 3 
State Revenues:  As discussed above, the bill increases, from $9 million to $18 million, 
the maximum amount of student loan debt relief tax credits MHEC may approve annually. 
Thus, general fund revenues decrease by $9 million annually beginning in fiscal 2024 due 
to additional credits claimed against the personal income tax. This estimate assumes that 
there is sufficient demand for the credit such that the increased maximum allowable amount 
of credits is fully utilized each year. As noted above, the estimated fiscal 2024 general fund 
revenue reduction is assumed in the fiscal 2024 budget.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3