START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 695 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 695 
(Delegates Sample-Hughes and Adams) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Rural Maryland Prosperity Investment Fund - Allocation of Grants (Rural 
Communities Improvement Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill alters the required distribution of money from the Rural Maryland Prosperity 
Investment Fund (RMPIF) by modifying one grant category to also include agricultural 
development, cooperative development, and workforce development.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Altering the allowable uses of funds distributed through RMPIF does not 
affect overall State expenditures, although funding may be reallocated among recipients, 
including institutions of higher education. The effect on any particular institution of higher 
education is unknown but likely minimal, since funding is allocated across multiple uses 
and recipients. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes $9.0 million in general funds 
for the Rural Maryland Council (RMC) to be distributed through the formula affected by 
the bill.  
  
Local Effect:  Community colleges may benefit from funds received for workforce 
development under the bill. The effect on any particular community college is unknown 
but, based on overall funding, likely minimal.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The affected portion of the RMPIF distribution, which allocates funding 
equally as grants among four categories, is below (the bill’s changes are shown in italics):   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 695/ Page 2 
 
specified regional infrastructure projects; 
 
rural entrepreneurship and agricultural development, including programs and 
activities serving rural communities undertaken by nonprofit organizations and 
institutions of higher education, cooperative development, and workforce 
development; 
 
rural community development, programmatic assistance, and education, divided 
equally between RMC and the Maryland Agricultural Education and Rural 
Development Assistance Fund (MAERDAF); and 
 
rural health care organizations. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Rural Maryland Council 
 
RMC is a State rural development council that brings together citizens and representatives 
of public-sector entities and private-sector organizations to collaboratively address 
problems and challenges facing rural communities. For administrative and budgetary 
purposes, RMC is placed under the Maryland Department of Agriculture. RMC administers 
both RMPIF and MAERDAF with the assistance of the Maryland Agricultural Education 
and Rural Development Assistance Board. 
 
Rural Maryland Prosperity Investment Fund 
 
The purpose of RMPIF is to provide funding to rural regional and statewide planning and 
development organizations, institutions of higher education serving rural communities, 
rural community development organizations, and local governments acting in partnership 
with one another to promote the quality of life in rural areas. 
 
Chapters 469 and 470 of 2014 extended the authorization for annual appropriations to 
RMPIF, modified the allocation of disbursements from the fund, and extended the fund’s 
termination date by 10 years from June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2030. Generally, the required 
RMPIF distribution is as follows:   
 
 
One-third of appropriated funding is allocated equally to the five regional councils 
as grants for regional planning and development assistance, by targeting support to:  
 
 
regional councils serving rural areas; and 
 
multicounty efforts serving rural communities in areas not served by the 
regional councils. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 695/ Page 3 
 
The remaining two-thirds is allocated equally as grants among:   
 
 
specified regional infrastructure projects; 
 
rural entrepreneurship development, including programs and activities 
serving rural communities undertaken by nonprofit organizations and 
institutions of higher education; 
 
rural community development, programmatic assistance, and education, 
divided equally between RMC and MAERDAF; and 
 
rural health care organizations. 
 
If revenues appropriated to RMPIF in any fiscal year are insufficient to fully fund all grants, 
$500,000 must be allocated to RMC, with $250,000 used to support the operations of the 
council and $250,000 allocated to MAERDAF. Any remaining funds must then be 
allocated as described above. 
 
Money received by a regional council for rural regional planning and development 
assistance is used to benefit rural areas as the regional council determines. 
 
Maryland Agricultural Education and Rural Development Assistance Fund 
 
Chapter 552 of 2000 established MAERDAF to provide funding to rural regional planning 
and economic development organizations and rural community development programs as 
well as to augment the efforts of advanced technology centers that serve agricultural- and 
natural resources-based small businesses in rural areas through community colleges. The 
Maryland Agricultural Education and Rural Development Assistance Board reviews grant 
applications and makes recommendations to RMC regarding grant recipients and amounts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may be affected by the reallocation of RMPIF 
funds – either through receipt of funding or loss of funding to a different, now eligible, 
recipient. The effect on any particular small business is unknown but could be meaningful. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Commerce; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Caroline, Charles, Carroll, Garrett, Kent, Queen Anne’s, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 695/ Page 4 
St. Mary’s, Talbot, Washington, and Worcester counties; Baltimore City Community 
College; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4