START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 662 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 662 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Real Estate Brokers, Salespersons, and Associate Brokers - Continuing 
Education Courses - Alterations 
 
  
This bill establishes separate continuing education requirements for a real estate broker, 
real estate salesperson, or associate real estate broker licensee who has been issued an 
initial license by the State Real Estate Commission. For a licensee who has been issued a 
renewal certificate, current continuing education requirements continue to apply. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the State Real Estate Commission increase by 
approximately $42,600 in FY 2024 for programming changes and consulting. Special fund 
expenditures in subsequent years reflect ongoing consulting costs. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
42,600 
2,200 
2,300 
2,400 
2,500 
Net Effect 
($42,600) 
($2,200) 
($2,300) 
($2,400) 
($2,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
   
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For a licensee who was issued an initial real estate broker, real estate 
salesperson, or associate real estate broker license, the subject matter of continuing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 662/ Page 2 
education courses must include at least one 3-clock hour course for each of the following 
topics:  
 
 
outlining contract writing, standard contract provisions, key regional contract 
requirements, and standard addenda and contingencies; 
 
the principles of real estate brokerage relationships and disclosures and disclosure 
requirements for sellers; 
 
the principles of real estate practice in relation to (1) advertising requirements for 
licensees; (2) the handling and disclosure of escrow funds; and (3) common 
ownership communities; and  
 
property management and landlord and tenant laws. 
 
Additionally, the licensee must complete at least one 1.5 clock hour course for each of the 
following topics: 
 
 
professionalism as it relates to the Maryland Code of Ethics (including a discussion 
relating to conflict resolution and a licensee’s duty of respect for the public, peers, 
and property); and 
 
real estate financing. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, each individual licensed by the State Real Estate Commission 
as a real estate broker, real estate salesperson, or associate real estate broker must complete  
15-clock hours of continuing education every two years in order to qualify for license 
renewal. The commission must approve the form, substance, and subject matter of the 
courses; however, every two years, a licensee must complete at least: 
 
 
a 3-clock hour course that outlines relevant changes that have occurred in federal, 
State, or local laws and regulations, court cases, and industry trends that have an 
impact on those laws and regulations, or any combination thereof;  
 
a 1.5-clock hour course that outlines federal, State, and local fair housing laws and 
regulations;  
 
a 3-clock hour ethics course that includes (1) the Maryland Code of Ethics; 
(2) a discussion of the practices of flipping; (3) fraudulent real estate practices and 
(4) professionalism as it relates to the Maryland Code of Ethics, including conflict 
resolution and a licensee’s duty to respect the public, peers, and property; 
 
a 3-clock hour course on the principles of real estate brokerage relationships and 
disclosures; and  
 
for a real estate broker and a licensee designated as a branch office manager or a 
team leader, a 3-clock hour course on the requirements of broker supervision. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 662/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  The State Real Estate Commission advises that information 
technology changes (totaling approximately $25,000 in fiscal 2024) are required to record, 
track, and enforce the new requirements established by the bill. In addition, the commission 
advises that it does not have the appropriate expertise to develop or approve courses that 
address the educational requirements specified in the bill. Thus, additional consulting costs 
(totaling approximately $17,600 in fiscal 2024) are also incurred. Ongoing consulting costs 
total approximately $2,200 in fiscal 2025 and $2,500 in fiscal 2028. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 443 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3