START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 133

Chapter 133

(House Bill 655)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages Districts – Legislative Districting Plan
References

FOR the purpose of updating certain provisions of law regarding Baltimore City alcoholic
beverages districts to refer to a certain Legislative Districting Plan; requiring the
Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City to grant a certain exemption to
certain persons under certain circumstances; and generally relating to alcoholic
beverages districts in Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–903(c)(1), 12–1308(a)(5), 12–1603(a), 12–1604(a), 12–1707(a), and
12–2007(b)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–903.

(c) (1) In this subsection, “46th alcoholic beverages district” means an area
that has the same boundaries as the 46th legislative district in the Legislative Districting
Plan of [2012] 2022.

12–1308.

(a) This section applies in:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 133 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) the 3000 block of Frederick Avenue in ward 20, precinct 9 of the 44A
legislative district of the City, based on the Legislative Districting Plan of [2012] 2022;
and

12–1603.

(a) The alcoholic beverages districts described in this section at all times are
coterminous with the legislative districts in the Legislative Districting Plan of [2012] 2022.

12–1604.

(a) This section applies only to the 46th alcoholic beverages district, which at all
times is coterminous with the 46th legislative district in the Legislative Districting Plan of
[2012] 2022.

12–1707.

(a) The alcoholic beverages districts described in this section at all times are
coterminous with the legislative districts in the Legislative Districting Plan of [2012]
2022.

12–2007.

(b) (1) The Board may grant an exemption for remaining open after hours to:

(i) a holder of a Class B restaurant license, only for serving food to
patrons seated for dining;

(ii) a pharmacy that fills prescriptions; or

(iii) a holder of a Class D beer, wine, and liquor license that operates
a restaurant, if:

1. it is used only for serving food to patrons seated in a dining
room that is not adjacent to a bar; and

2. the restaurant is located in the 46th Legislative District in
the Legislative Districting Plan of [2012] 2022.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Board of License
Commissioners for Baltimore City shall exempt from this Act an alcoholic beverages license
holder that currently conducts an activity that is made unlawful by this Act if the license
holder:

(1) received approval from the Board to conduct the activity on or before
February 1, 2022; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 133

(2) has owned the licensed premises continuously since February 1, 2022.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3