START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 633 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 633 
(Delegate Bhandari) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospital Credentialing - Reappointment Process for Physician Staff - 
Modification 
 
   
This bill alters the minimum standards for a physician credentialing process that a hospital 
must have in place as a condition of licensure. The formal written reappointment process 
for physicians must be conducted in accordance with standards of the accreditation body 
that accredits a hospital rather than at least every two years.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, as a condition of licensure, each hospital 
must establish a credentialing process for the physicians who are employed by or who have 
staff privileges at the hospital and use the uniform credentialing form as the initial 
application of a physician seeking to be credentialed.  
 
The Secretary of Health must, by regulation and in consultation with hospitals, physicians, 
interested community and advocacy groups, and representatives of the Maryland Defense 
Bar and Plaintiffs’ Bar, establish minimum standards for a credentialing process, which 
must include:  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 633/ Page 2 
 
a formal written appointment process documenting the physician’s education, 
clinical expertise, licensure history, insurance history, medical history, claims 
history, and professional experience;  
 
a requirement that an initial appointment to staff not be complete until the physician 
has successfully completed a probationary period; and  
 
a formal written reappointment process to be conducted at least every two years that 
documents the physician’s pattern of performance by analyzing specified factors 
such as clinical skills and claims filed against the physician.  
 
Under the bill, the formal written reappointment process must be conducted in accordance 
with standards of the accreditation body that accredits a hospital rather than at least every 
two years.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 258 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2