START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 82

Chapter 82

(House Bill 644)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Golf Simulator Facility

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Frederick County
to issue a Class B–GSF (golf simulator facility) license to a golf simulator facility
under certain circumstances; authorizing the license holder to sell beer, wine, and
liquor for on–premises consumption under certain circumstances; requiring the
license holder to submit a certain report to the Board before a license may be
renewed; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Frederick County.

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1009
to be Section 20–1008
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1009
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 20–1009 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated Code of Maryland
be renumbered to be Section(s) 20–1008.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 82 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

20–1009.

(A) THERE IS A CLASS B–GSF (GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY) LICENSE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE BY A GOLF SIMULATOR
FACILITY THAT:

(1) IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;

(2) HAS AT LEAST FIVE GOLF SIMULATOR BAYS; AND

(3) HAS ACCOMMODATIONS THAT ARE PREDOMINANTLY DEDICATED
TO GOLF SIMULATOR BAYS AND SEATING DEDICATED TO THE GOLF SIMULATOR
BAYS.

(C) AN APPLICANT FOR THE LICENSE SHALL SUBMIT TO THE BOARD A
FLOOR PLAN OR LAYOUT OF THE PROPOSED LICENSED PREMISES THAT
ILLUSTRATES THAT THE PROPOSED LICENSED PREMISES IS PREDOMINANTLY
DEDICATED TO GOLF SIMULATOR BAYS AND HAS SEATING DEDICATED TO THE GOLF
SIMULATOR BAYS.

(D) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION:

(1) IF THE LICENSE HOLDER OFFERS FOOD ON–PREMISES AT ALL
TIMES WHEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE BEING SOLD; AND

(2) DURING NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
20–2005 OF THIS TITLE.

(E) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER’S ANNUAL GROSS SALES FROM:

(I) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MAY NOT EXCEED 35% OF THE
ANNUAL GROSS SALES OF THE GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY;

(II) GOLF SIMULATOR BAY RENTAL FEES SHALL BE AT LEAST
50% OF THE ANNUAL GROSS SALES OF THE GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY; AND

(III) FOOD SHALL BE AT LEAST 15% OF THE ANNUAL GROSS
SALES OF THE GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 82

(2) BEFORE THE BOARD MAY RENEW THE LICENSE, THE LICENSE
HOLDER SHALL PROVIDE THE BOARD WITH AN ANNUAL GROSS SALES REPORT FOR
ALCOHOL, GOLF SIMULATOR BAY RENTAL FEES, AND FOOD THAT SHOWS THE
LICENSE HOLDER HAS MET THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(F) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $1,500.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3