START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 686 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 686 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Financial Regulation - Modernizing Licensing of Non-Depository Institutions and 
Elimination of Branch License Requirements 
 
 
This bill generally eliminates the requirement that each location of a non-depository 
financial institution licensed by the Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation 
(OCFR) obtain a separate license or registration, and instead institutes a new licensing and 
registration system whereby each financial institution obtains a single license or 
registration that covers all of its locations. The bill makes numerous other technical and 
conforming changes and modifies several current statutory requirements related to 
licensure (e.g., bonding requirements, use of trade names, etc.). Finally, it gives OCFR 
greater discretion in setting and collecting fees from licensees and registrants. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues decrease by approximately $3.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. While OCFR may realize administrative 
efficiencies, special fund expenditures are likely not materially affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 686/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  OCFR regulates State-chartered and State-licensed 
financial institutions operating in Maryland. These include depository institutions such as 
Maryland-chartered banks, trust companies, bank holding companies, and credit unions, as 
well as non-depository entities such as money transmitters, check cashers, consumer 
lenders, sales finance companies, installment lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan 
originators, credit services businesses, debt management services providers, debt 
settlement services providers, consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies. The 
activities of the office are set out in Titles 1 through 7, 11, and 12 of the Financial 
Institutions Article. In addition, the office supervises certain activities found in Title 12 
and Title 14 of the Commercial Law Article and Title 7 of the Business Regulation Article. 
 
Under current law, OCFR must generally issue a license for each location that a 
non-depository licensee operates. The per-branch fee varies based on the specific type of 
financial institution. The bill authorizes affected licensees to do business at each location 
listed by the licensee during the initial licensing process. 
 
The bill’s licensing changes apply to: 
 
 
consumer lenders; 
 
installment lenders; 
 
sales finance companies; 
 
mortgage lenders; 
 
mortgage loan originators; 
 
check cashers; 
 
money transmitters; 
 
debt management companies; and 
 
collection agencies. 
 
Under the bill, OCFR is authorized (but not required) to impose an annual assessment on 
any licensee or registrant not more than once a year. Licensing and registration fees for 
each type of license or registration will be established annually by OCFR through a 
combination of fixed license fees and an assessment structure that matches the costs 
incurred by OCFR during the licensing and supervision process. Specifically, the bill 
establishes that, in calculating an assessment with respect to any licensed person, OCFR 
may consider:  
 
 
the costs incurred in supervising the licensed persons of that license category; 
 
the type of business conducted in the State by that licensed person; 
 
the volume of business that licensed person conducts in the State; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 686/ Page 3 
 
assets of the licensed person; and 
 
any other factor OCFR considers appropriate. 
 
Bonding requirements are similarly established for each financial institution rather than 
each branch of an institution. The bill establishes criteria and limits for bonding 
requirements established by OCFR for each type of licensee or registrant. 
 
In general, licensees and registrants must continually update their roster of branches that 
are covered by licenses or registrations, as specified. 
 
State Revenues:  Overall, OCFR indicates that it intends to reduce the considerable fund 
balance in the Non-depository Special Fund by reducing fee assessments until the fund 
balance reaches targeted levels. Specifically, as described below, OCFR intends to 
maintain fund balances that more closely approximate the actual cost of regulating 
non-depository financial institutions as a group. 
 
OCFR advises that, in fiscal 2023, it expects to receive about $3.0 million in licensing 
revenues from branch offices. Because the bill generally eliminates the requirement that 
each branch obtain a separate license, beginning in fiscal 2024, licensing revenues are 
expected to decrease by $3.0 million for the Non-depository Special Fund. OCFR forecasts 
a fund balance of approximately $18.0 million at the end of fiscal 2023, which is more than 
double the fiscal 2023 appropriation of $8.8 million. Under the bill, OCFR advises that, 
once the fund balance is reduced through lower collections, it intends to begin each 
fiscal year with a fund balance totaling at least 60% of the amount proposed in the State 
budget for that year, with an additional 20% of that amount reserved for indirect and/or 
unexpected costs. 
 
To the extent the Non-depository Special Fund has insufficient funds to meet the target 
amount for a given year, OCFR is authorized under the bill to seek an assessment from 
licensees to replenish the fund to meet the target. After accounting for the ongoing revenue 
decrease due to the elimination of branch licenses, OCFR anticipates the fund balance will 
remain above the target through at least fiscal 2027, and potentially through fiscal 2028. 
Thus, the fund balance is likely sufficient to sustain four to five years of the reduced 
licensing revenues before any additional assessments are necessary. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Generally, the bill eliminates the requirement that non-depository 
financial institutions obtain separate licenses for each place of business. Thus, small 
business financial institutions that are affected by the bill likely realize cost savings, as they 
are no longer subject to multiple licensing fees. The bill likely also reduces the regulatory 
burden on such businesses, given that existing licensing processes for branch locations may 
entail significant staff time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 686/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4