START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 83

Chapter 83

(House Bill 679)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Display of License

FOR the purpose of altering in Frederick County the manner in which a license holder must
frame and conspicuously display an alcoholic beverages license on the licensed
premises; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Frederick County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1901
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1904
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

20–1901.

(a) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 5 (“Conduct of Local License
Holders”) of Division I of this article apply in the county without exception or variation:

(1) § 4–502 (“Storage of alcoholic beverages”);

(2) § 4–503 (“Solicitations and sales outside of licensed premises”);
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 83 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) § 4–506 (“Evidence of purchaser’s age”); AND

(4) § 4–507 (“Retail delivery of alcoholic beverages”)[; and

(5) § 4–508 (“Display of license”)].

(b) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 5 (“Conduct of Local License
Holders”) of Division I of this article apply in the county:

(1) § 4–504 (“Employment of underage individuals”), subject to § 20–1902
of this subtitle; [and]

(2) § 4–505 (“Alcohol awareness program”), subject to § 20–1903 of this
subtitle; AND

(3) § 4–508 (“DISPLAY OF LICENSE”), SUBJECT TO § 20–1904 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

20–1904.

A LICENSE HOLDER SHALL FRAME THE LICENSE AND DISPLAY THE LICENSE
CONSPICUOUSLY IN THE LICENSED PREMISES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2