START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 668

Chapter 668

(House Bill 614)

AN ACT concerning

Department of Aging – Long–Term Care and Dementia Care Navigation
Programs

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Aging to oversee long–term care and
dementia care navigation programs; requiring each area agency to establish a
long–term care and dementia care navigation program; requiring the Department to
publish a certain report on its website; and generally relating to long–term care and
dementia care and the Department of Aging.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 10–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 10–1301 through 10–1303 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 13.
~~Dementia~~ Long–Term Care and Dementia Care Navigation Programs”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

10–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Area agency” means the local agency that the Department designates in
accordance with the Older Americans Act of 1965 to administer the delivery of a
comprehensive and coordinated plan of social and other services and activities for seniors
in a planning and service area.

SUBTITLE 13. DEMENTIA LONG–TERM CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE NAVIGATION
PROGRAMS.

10–1301.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 668 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, OVERSEE AND
TRAIN THE STAFF OF LONG–TERM CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE NAVIGATION
PROGRAMS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) DISSEMINATE BEST PRACTICES AND COLLECT INTERACTION DATA
TO ENSURE STATEWIDE PROGRAM INTEGRITY.

(B) THE WORK OF THE LONG–TERM CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE
NAVIGATION PROGRAMS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE GUIDED BY THE
RECOMMENDATIONS OF:

(1) THE STATE PLAN ON AGING; AND

(2) THE VIRGINIA I. JONES ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND RELATED
DEMENTIAS COUNCIL UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 32 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL
ARTICLE.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR
AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE, THE SENATE FINANCE
COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
COMMITTEE, ON THE SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE:

(I) THE NUMBER OF DIRECT CONTACTS EACH LONG–TERM
CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE NAVIGATION PROGRAM HAS WITH STATE RESIDENTS;
AND

(II) THE RESULT OF EACH DIRECT CONTACT, INCLUDING:

1. THE PERCENTAGE OF INDIVIDUALS REFERRED TO
SERVICE PROVIDERS;

2. THE NUMBER OF COGNITIVE ASSESSMENTS
SCREENINGS CONDUCTED;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 668

3. THE NUMBER OF OUTREACH EVENTS CONDUCTED;
AND

4. THE NUMBER OF STATE RESIDENTS CONTACTED
THROUGH OUTREACH EVENTS.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH THE REPORT REQUIRED
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

10–1302.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, EACH AREA
AGENCY SHALL ESTABLISH A DEVELOP A LONG–TERM CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE
NAVIGATION PROGRAM THAT CONSISTS OF NEW OR EXISTING SERVICES.

(2) (I) AN AREA AGENCY MAY STAFF THE PROGRAM FROM
EXISTING RESOURCES OR HIRE AN INDIVIDUAL FOR THE PROGRAM.

(II) SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATION OF THE FUNDING PROVIDED
TO EACH AREA AGENCY UNDER § 10–1303 OF THIS SUBTITLE, EACH AREA AGENCY
SHALL IMPLEMENT THE PROGRAM DEVELOPED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE DUTIES OF THE
LONG–TERM CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE NAVIGATION PROGRAM INCLUDE:

(1) PROVIDING INFORMATION AND REFERRALS TO LONG–TERM CARE
AND CHRONIC DISEASE SERVICES;

(2) PROVIDING COGNITIVE ASSESSMENTS SCREENING FOR
INDIVIDUALS CONCERNED WITH THEIR COGNITION;

(2) (3) PROVIDING PROGRAMS THAT ENGAGE INDIVIDUALS WHO
DEMONSTRATE SYMPTOMS OF DEMENTIA THAT INTERFERE WITH ACTIVITIES OF
DAILY LIVING, REGULAR EXERCISE, AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES;

(3) (4) PROVIDING SUPPORT FOR CAREGIVERS OF INDIVIDUALS
WHO DEMONSTRATE SYMPTOMS OF DEMENTIA THAT INTERFERE WITH ACTIVITIES
OF DAILY LIVING;

(4) (5) CONSULTING WITH AND PROVIDING TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE TO AREA AGENCY STAFF WHO INTERACT WITH INDIVIDUALS WITH:

(I) DEMENTIA DIAGNOSES; OR
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 668 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) COGNITIVE CHANGES THAT MAY BE ASSOCIATED WITH
DEMENTIA; AND

(5) (6) ESTABLISHING RELATIONSHIPS WITH HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS TO FACILITATE CONTACT BETWEEN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND:

(I) INDIVIDUALS WHO DEMONSTRATE SYMPTOMS OF
DEMENTIA THAT INTERFERE WITH ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING; AND

(II) CAREGIVERS OF INDIVIDUALS WHO DEMONSTRATE
SYMPTOMS OF DEMENTIA THAT INTERFERE WITH ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING; AND

(6) PROVIDING ANY OTHER APPROPRIATE SERVICE.

(C) THE SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL BE PROVIDED ALONG WITH THE SERVICES DESCRIBED IN §§ 10–307 AND
10–309 OF THIS TITLE.

10–1303.

(A) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$2,400,000 TO MANAGE THE LONG–TERM CARE AND DEMENTIA CARE NAVIGATION
PROGRAMS STATEWIDE AND TO FUND THE PROGRAMS LOCALLY.

(B) THE FUNDS APPROPRIATED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE
DISTRIBUTED PROPORTIONALLY TO EACH AREA AGENCY BASED ON A FORMULA
DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT THAT CONSIDERS THE NEEDS OF NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS WHO WILL LIKELY NEED LONG–TERM CARE OR DEMENTIA CARE
SERVICES IN EACH JURISDICTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4