START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

Chapter 218

(House Bill 693)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Pharmacy – Board Membership ~~and,~~ Delegated Pharmacy Acts,
and Sunset Extension

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the State Board of Pharmacy to include a
registered pharmacy technician; authorizing a licensed pharmacist, under certain
circumstances, to delegate ~~pharmacy~~ ~~acts~~ the entry of certain data into databases or
patient charts to be performed at a remote location to a registered pharmacy
technician and a registered pharmacy intern; ~~repealing~~ ~~the~~ ~~prohibition~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~
~~registered~~ ~~pharmacy~~ ~~technician~~ ~~administering~~ ~~influenza~~ ~~vaccines;~~ prohibiting
registered pharmacy technicians and pharmacy technician trainees from making
decisions that require the professional judgment of a pharmacist; prohibiting a
registered pharmacy technician from administering a vaccination except under
certain circumstances; continuing the Board in accordance with the provisions of the
Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law) by extending to a certain date the
termination provisions relating to certain statutory and regulatory authority of the
Board; and generally relating to the State Board of Pharmacy.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–101(a) ~~and~~ ~~12–307(d)~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–101(g), 12–202(a) and (b), 12–307(d), 12–6B–06, and 12–802
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–307(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

12–101.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 218 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(g) (1) “Delegated pharmacy act” means an activity that constitutes the
practice of pharmacy delegated by a licensed pharmacist under this title and regulations
adopted by the Board.

(2) “Delegated pharmacy act” does not include:

(i) An act within the parameters of a therapy management contract
as provided under Subtitle 6A of this title;

[(ii) The EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 12–6B–06 OF THIS TITLE,
THE administration of an influenza A vaccination in accordance with § 12–508 of this title;]

[(iii)] (II) The delegation of a pharmacy act by a registered
pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, or pharmacy technician trainee;

[(iv)] (III) A pharmacy activity performed by a pharmacy student in
accordance with § 12–301(b) of this title;

[(v)] (IV) A pharmacy activity performed by an applicant for a
license to practice pharmacy in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board; [or]

(V) (VI) A DECISION–MAKING TASK THAT REQUIRES THE
PROFESSIONAL JUDGMENT OF A PHARMACIST; AND

(vi) (VII) The performance of other functions prohibited in
regulations adopted by the Board.

12–202.

(a) (1) The Board consists of [twelve] 13 members.

(2) Of the [twelve] 13 Board members:

(i) Ten shall be licensed pharmacists, including:

1. Two who at the time of appointment practice primarily in
chain store pharmacies;

2. Two who at the time of appointment practice primarily in
independent pharmacies;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

3. Two who at the time of appointment practice primarily in
an acute–care hospital;

4. One who at the time of appointment practices primarily in
a pharmacy that provides services to a long–term care facility;

5. One who at the time of appointment practices primarily in
a pharmacy that specializes in the provision of home infusion/home care services; and

6. Two pharmacists at–large; [and]

(II) ONE SHALL BE A REGISTERED PHARMACY TECHNICIAN;
AND

[(ii)] (III) Two shall be consumer members.

(3) (i) The Governor shall appoint the chain store pharmacist members,
with the advice of the Secretary, from a list of names submitted to the Secretary and the
Governor by the Maryland Association of Chain Drug Stores.

(ii) The Governor shall appoint the independent pharmacist
members, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list of names submitted to the Secretary
and the Governor by the Maryland Pharmacists Association and the Maryland
Pharmaceutical Society.

(iii) The Governor shall appoint the acute–care hospital pharmacist
members, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list of names submitted to the Secretary
and the Governor by the Maryland Society of Health–System Pharmacists.

(iv) The Governor shall appoint the long–term care facility
pharmacist member, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list of names submitted to the
Secretary and the Governor by the Maryland Chapter of the American Society of
Consultant Pharmacists.

(v) The Governor shall appoint the home infusion/home care
pharmacist member, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list of names submitted to the
Secretary and the Governor by the Maryland Society of Health–System Pharmacists.

(vi) The Governor shall appoint the at–large pharmacist members,
with the advice of the Secretary, from a list of all names submitted to the Maryland
Pharmacists Association, and then forwarded to the Secretary and the Governor.

(VII) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT THE REGISTERED
PHARMACY TECHNICIAN MEMBER, WITH THE ADVICE OF THE SECRETARY, FROM A
LIST OF ALL NAMES SUBMITTED TO THE SECRETARY AND THE GOVERNOR BY THE

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 218 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

MARYLAND SOCIETY OF HEALTH–SYSTEM PHARMACISTS AND THE MARYLAND
PHARMACISTS ASSOCIATION.

[(vii)] (VIII) Except for the at–large vacancies, the number of names on
each list submitted to the Secretary and the Governor under this paragraph shall be three
times the number of vacancies.

(4) For each pharmacist vacancy AND EACH REGISTERED PHARMACY
TECHNICIAN VACANCY:

(i) The Board shall notify all licensed pharmacists, REGISTERED
PHARMACY TECHNICIANS, and other interested parties of record in the State of the
vacancy to solicit nominations to fill the vacancy and provide information for contacting a
representative of the group that submits the list of names to the Governor under paragraph
(3) of this subsection; and

(ii) Except for the at–large vacancies, each association that is
responsible for submitting a list of nominees to the Secretary and the Governor under this
section shall:

1. Issue a nomination form upon the request of any licensed
pharmacist and consider all nominations received by the association’s deadline;

2. Form a committee, which recognizes diversity within the
State in geographic distribution, sex, race, and age, comprised of at least five pharmacists
to review nominations, interview all qualified nominees in a meeting open to the public,
and select three names for each vacancy to be submitted to the Secretary and the Governor;
and

3. In the event that fewer than three qualified nominees are
submitted to the association, select any additional names that are needed to complete the
list required to be submitted to the Secretary and the Governor under this section.

(5) The Governor shall appoint the consumer members with the advice of
the Secretary and the advice and consent of the Senate.

(6) Each member of the Board shall be a resident of this State.

(7) A member of the Board shall be recused from all aspects of the licensing
exam if that Board member:

(i) Is a member of the board of trustees at a school of pharmacy;

(ii) Is a teacher at a school of pharmacy; or

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

(iii) Acquires the member’s primary source of income through
employment by a school of pharmacy.

(b) Each pharmacist member AND EACH REGISTERED PHARMACY
TECHNICIAN MEMBER of the Board shall:

(1) Be skilled and competent in practicing pharmacy; and

(2) Have at least 5 years of active pharmacy practice.

12–307.

(d) A licensed pharmacist may delegate pharmacy acts to a registered pharmacy
technician, pharmacy student, or pharmacy technician trainee provided that ONLY IF the
delegated pharmacy acts:

(1) Are directly supervised by a licensed pharmacist;

(2) Are not required to be performed by a licensed pharmacist;

(3) Are within the education, training, experience, and area of practice of
the delegating licensed pharmacist; and

(4) Are appropriate to the education, training, and experience of the
registered pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, or pharmacy technician trainee.

(E) A LICENSED PHARMACIST MAY DELEGATE PHARMACY ACTS, INCLUDING
THE ENTERING ENTRY OF PRESCRIPTION–RELATED DATA INTO DATABASES OR
PATIENT CHARTS, TO BE PERFORMED AT A REMOTE LOCATION TO A REGISTERED
PHARMACY TECHNICIAN OR A REGISTERED PHARMACY INTERN ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~THAT~~
THE DELEGATED PHARMACY ACTS IF:

(1) ARE SUPERVISED BY A LICENSED PHARMACIST;

(1) THE REGISTERED PHARMACY TECHNICIAN OR REGISTERED
PHARMACY INTERN HAS IMMEDIATE ELECTRONIC ACCESS TO A PHARMACIST WHO
CAN PROVIDE ASSISTANCE AS NEEDED; AND

(2) THE DATA ENTRY:

(2) (I) ARE IS NOT REQUIRED TO BE PERFORMED BY A LICENSED
PHARMACIST;

(3) DO NOT INVOLVE THE COMPOUNDING, DISTRIBUTION, OR
DISPENSING OF PRESCRIPTION OR NONPRESCRIPTION DRUGS;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 218 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) (II) ARE IS WITHIN THE EDUCATION, TRAINING, EXPERIENCE,
AND AREA OF PRACTICE OF THE DELEGATING LICENSED PHARMACIST;

(5) (III) ARE IS APPROPRIATE TO THE EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND
EXPERIENCE OF THE REGISTERED PHARMACY TECHNICIAN OR THE REGISTERED
PHARMACY INTERN; AND

(6) (IV) IF THE DELEGATED ACT DATA ENTRY INVOLVES ACCESS TO
PROTECTED PATIENT INFORMATION UNDER THE FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE
PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996, CAN BE PERFORMED IN A
MANNER THAT MAINTAINS THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF PATIENT INFORMATION.

12–6B–06.

(a) Registration authorizes a registered [pharmacist] PHARMACY technician to
perform delegated pharmacy acts as defined in § 12–101 of this title while the registration
is effective.

(b) A registered pharmacy technician or a pharmacy technician trainee may not:

(1) Act within the parameters of a therapy management contract as
provided under Subtitle 6A of this title;

(2) [Administer an influenza vaccination in accordance with § 12–508 of
this title] MAKE DECISIONS THAT REQUIRE THE PROFESSIONAL JUDGMENT OF A
PHARMACIST;

(3) Delegate a pharmacy act that was delegated to the registered pharmacy
technician or individual engaging in a Board approved technician training program; or

(4) Perform other functions prohibited by regulations adopted by the
Board.

(C) (1) A REGISTERED PHARMACY TECHNICIAN MAY ADMINISTER AN, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 12–508 OF THIS TITLE:

(I) AN INFLUENZA, COVID–19, OR PNEUMONIA VACCINATION
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 12–508 OF THIS TITLE TO AN INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST 18
YEARS OLD; AND

(II) A RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL VIRUS OR SHINGLES
VACCINATION TO AN INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST 50 YEARS OLD.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
REGISTERED PHARMACY TECHNICIAN MAY NOT ADMINISTER A VACCINATION IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 12–508 OF THIS TITLE.

(D) A PHARMACY TECHNICIAN TRAINEE MAY NOT ADMINISTER A
VACCINATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 12–508 OF THIS TITLE.

12–802.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Program Evaluation
Act, this title and all rules and regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and be
of no effect after July 1, [2023] 2033 2025.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2023.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7