START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 447

Chapter 447

(House Bill 626)

AN ACT concerning

Animal Testing and Research – Human–Relevant Research Funding and Animal
Testing and Research ~~Licensure~~ Contributions

FOR the purpose of establishing the Human–Relevant Research Fund under the
administration of the Maryland Technology Development Corporation as a special,
nonlapsing fund; requiring that the interest earnings of the Fund be credited to the
Fund; requiring the Corporation to establish a grant and loan program to provide
grants and loans for State–funded, human–relevant animal testing alternatives
research; requiring ~~a~~ ~~person,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~after~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~issued~~ ~~a~~ ~~license~~ ~~by~~
certain ~~persons~~ research facilities who engage in animal testing or research to pay a
certain contribution to the Secretary of Health ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~person~~ ~~may~~ ~~use~~ ~~nonhuman~~
~~animals~~ ~~to~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~medical~~ ~~or~~ ~~product~~ ~~testing~~ ~~or~~ ~~research~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State;~~ and generally
relating to the Human–Relevant Research Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–401(a) and (c) ~~and~~ ~~10–429(a)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(g)~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–4D–01 through 10–4D–06 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4D.
Human–Relevant Research Fund and Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 24–2201 through ~~24–2205~~ 24–2203 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 22.
Animal Testing and Research ~~License~~ Contribution”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(1) and (2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 447 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “Corporation” means the Maryland Technology Development Corporation.

~~10–429.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~part~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(g)~~ ~~“Institutional~~ ~~review~~ ~~board”~~ ~~has~~ ~~the~~ ~~meaning~~ ~~stated~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~federal~~ ~~regulations~~
~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~protection~~ ~~of~~ ~~human~~ ~~subjects.~~

SUBTITLE 4D. HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH FUND AND PROGRAM.

10–4D–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING TERMS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH REVIEW BOARD
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–4D–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) “CORPORATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–401 OF THIS TITLE.

(D) “FUND” MEANS THE HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH FUND.

(E) “INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
10–429 OF THIS TITLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 447

10–4D–02.

(A) THERE IS A HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROMOTE STATE–FUNDED
RESEARCH INTENDED TO DEVELOP HUMAN–RELEVANT ALTERNATIVES TO USING
NONHUMAN ANIMALS IN MEDICAL AND PRODUCT TESTING AND RESEARCH
THROUGH GRANTS AND LOANS TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ENTITIES IN THE STATE.

(C) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND UNDER § 24–2203 §
24–2202 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) MONEY IN THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY TO:

(1) AWARD GRANTS AND LOANS FOR STATE–FUNDED,
HUMAN–RELEVANT ANIMAL TESTING ALTERNATIVES RESEARCH IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BOARD; AND

(2) PAY THE COSTS NECESSARY TO ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY IN THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 447 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) (1) THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE STATE BUDGET BILL EACH
FISCAL YEAR AN APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND.

(2) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

10–4D–03.

(A) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE CORPORATION
SHALL ESTABLISH A GRANT AND LOAN PROGRAM TO PROVIDE GRANTS AND LOANS
FOR STATE–FUNDED, HUMAN–RELEVANT ANIMAL TESTING ALTERNATIVES
RESEARCH.

(B) A GRANT OR LOAN AWARDED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IS CONTINGENT ON
THE RECIPIENT:

(1) SUBMITTING TO THE BOARD APPROVAL FROM AN INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD; AND

(2) ENTERING INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE
CORPORATION THAT:

(I) (1) ESTABLISHES THE SCOPE OF THE STATE’S
OWNERSHIP OR OTHER FINANCIAL INTEREST IN THE COMMERCIALIZATION AND
OTHER BENEFITS OF THE RESULTS, PRODUCTS, INVENTIONS, AND DISCOVERIES
RESULTING FROM STATE–FUNDED, HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH; AND

(II) (2) TO THE EXTENT CONSISTENT WITH FEDERAL AND
STATE LAW, REFLECTS THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY POLICIES OF THE
CORPORATION.

(C) A RECIPIENT SHALL SUBMIT THE APPROVAL REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF THIS SECTION WITHIN 6 MONTHS AFTER THE AWARD OF THE
GRANT OR LOAN.

(D) THE CORPORATION MAY NOT DISBURSE GRANT OR LOAN MONEY TO A
RECIPIENT UNTIL THE RECIPIENT MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B)
OF THIS SECTION.

10–4D–04.

(A) THE CORPORATION SHALL CONTRACT WITH AN INDEPENDENT
SCIENTIFIC REVIEW BOARD COMPOSED OF RECOGNIZED SCIENTIFIC EXPERTS IN

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 447

THE FIELD OF HUMAN–RELEVANT ANIMAL TESTING ALTERNATIVES TO ACT AS THE
HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH REVIEW BOARD.

(B) THE BOARD SHALL:

(1) REVIEW, EVALUATE, RANK, AND RATE RESEARCH PROPOSALS FOR
STATE–FUNDED, HUMAN–RELEVANT ANIMAL TESTING ALTERNATIVES RESEARCH:

(I) BASED ON THE PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES
ESTABLISHED BY THE CORPORATION; AND

(II) IN A MANNER THAT GIVES DUE CONSIDERATION TO THE
SCIENTIFIC, MEDICAL, AND ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE RESEARCH; AND

(2) BASED ON THE RANKINGS AND RATINGS AWARDED TO THE
RESEARCH PROPOSALS BY THE BOARD, MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
CORPORATION FOR THE AWARD AND DISBURSEMENT OF GRANTS AND LOANS.

(C) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) IS NOT ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE A GRANT OR LOAN FOR
STATE–FUNDED, HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH FROM THE FUND; AND

(2) SHALL BE SUBJECT TO CONFLICT OF INTEREST STANDARDS THAT
ARE AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE STANDARDS ON CONFLICT OF INTEREST
ADOPTED BY THE FEDERAL NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

10–4D–05.

THE CORPORATION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE BOARD, SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR AWARDING AND MAKING THE
DISBURSEMENT OF A GRANT OR LOAN.

10–4D–06.

(A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE CORPORATION AND THE
BOARD SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE PROGRESS
OF THE HUMAN–RELEVANT ANIMAL TESTING ALTERNATIVES RESEARCH
CONDUCTED WITH MONEY FROM GRANTS OR LOANS AWARDED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE.

(B) THE REPORT SHALL IDENTIFY:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 447 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) EACH RECIPIENT OF MONEY FROM THE FUND;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF MONEY AWARDED TO EACH RECIPIENT; AND

(3) A DESCRIPTION OF THE TYPE OF STATE–FUNDED,
HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH PERFORMED BY THE RECIPIENT AND THE ANIMAL
TESTS THE RESEARCH IS INTENDED TO REPLACE.

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 22. ANIMAL TESTING AND RESEARCH LICENSE CONTRIBUTION.

24–2201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE TO CONDUCT MEDICAL OR PRODUCT
TESTING OR RESEARCH USING ANIMALS.

(C) “LICENSEE” MEANS A PERSON WHO HOLDS A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE, “ANIMAL AND PLANT HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE FORM 7023”
MEANS THE FORM REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE UNDER 7 U.S.C. § 2143 AND 9 C.F.R. § 2.36.

24–2202.

(A) ON OR AFTER BEFORE JANUARY 1, 15 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024,
A PERSON EACH RESEARCH FACILITY THAT IS LOCATED IN THE STATE AND IS
REQUIRED TO SUBMIT AN ANIMAL AND PLANT HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE FORM
7023 SHALL BE LICENSED BY THE SECRETARY BEFORE THE PERSON MAY USE
~~NONHUMAN~~ ~~ANIMALS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~TESTING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RESEARCH~~
IN THE STATE.

~~24–2203.~~

(A) (1) AN APPLICANT FOR A LICENSE SHALL SUBMIT AN APPLICATION
TO THE SECRETARY ON THE FORM THAT THE SECRETARY REQUIRES.

(2) AN INITIAL APPLICATION SHALL REQUIRE AN APPLICANT TO
~~INCLUDE:~~

(I) THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS THAT WILL BE USED TO CONDUCT
THE MEDICAL OR PRODUCT TESTING OR RESEARCH;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 447

(II) A LIST OF THE SPECIES OF ANIMALS THAT WILL BE USED TO
CONDUCT THE MEDICAL OR PRODUCT TESTING OR RESEARCH; AND

(III) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE SECRETARY.

(B) (1) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS PAY TO THE DEPARTMENT A
CONTRIBUTION IN THE AMOUNT OF:

(I) (1) $5,000 FOR UP TO 500 100 ANIMALS;

(II) (2) $10,000 FOR MORE THAN 500 100 BUT NOT MORE
THAN 1,000 500 ANIMALS;

(III) (3) $25,000 $55,000 FOR MORE THAN 1,000 500 BUT NOT
MORE THAN 5,000 ANIMALS;

(IV) $35,000 FOR MORE THAN 5,000 BUT NOT MORE THAN 10,000
ANIMALS; AND

(V) (4) $50,000 $75,000 FOR MORE THAN 10,000 5,000
ANIMALS.

(2) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE MAY BE PAID IN QUARTERLY
~~INSTALLMENTS.~~

(B) THE AMOUNT OF THE CONTRIBUTION TO BE PAID UNDER SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE BASED ON THE TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS
REPORTED IN COLUMN F ON THE MOST RECENTLY SUBMITTED ANIMAL AND PLANT
HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE FORM 7023.

(C) THE SECRETARY SHALL:

(1) DISTRIBUTE THE AMOUNT OF LICENSING FEES NECESSARY TO
ADMINISTER THE LICENSING PROGRAM TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE COST ACCOUNT;
~~AND~~

(2) DISTRIBUTE DISTRIBUTE THE REMAINING FEES FUNDS PAID
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO THE HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH
FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–4D–02 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE AFTER MAKING THE DISTRIBUTION REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS
~~SUBSECTION.~~

~~24–2204.~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 447 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) THE SECRETARY SHALL ISSUE A LICENSE TO AN APPLICANT WHO
SUBMITS THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER § 24–2203(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND
ON PAYMENT OF:

(I) THE TOTAL ANNUAL LICENSE FEE; OR

(II) THE FIRST QUARTERLY INSTALLMENT OF THE TOTAL
ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.

(2) THE TERM OF A LICENSE IS 1 YEAR.

(B) THE SECRETARY MAY DENY A LICENSE TO AN APPLICANT OR MAY
SUSPEND OR REVOKE A LICENSE IF THE APPLICANT OR LICENSEE:

(1) FRAUDULENTLY OR DECEPTIVELY MAKES A STATEMENT ON AN
APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE;

(2) FAILS TO MAKE A QUARTERLY INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF THE
ANNUAL LICENSE FEE; OR

(3) COMMITS FREQUENT OR NUMEROUS VIOLATIONS OF THIS
SUBTITLE OR THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) EACH LICENSEE SHALL:

(1) MAINTAIN A RECORD OF ALL ANIMALS USED AND DISPOSED OF TO
CONDUCT MEDICAL OR PRODUCT TESTING OR RESEARCH, INCLUDING THE NUMBER
AND TYPES OF ANIMALS USED; AND

(2) SUBMIT TO THE SECRETARY A QUARTERLY REPORT INCLUDING
THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
SECRETARY SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE AGGREGATE NUMBER OF EACH
~~SPECIES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ANIMAL~~ ~~USED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~TESTING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RESEARCH~~ ~~BY~~
LICENSEES IN THE STATE.

~~24–2205.~~

(A) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT USE NONHUMAN ANIMALS TO CONDUCT
MEDICAL OR PRODUCT TESTING OR RESEARCH IN THE STATE UNLESS LICENSED BY
THE SECRETARY.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 447

(2) A PERSON MAY NOT AID OR ABET THE UNAUTHORIZED USE OF
~~NONHUMAN~~ ~~ANIMALS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~TESTING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RESEARCH~~
IN THE STATE.

(B) A PERSON IN VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IS
GUILTY OF A FELONY AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO:

(1) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $5,000; OR

(2) FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, A FINE NOT EXCEEDING
~~$20,000.~~

24–2203.

A RESEARCH FACILITY THAT FAILS TO PAY THE CONTRIBUTION REQUIRED
UNDER § 24–2202(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY OF
NOT MORE THAN $1,000 PER DAY.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (1) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law or by regulation of the
Treasurer, the Treasurer shall credit to the General Fund any interest on or other income
from State money that the Treasurer invests.

(2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE HUMAN–RELEVANT RESEARCH FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 447 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10