START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 683 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 683 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources – Apprentice Hunting License – Alterations 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to issue an apprentice 
hunting license to a person younger than age 17 who has previously been issued an 
apprentice hunting license. DNR must require an applicant for a second or subsequent 
apprentice hunting license to repeat the required DNR-approved short online or electronic 
course of instruction in competency in firearms and hunter safety. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances. Any 
potential impact on hunting license fee revenue is anticipated to be minimal. DNR can 
update regulations as necessary using existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Apprentice Hunting Licenses  
 
There is a one-time, nonrenewable, apprentice hunting license that allows the purchaser to 
hunt all legal game birds and mammals in a single season without the purchase of additional 
stamps (unless the purchaser is hunting migratory game birds or deer during bow and arrow 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 683/ Page 2 
or black powder season). An apprentice hunting license may not be issued to a person who 
has previously been issued any hunting license in Maryland. 
 
Prior to obtaining an apprentice hunting license, a person must satisfactorily complete a 
short online or electronic course of instruction in competency in firearms and hunter safety 
that is approved by DNR. A person may only hunt under the apprentice license if 
(1) accompanied and directly supervised by a person who is at least age 18 and has a valid 
resident nonapprentice hunting license and (2) the person accompanying the apprentice 
hunter maintains close visual and verbal contact with, provides adequate direction to, and 
is in a position to immediately assume control of the firearm of the apprentice hunting 
licensee. However, if an apprentice hunting licensee has completed the full hunter safety 
course and obtained a certificate of competency in firearms and hunter safety, the licensee 
may hunt without supervision (unless the licensee is participating in a DNR-approved 
junior hunt). 
 
The fee for a resident apprentice hunting license is $10.00, and the fee for a nonresident 
apprentice hunting license is $20.00. 
 
Hunting Licenses, Generally 
 
With certain exceptions, a person may not hunt or attempt to hunt during open season and 
in any permitted manner any game birds and mammals in the State without a resident or 
nonresident hunter’s license. Resident and nonresident hunting licenses enable the 
purchaser to hunt all legal game birds and mammals during any appropriate season without 
the purchase of additional stamps, unless the purchaser is hunting migratory game birds, 
wild waterfowl, or deer during bow and arrow season or black powder season, in which 
case specified stamps are required. In general, unless grandfathered by having obtained a 
license prior to July 1, 1977, or hunting with supervision under an apprentice hunting 
license, all hunters must obtain a certificate of competency in firearms and hunter safety in 
order to be eligible for a hunting license. 
 
Varying fees apply for hunting licenses and stamps. A resident hunting license is $24.50, a 
resident senior hunting license is $5.00, and a resident junior hunting license is $10.50. 
A nonresident hunting license is $130.00, and a nonresident three-day hunting license is 
$45.00. Although not specified in statute, DNR charges a fee of $65.00 for a nonresident 
senior hunting license and $32.50 for a nonresident junior hunting license. 
 
Junior Hunt Days 
 
DNR establishes junior hunt days just for hunters age 16 and younger to hunt accompanied 
by a mentor. All young hunters participating in the junior hunt days must (1) have 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 683/ Page 3 
completed a hunter education course; (2) possess a valid hunting license (or be exempt 
from the license requirements); and (3) be accompanied in the field by an individual who:   
 
 
is at least age 21;  
 
possesses a valid Maryland hunting license, or is exempt from the license 
requirements; and 
 
is unarmed. 
 
Hunters participating in the junior waterfowl hunt days must possess the printed receipt 
showing proof of purchase of the Maryland Migratory Game Bird Stamp. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 91 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3