START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 135

Chapter 135

(House Bill 625)

AN ACT concerning

Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program –
Alterations

FOR the purpose of expanding the forms of financial assistance available under the
Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program; altering
eligibility requirements for projects that may receive financial assistance under the
Program; altering the time period when applications may be submitted under the
Program; repealing certain restrictions on the amount of financial assistance that
may be provided under the Program; altering the processes for applications to the
Program and the distribution of financial assistance; and generally relating to the
Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–2801 through 4–2804
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–2806
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

4–2801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Affordable” means that monthly housing costs [do not exceed 30% of a
household’s income, where the household’s income does not exceed 80% of the statewide
median income for a household of like size] ARE AFFORDABLE TO A FAMILY OF LIMITED
INCOME AS DETERMINED UNDER § 4–212 OF THIS TITLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 135 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) “Appraisal gap” means the amount by which the total cost of eligible
construction expenses exceeds the contract sales price of a qualified property when it is
initially sold to an owner–occupant.

(d) (1) “Eligible construction expenses” means any amount that is expended
on the construction or substantial rehabilitation of a qualified property.

(2) “Eligible construction expenses” includes any amount expended on:

(i) acquisition costs;

(ii) roof repair and replacement;

(iii) chimney repair and lining;

(iv) internal and external doors;

(v) windows;

(vi) masonry;

(vii) floor joists;

(viii) finished flooring;

(ix) framing;

(x) structural repairs;

(xi) foundation repairs;

(xii) plumbing, electrical, and mechanical systems;

(xiii) architectural and engineering consulting fees;

(xiv) tools and equipment rental; [and]

(xv) new construction;

(XVI) INFRASTRUCTURE; AND

(XVII)OTHER EXPENSES AS DETERMINED BY THE SECRETARY.

(e) “Financial assistance” [does not include:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 135

(1) loans; or

(2) other instruments that would create debt through property liens on
qualified property under this subtitle] INCLUDES:

(1) A GRANT;

(2) A LOAN;

(3) A REDUCTION IN THE PRINCIPAL OBLIGATION OF OR RATE OF
INTEREST PAYABLE ON A LOAN OR PORTION OF A LOAN;

(4) A PREPAYMENT OF INTEREST ON A SUBORDINATE OR SUPERIOR
LOAN OR PORTION OF A LOAN;

(5) AN ASSURANCE;

(6) A GUARANTEE; AND

(7) ANY OTHER FORM OF CREDIT ENHANCEMENT.

(f) “Fund” means the Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial
Assistance Fund established under this subtitle.

(g) “Qualified project” means the construction or substantial rehabilitation of a
qualified property if the eligible construction expenses do not exceed $500,000.

(h) “Qualified property” means residential real property that is:

(1) newly constructed or a formerly vacant structure that has been
substantially rehabilitated;

(2) located in:

(i) a low–income census tract as defined by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development; and

(ii) an area designated as a sustainable community [under § 6–205
of this article]; and

(3) constructed or rehabilitated with the purpose of being sold to an
owner–occupant at an affordable sales price.

(I) “SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY” MEANS AN AREA DESIGNATED AS A
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY UNDER § 6–205 OF THIS ARTICLE.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 135 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4–2802.

(a) There is an Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial Assistance
Program in the Department.

(b) The purpose of the Program is to make financial assistance available to
affordable housing developers working in low–income census tracts AND SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES in order to help close appraisal gaps that occur in historically redlined
neighborhoods.

4–2803.

(a) In the fiscal year in which a qualified project is [completed] PROPOSED, an
individual or business entity may apply to the Department for financial assistance to cover
the appraisal gap for the project in accordance with this section.

(b) [The amount of the financial assistance provided under subsection (a) of this
section shall not exceed 35% of the lesser of:

(1) the total cost of eligible construction expenses; or

(2) 80% of the national median sale price for new homes on the date of sale,
as determined by the most recent census data available] THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
DEVELOP BY REGULATION AN APPLICATION FORM AND A PROCESS FOR THE
DISTRIBUTION OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THIS SECTION.

(c) Financial assistance provided under this section may be allocated among the
partners, members, or shareholders of a business entity in any manner agreed to by those
persons in writing.

(d) Financial assistance provided under this section may be used in conjunction
with other State, federal, or local funding sources.

(E) A QUALIFIED PROJECT RECEIVING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THIS
SECTION SHALL BE IN COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE
PLANS.

4–2804.

(a) Subject to § 4–2805 of this subtitle[, on application by an individual or
business entity that pays or incurs eligible construction expenses, the Department shall
provide financial assistance to the individual or business entity in the amount determined
under § 4–2803 of this subtitle] AND THE REGULATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ACCEPT AN APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 135

AN INDIVIDUAL OR BUSINESS ENTITY THAT PROPOSES TO DEVELOP A QUALIFIED
PROJECT.

(b) The application shall be in the form and shall contain any information that
the Department requires by regulation.

(c) The Department shall approve all applications that qualify for financial
assistance under this subtitle in a timely manner.

4–2806.

The Department shall adopt:

(1) regulations to specify criteria for the application for and approval of the
financial assistance under this subtitle; and

(2) any other regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this
subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5