START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 677 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 677 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Pride of Baltimore II - Appropriations - Extension 
 
 
This bill reestablishes the mandated appropriation (and related reporting requirements) for 
the operation of the Pride of Baltimore II established by Chapter 854 of 2018. Specifically, 
the bill requires the Governor, for fiscal 2024 through 2028, to include in the annual State 
budget an appropriation of $500,000 from the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) for the 
operation of the Pride of Baltimore II. By December 1 each year, any person or entity that 
receives funds under the bill must submit a specified report to the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT) and specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. TTF expenditures increase by $500,000 annually from 
FY 2024 through 2028 – reflecting discretionary funding in FY 2024 and the bill’s 
mandated appropriation from FY 2025 through 2028. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2025 through 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
Net Effect 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 677/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 854 required the Governor to include in the annual 
State budget for fiscal 2020 through 2023 an appropriation of $500,000 from TTF for the 
operation of the Pride of Baltimore II. By December 1 each year, any person or entity that 
receives funds pursuant to the Act is required to submit a report that includes (1) an 
accounting of how the funds were spent, as specified; (2) an itinerary and any other 
information that demonstrates that the ship was operated solely to promote historical 
maritime education, foster economic development and tourism, and represent the citizens 
of the State in every port visited; and (3) a strategic business plan that includes specified 
information. 
 
The bill extends the termination date of Chapter 854 from June 30, 2023, to June 30, 2028. 
It also establishes a new mandated appropriation of $500,000 annually for the Pride of 
Baltimore II – for fiscal 2025 through 2028. (Although the bill specifies that the Governor 
must also include funding in the State budget for this purpose in fiscal 2024, the  
General Assembly cannot mandate funding for fiscal 2024 during the 2023 session.) The 
annual report described above is also modified. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase by $500,000 annually from fiscal 2025 
through 2028 due to the bill’s mandated appropriation for the operation of the  
Pride of Baltimore II. Although the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced does not include 
funding for the operation of the Pride of Baltimore II, and funding is discretionary in that 
year under the bill, this analysis assumes that $500,000 is provided in fiscal 2024 as well. 
 
MDOT can continue to receive the required report using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 677/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3