START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 566

Chapter 566

(House Bill 630)

AN ACT concerning

~~Public~~ ~~Utilities~~ ~~–~~ ~~Primary~~ ~~and~~ ~~Secondary~~ Utility Account Holders – ~~Domestic~~
~~Violence~~ Victims of Abuse – Protections

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~utility~~ ~~to~~ ~~release~~ ~~a~~ ~~primary~~ ~~or~~ ~~secondary~~ ~~account~~
~~holder~~ ~~who~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~victim~~ ~~of~~ ~~domestic~~ ~~violence~~ ~~from~~ ~~a~~ ~~contract~~ ~~held~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~utility~~
~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances~~ authorizing an account holder who is the victim of abuse
to terminate, and requiring a utility to allow for the termination of, the account
holder’s future liability under a utility contract under certain circumstances;
requiring a utility to allow an account holder who terminates a utility contract under
this Act to allow the account holder to open a new utility account for a new premises
notwithstanding a certain account balance or arrearage; and generally relating to
~~public~~ utility accounts.

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 5–502
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

5–502.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “PRIMARY ACCOUNT HOLDER” MEANS THE INDIVIDUAL IN WHOSE
NAME A UTILITY ACCOUNT IS ESTABLISHED.

(3) “SECONDARY ACCOUNT HOLDER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS
LISTED ON A UTILITY ACCOUNT BUT WHO IS NOT THE PRIMARY ACCOUNT HOLDER.

(2) “ABUSE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–501(B) OF THE
FAMILY LAW ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 566 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “ACCOUNT HOLDER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL IN WHOSE NAME A
UTILITY ACCOUNT IS MAINTAINED INDIVIDUALLY OR JOINTLY WITH OTHER
INDIVIDUALS.

(4) “OFFENDER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO COMMITS AN ACT OF
ABUSE.

(5) “QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY” MEANS:

(I) A LICENSED PHYSICIAN OR PSYCHOLOGIST AUTHORIZED TO
PRACTICE UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE;

(II) A SOCIAL WORKER OR CASEWORKER OF ANY PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE HEALTH OR SOCIAL SERVICES AGENCY OR PROVIDER; OR

(III) AN ADVOCATE FROM A DOMESTIC VIOLENCE OR SEXUAL
ASSAULT PREVENTION OR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

(6) “REPORT BY A QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY” MEANS A REPORT BASED
ON INFORMATION RECEIVED BY A QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY WHILE ACTING IN A
PROFESSIONAL CAPACITY THAT:

(I) INDICATES THAT THE ACCOUNT HOLDER IS SEEKING
ASSISTANCE AS A RESULT OF BEING A VICTIM OF ABUSE; AND

(II) INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

1. THE NAME OF THE ACCOUNT HOLDER;

2. THE DATE, TIME, LOCATION, AND A BRIEF
DESCRIPTION OF THE INCIDENT;

3. THE NAME AND PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE
ALLEGED OFFENDER, IF KNOWN;

4. THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE EMPLOYER OF THE
QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY;

5. IF THE QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY IS REQUIRED TO BE
LICENSED, THE LICENSING ENTITY AND LICENSE NUMBER OF THE QUALIFIED THIRD
PARTY;

6. THE SIGNATURE OF THE QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY,
UNDER SEAL OF A NOTARY PUBLIC; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 566

7. THE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND SIGNATURE OF THE
ACCOUNT HOLDER UNDER PENALTY OF PERJURY.

(4) (7) “UTILITY” MEANS AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, AN ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER, A GAS COMPANY, A GAS SUPPLIER, A SEWAGE DISPOSAL COMPANY, A
WATER COMPANY, OR ANY COMBINATION OF THESE COMPANIES.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION, IF AN
ACCOUNT HOLDER IS A VICTIM OF ABUSE, THE ACCOUNT HOLDER MAY TERMINATE,
AND THE UTILITY SHALL ALLOW FOR THE TERMINATION OF, THE ACCOUNT
HOLDER’S FUTURE LIABILITY UNDER A UTILITY CONTRACT IF THE ACCOUNT
HOLDER PROVIDES THE UTILITY WITH WRITTEN NOTICE BY FIRST–CLASS MAIL OR
HAND DELIVERY OF THE ACCOUNT HOLDER’S REQUEST FOR TERMINATION OF THE
ACCOUNT HOLDER’S FUTURE LIABILITY UNDER THE CONTRACT.

(2) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A COPY OF AN ENFORCEABLE FINAL PEACE PROTECTIVE
ORDER ISSUED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE ACCOUNT HOLDER UNDER § 4–506 OF THE
FAMILY LAW ARTICLE;

(II) A COPY OF AN ENFORCEABLE FINAL PEACE ORDER, FOR
WHICH THE UNDERLYING ACT WAS AN ACT OF ABUSE, ISSUED FOR THE BENEFIT OF
THE ACCOUNT HOLDER UNDER § 3–1505 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE; OR

(III) A COPY OF A REPORT BY A QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY IF:

1. THE NAME AND PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE
ALLEGED OFFENDER ARE REDACTED; AND

2. THE REPORT WAS SIGNED BY THE QUALIFIED THIRD
PARTY WITHIN THE 60 DAYS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE DATE THE NOTICE IS
PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) AN ACCOUNT HOLDER WHO TERMINATES A UTILITY CONTRACT UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IS RESPONSIBLE FOR UTILITY CHARGES ONLY UP
TO AND INCLUDING THE BILLING CYCLE DURING WHICH THE WRITTEN NOTICE
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IS SUBMITTED.

(D) IF AN ACCOUNT HOLDER TERMINATES A UTILITY CONTRACT UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE UTILITY SHALL ALLOW THE ACCOUNT
HOLDER TO OPEN A NEW UTILITY ACCOUNT FOR A NEW PREMISES
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 566 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

NOTWITHSTANDING AN ACCOUNT BALANCE OR ARREARAGE AT THE PREMISES
DESCRIBED IN THE WRITTEN NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(B) (1) A UTILITY SHALL ALLOW A PRIMARY OR SECONDARY ACCOUNT
HOLDER TO BE RELEASED FROM A CONTRACT WITHOUT INCURRING A FEE,
PENALTY, OR CHARGE IF THE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY ACCOUNT HOLDER
PROVIDES AN ATTESTATION IN WRITING OF THE ACCOUNT HOLDER’S STATUS AS A
VICTIM OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

(2) THE WRITTEN ATTESTATION REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) CERTIFIED FILES OR RECORDS FROM A COURT OR A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR OTHER FEDERAL OR STATE AGENCY;

(II) DOCUMENTATION FROM A DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, SEXUAL
ASSAULT, OR HUMAN TRAFFICKING PREVENTION OR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
~~INDICATING~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRIMARY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SECONDARY~~ ~~ACCOUNT~~ ~~HOLDER~~ ~~PARTICIPATED~~
IN OR SOUGHT ASSISTANCE FROM THE PROGRAM; OR

(III) DOCUMENTATION FROM A RELIGIOUS, MEDICAL, OR OTHER
~~PROFESSIONAL~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~WHOM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRIMARY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SECONDARY~~ ~~ACCOUNT~~ ~~HOLDER~~
SOUGHT ASSISTANCE OR TREATMENT AS A SURVIVOR OF THREATENED,
ATTEMPTED, OR ACTUAL DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, SEXUAL ASSAULT, STALKING,
HARASSMENT, OR HUMAN TRAFFICKING.

(C) A UTILITY MAY NOT MAKE THE RELEASE FROM A CONTRACT UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION CONTINGENT ON:

(1) THE DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION OR ANY
FURTHER DETAILS ABOUT THE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY ACCOUNT HOLDER’S
STATUS AS A VICTIM OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE;

(2) THE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY ACCOUNT HOLDER MAINTAINING A
~~CONTRACTUAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~BILLING~~ ~~RESPONSIBILITY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~SEPARATED~~ ~~ACCOUNT~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~
~~PROVIDER;~~

(3) THE PRIMARY ACCOUNT HOLDER APPROVING THE RELEASE IF
THE SECONDARY ACCOUNT HOLDER IS THE PERSON MAKING THE REQUEST; OR

(4) A PAYMENT ON ARREARS ACCRUED BY THE ACCOUNT BEFORE THE
RELEASE REQUEST.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 566

(D) (1) A UTILITY SHALL RELEASE A PRIMARY OR SECONDARY ACCOUNT
HOLDER REQUESTING A RELEASE UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION NOT
LATER THAN 7 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE RELEASE REQUEST.

(2) A UTILITY SHALL DISPOSE OF ANY WRITTEN ATTESTATION
PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION:

(I) NOT LATER THAN 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE
INFORMATION; AND

(II) IN A MANNER THAT MAINTAINS THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF
THE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY ACCOUNT HOLDER.

(E) A UTILITY SHALL MAKE INFORMATION ABOUT THE OPTIONS AND
~~PROCESS~~ ~~DESCRIBED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CUSTOMERS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~ANY~~
WEBSITE, MOBILE APPLICATION, AND OTHER FORMS OF PUBLIC–FACING CUSTOMER
COMMUNICATION THE UTILITY MAINTAINS.

(F) A UTILITY MAY NOT BE SUBJECT TO LIABILITY FOR ANY CLAIMS ARISING
~~FROM~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~TAKEN~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OMISSION~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~RESPECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMPLYING~~ ~~WITH~~
THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5