START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 690 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 690 
(Delegate Edelson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland African American Museum Corporation - Board of Directors - 
Membership 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the board of directors of the Maryland African American 
Museum Corporation (MAAMC) by reducing the number of members from 37 to 25. 
Instead of the chairman (or designee) of the Commission on African American History and 
Culture serving as a member of the board, the commission must approve one member. The 
bill also adds one member of the board appointed by the President of the Senate and 
one member appointed by the Speaker of the House. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 428 and 429 of 1998 established MAAMC to plan, develop, and 
manage the Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and 
Culture in Baltimore City. MAAMC’s mission is to be a resource regarding the lives of 
African American Marylanders by collecting, preserving, interpreting, documenting, and 
exhibiting contributions that represent their history. The corporation is a public 
instrumentality and an independent unit of the Executive Branch. A 37-member board of 
directors manages the corporation’s affairs, including 28 members appointed by the 
Governor who have expertise in African American history, culture, museums, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 690/ Page 2 
fundraising, or who represent the diversity of communities throughout the State. The bill 
reduces this number of appointees to 19, among other changes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 332 (Senator Hayes) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland African American Museum Corporation; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2