START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 77

Chapter 77

(House Bill 648)

AN ACT concerning

Garrett County – Tax Sales – Auctioneer Fees

FOR the purpose of increasing the auctioneer’s fee for the tax sale of property in Garrett
County; and generally relating to tax sales of property in Garrett County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 14–813(e)(1)(iv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 14–813(e)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

14–813.

(e) (1) The following expenses relating to the sale shall be allowed, all of which
are liens on the property to be sold:

(iv) the auctioneer’s fee, as provided in paragraph (2) of this
subsection;

(2) The auctioneer’s fee allowed in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall
be:

(i) except in Baltimore City, Caroline County, Carroll County, Cecil
County, Dorchester County, Frederick County, Garrett County, Harford County, Howard
County, Kent County, Prince George’s County, Queen Anne’s County, Somerset County, St.
Mary’s County, Talbot County, Wicomico County, or Worcester County:

1. for any date when 1, 2, or 3 properties are sold, an amount
not to exceed $10; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 77 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. for any date when 4 or more properties are sold, $3 for each
property sold;

(ii) in Dorchester County, $7.50 for each property sold;

(iii) in Kent County, an amount not exceeding $7.50 for each property
sold;

(iv) in Cecil County and Queen Anne’s County, $7.50 for each
property sold;

(v) in [Garrett County,] Somerset County[,] and Wicomico County,
$8 for each property sold;

(vi) in Worcester County, the greater of $8 for each property sold or
$300, to be allocated pro rata among each property sold;

(vii) in Baltimore City:

1. for any date when 1, 2, or 3 properties are sold, an amount
not to exceed $10;

2. for any date when 4 or more properties are sold, $3 for each
property sold; and

3. in an electronic sale, an amount not to exceed $10 for each
property sold;

(viii) in Carroll County, the amount set by the Carroll County
Commissioners;

(ix) in Caroline County, GARRETT COUNTY, Harford County,
Howard County, Prince George’s County, and Talbot County, $10 for each property sold;

(x) in Frederick County, the lowest responsive bid for each property
sold; and

(xi) in St. Mary’s County, the actual cost charged by the auctioneer
for each property sold.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2