START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 671 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 671 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Garrett County - Board of County Commissioners - Meetings 
 
 
This bill requires the Garrett County Commissioners to hold public meetings in person or 
through live video streaming at least twice a month. The bill also prohibits the 
Garrett County Commissioners from meeting solely through live video streaming for more 
than two consecutive meetings in the absence of a formal declaration of a state of 
emergency. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Altering the meeting times of the Garrett County Commissioners will not 
affect county finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Garrett County Commissioners are required to hold public meetings 
weekly. Additionally, the commissioners must provide notice of the dates and times of all 
public meetings, including any schedule changes or cancellations. The commissioners must 
also schedule or announce administrative sessions to review matters as specified. Each 
commissioner is required to attend scheduled or planned meetings of an appointed 
commission, board, or committee. 
 
Garrett County has three county commissioners; each elected to serve a four-year term. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 671/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 524 (Senator McKay) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2