START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 655 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 655 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages Districts – Legislative Districting Plan 
References 
 
 
This emergency bill alters specified statutory references to the boundaries of 
Baltimore City’s alcoholic beverages districts, so that they are defined as coterminous with 
the legislative districts in the Legislative Districting Plan of 2022, rather than the 
Legislative Districting Plan of 2012. The bill requires the Baltimore City Board of License 
Commissioners to exempt an activity made unlawful by the bill if the license holder 
received approval from the board to conduct that activity by February 1, 2022, and has 
owned the licensed premises continuously since then. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Minimal. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
Baltimore City operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The affected provisions relate to (1) Class B beer, wine, and liquor licenses 
in the 46th alcoholic beverage district; (2) beer, wine, and liquor tasting licenses in the 
3000 block of Frederick Avenue in ward 20, precinct 9 of the 44A legislative district of 
Baltimore City; (3) general provisions relating to the issuance of alcoholic beverages 
licenses in the 40th, 41st, 43rd, 44th, 45th, and 46th alcoholic beverages districts; 
(4) general provisions relating to the issuance of alcoholic beverages licenses in the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 655/ Page 2 
46th alcoholic beverages district; (5) the transfer of licenses into the 40th, 41st, 43rd, 44th, 
and 45th alcoholic beverages districts; and (6) exemptions for remaining open after hours 
in the 46th legislative district.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 440 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2