START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 611 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 611 
(Delegate Kelly, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Nursing – Sunset Extension, Licensure Exceptions, and Board 
Operations and Membership 
 
 
This emergency bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Nursing (MBON) 
by two years to July 1, 2025. Through June 30, 2025, the Secretary of Health has authority 
over the “infrastructure operations” of MBON for which MBON special funds may not be 
used; accordingly, should the board’s termination date be further extended, authority over 
infrastructure operations reverts to MBON on July 1, 2025. The terms of MBON board 
members in office on the date the bill takes effect are terminated on a staggered basis 
beginning May 1, 2023. MBON must hire an external consultant to conduct an independent 
evaluation of the board to develop an action plan, as specified; the external consultant must 
report by September 1, 2023. By December 1, 2023, MBON must report on specified 
processing times. The bill also alters the exceptions to registered nurse (RN) and licensed 
practical nurse (LPN) licensure requirements and expands the required contents of 
MBON’s annual report. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase 
beginning in FY 2023 and continue through FY 2025 to assume responsibility over MBON 
infrastructure operations, as discussed below; special fund expenditures correspondingly 
decrease. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $8.0 million 
in general funds for this purpose, contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file. 
Special fund expenditures related to licensing, investigation, and disciplinary activities 
continue through FY 2025 and may increase by an indeterminate amount, as discussed 
below. Special fund expenditures increase in FY 2023 (and possibly 2024) by at least 
$150,000 to hire an external consultant. MBON special fund revenues continue. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 611/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Infrastructure operations” means the administrative activities of a health 
occupations board or a commission, including tools and resources for the use and support 
of deliberative actions. “Infrastructure operations” does not include policy or regulatory 
decisions of a board or commission or licensing, investigation, or disciplinary activities. 
 
Authority Over Infrastructure Operations 
 
The bill temporarily repeals MBON’s authority to employ staff, define the duties of its 
staff, and employ an executive director. Instead, authority over MBON’s infrastructure 
operations transfers to the Secretary of Health. Through June 30, 2025, the Secretary of 
Health is authorized to employ staff for the board in accordance with the State budget and 
designate a staff member who is an RN as the board’s executive director. 
 
The Secretary is also authorized to set the compensation of a board employee whose 
position is unique to the board, requires specific skills or experience to perform the duties 
of the position, and does not require the employee to perform functions that are comparable 
to functions performed in other units of the Executive Branch. The Secretary of Budget 
and Management, in consultation with the Secretary of Health, must determine the 
positions for which the Secretary may set compensation. 
 
The bill prohibits using special funds from the Board of Nursing Fund to pay for 
infrastructure operations while the Secretary retains authority. 
 
Independent Evaluation and Action Plan 
 
Uncodified language requires MBON to hire an external consultant, approved by the 
Secretary of Health, to conduct an independent evaluation of MBON and develop an action 
plan to implement the recommendations identified in the report MBON submitted pursuant 
to the 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report. The action plan must be developed in partnership 
with the Department of Budget and Management, the Department of Information 
Technology, and MDH, and must include:   
 
 
a gap analysis to address immediate infrastructure needs, as specified; 
 
the identification of new workflows to reduce the time needed to fill vacancies; 
 
an evaluation of the qualifications necessary to serve as executive director of the 
board, including a recommendation on whether to repeal the requirement that the 
executive director be an RN; 
 
a plan to hire additional investigators to ensure timely processing of complaints;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 611/ Page 3 
 
an update of MBON’s organizational structure and the provision of a new 
organizational chart; 
 
a plan to create and staff a new Office of Compliance and a Communications 
Department within the Operations Division; 
 
strategic goals established in collaboration with MBON’s president and 
executive director; and 
 
a review of fee structure and rates, including a comparison with neighboring states. 
 
By September 1, 2023, the external consultant must report on its findings and the action 
plan to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee. The report may serve as the basis for additional recommendations made by the 
Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability (OPEGA) in the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) as part of the performance evaluation of the 
board that is currently underway. 
 
Termination of Current Board Members’ Terms 
 
The terms of MBON members who are in office on the date the bill takes effect must end 
on the following dates: 
 
 
the terms of seven members on May 1, 2023; and 
 
the terms of seven members on November 1, 2023. 
 
An affected board member may apply for reappointment. A member appointed to fill a 
vacancy must serve for the remainder of the term. However, if an affected board member 
is reappointed, the member’s appointment runs from the date of the member’s initial 
appointment. For the Governor’s appointments of MBON’s two consumer members only, 
the advice and consent of the Senate is required during the legislative session immediately 
following the dates of appointment (i.e., the 2024 legislative session). 
 
Report on Processing Times 
 
Uncodified language requires MBON, by December 1, 2023, to report to the Governor, the 
Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health and Government Operations Committee 
on the average processing times for fiscal 2023 for (1) issuing initial licenses, certifications, 
and renewals, as specified; (2) the issuance of authorization to test; and (3) the approval of 
proposed nursing curriculum revisions, new nursing and certified nursing assistant 
education programs, new faculty, and new clinical sites.   
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 611/ Page 4 
Licensure Requirements 
 
The bill alters an existing exception to the requirement that an individual must be licensed 
before practicing as an RN or LPN. An individual who has an application for licensure 
pending before MBON may now continue to practice as an RN or LPN, as specified, even 
if the individual has taken and failed the licensing examination once during the 120-day 
period immediately following the individual’s submission of their application. An 
individual who has failed the licensing examination twice or more may not continue to 
practice while their application is pending. 
 
Contents of Annual Report 
 
The bill expands the contents of MBON’s annual report to include any additional aggregate 
data, identified by the board in consultation with stakeholders, determined to be necessary 
to facilitate workforce and health planning purposes. The data may not reference any 
individual’s name or other personal identifier. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed and/or certified by MBON to 
practice registered or licensed practical nursing in the State. 
 
Authorized Practice Without a License 
 
An individual may practice without a license, pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by 
MBON, if the individual (1) has otherwise qualified to practice registered nursing or 
licensed practical nursing in any other state or country and is in the State temporarily or 
(2) has an application for licensure pending before MBON, but has either not taken the 
licensing examination yet, is awaiting the results of the examination, or has passed the 
examination but the completion of their criminal history records check (CHRC) is pending.  
 
Board of Nursing Fund 
 
The Board of Nursing Fund is a continuing, nonlapsing fund that must be used exclusively 
to cover the actual documented and indirect costs of fulfilling the statutory and regulatory 
duties of MBON. MBON may set reasonable fees for the issuance and renewal of licenses 
and its other services. The fees charged must be set in a manner to produce funds that 
approximate the cost of maintaining MBON and its operations. Any unspent portions of 
the fund may not be transferred or revert to the general fund.  
 
Board Membership 
 
MBON comprises 14 board members, of which 9 must be RNs; 1 must be a licensed nurse 
who is either an LPN, an RN, or an advanced practice registered nurse; 2 must be LPNs; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 611/ Page 5 
and 2 must be consumers. All appointments are made by the Governor. For the appointment 
of an RN or LPN board member, the Governor must select an appointee from specified 
lists of qualified individuals furnished by designated nursing organizations. For the 
appointment of a consumer member, the Governor must make the appointment with the 
advice of the Secretary and the advice and consent of the Senate. 
 
Annual Report 
 
MBON is required to submit to the Governor, the Secretary, and the General Assembly an 
annual report that includes the following data calculated on a fiscal year basis:  
 
 
the number of initial and renewal licenses and certificates issued; 
 
the number of positive and negative CHRC results received;  
 
the number of individuals denied initial or renewal licensure or certification due to 
positive CHRC results; 
 
the number of individuals denied licensure or certification due to reasons other than 
a positive CHRC; 
 
the number of new complaints received; 
 
the number of complaints carried over from year to year; 
 
the most common grounds for complaints; and  
 
the number and types of disciplinary actions taken by MBON. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
MBON is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. MBON is scheduled to terminate 
July 1, 2023. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation Act, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by OPEGA. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if 
directed by specified entities or by legislation. On January 3, 2023, the Executive Director 
of DLS directed OPEGA to conduct a performance evaluation of MBON. The evaluation 
is expected to be completed by the end of calendar 2023. 
 
State Expenditures:  MBON is special funded. Currently, all board operations are paid 
with special funds generated through fee revenues. Under the bill, costs associated with 
infrastructure operations shift to MDH beginning in fiscal 2023 (and continuing through 
fiscal 2025). This analysis assumes that personnel expenditures related to MBON’s 
Executive, Operations (including information technology, fiscal, and human resources), 
and Legal divisions transfer to the Secretary’s control and are general funded. MDH also 
assumes payment of fixed infrastructure costs, including rent, utilities, office supplies, and 
printing (which total at least $500,000 annually). Expenditures related to MBON’s 
Accountability (complaints, investigations, discipline, and compliance), Exams and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 611/ Page 6 
Education, and Licensure and Certification divisions remain under the board’s control and 
are special funded. Beginning July 1, 2025, all MBON expenditures are special funded. 
 
Impact of Transferring Authority Over Infrastructure Operations 
 
MDH general fund expenditures increase significantly beginning in fiscal 2023, to pay 
costs relating to infrastructure operations (including personnel), as well as fixed 
infrastructure costs. DLS advises that approximately one-third of MBON positions as of 
August 2022 (31) were associated with infrastructure operations, while two-thirds 
(60) were associated with licensing, investigation, and disciplinary activities. Total 
estimated personnel expenditures (both regular and contractual staff) for fiscal 2023 are 
approximately $7.6 million; another $1.4 million is budgeted for contractual services.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, should one-third of costs for personnel and all costs for 
contractual services (totaling $3.9 million) shift to MDH and two-thirds of personnel costs 
remain with MBON ($5.1 million), MDH general fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $4.4 million on an annual basis to reflect personnel and fixed infrastructure 
costs, while MBON special fund expenditures decrease accordingly (with the board 
responsible for the remaining $5.1 million in personnel expenditures and potentially some 
other costs). Assuming the bill takes effect May 1, 2023, general fund expenditures could 
increase by approximately $738,900 in fiscal 2023. The exact impact on general and 
special fund expenditures cannot be reliably estimated at this time. MDH advises that the 
number of additional MDH staff that may be assigned to MBON, the cost of necessary 
upgrades to information technology platforms, and the impact of adjusting compensation 
levels and filling staff vacancies is unknown at this time.  
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $8.0 million in 
general funds for the Office of the Secretary within MDH for the purpose of supporting 
infrastructure operations of MBON contingent on the enactment of House Bill 611 or 
Senate Bill 960. Funds not expended for this purpose may not be transferred by budget 
amendment or otherwise to any other purpose and must revert to the general fund. 
 
Impact of Other Provisions 
 
MBON must hire an external consultant to conduct an independent evaluation of the board 
and develop a specified action plan. The consultant must report its findings and action plan 
by September 1, 2023. As the bill authorizes board special funds to be used to cover this 
cost, MBON special fund expenditures increase by at least $150,000 in fiscal 2023. 
Assuming the bill takes effect May 1, 2023, the external consultant will have only 
four months to complete its evaluation and develop and submit the action plan.  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 611/ Page 7 
Under the bill, an individual who has an application for licensure pending before MBON 
may continue to practice as an RN or LPN if the individual has failed the licensing 
examination once. MBON advises that it must track RN and LPN graduate applicants who 
fail the exam to ensure that they do not continue to work beyond the 120-day period. Thus, 
the board may incur additional contractual expenses beginning in fiscal 2023, presumably 
in May, June, and December when large volumes of new graduate applications are 
received.  
 
The bill also expands the contents of MBON’s annual report to include any additional 
aggregate data, identified by the board in consultation with stakeholders, determined to be 
necessary to facilitate workforce and health planning purposes. MBON advises that it 
would need to hire a research statistician to collect and evaluate aggregated data and would 
incur significant additional information technology expenses related to updating paper and 
electronic applications and licensing systems to collect additional data. The board’s current 
applications capture only licensure type, county of practice, specialty, type of position, and 
type of setting. As any additional data is to be identified by the board, actual expenditures 
are reliant on which data points are identified by the board with its stakeholders and cannot 
be reliably estimated at this time.   
 
State Revenues:  MBON special fund revenues continue under the bill. Any reduction in 
special fund expenditures resulting from infrastructure operations being covered with 
general funds in fiscal 2023 through 2025 results in special funds remaining in the Board 
of Nursing Fund. MBON’s closing fund balance at the end of fiscal 2022 was $385,932. 
This fund balance is projected to be completely depleted by the end of fiscal 2024. Thus, 
use of general funds for a portion of expenditures that would otherwise be special funded 
allows the MBON special fund balance to increase substantially by the end of fiscal 2025 
when MBON resumes covering all expenditures with special funds. 
 
Additional Comments:  Absent extension of the board’s termination date (as included in 
this legislation and Senate Bill 729 of 2023), MBON operations cease effective 
July 1, 2023. Under the bill, MBON instead terminates July 1, 2025, the date on which the 
board would otherwise reassume responsibility for its infrastructure operations. However, 
this analysis assumes that the board’s termination date will be further extended in either 
the 2024 or 2025 legislative session – after required reports have been provided and before 
July 1, 2025. DLS advises that the requirement that MBON hire an external consultant to 
conduct an independent evaluation and develop an action plan may be duplicative of the 
performance evaluation of MBON currently being conducted by OPEGA, which is 
anticipated to be completed by December 2023.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 611/ Page 8 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 960 (Senator Kelly) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8