START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 644 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 644 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Golf Simulator Facility 
 
   
This bill establishes a Class B-GSF (golf simulator facility) alcoholic beverages license in 
Frederick County and authorizes the Frederick County Board of License Commissioners 
to issue a license for use by a golf simulator facility that is open to the public; features at 
least five golf simulator bays; and has accommodations that are predominantly dedicated 
to golf simulator bays and seating for those bays. The license authorizes the licensee to sell 
beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption so long as the licensee offers food 
on-site at all times when alcoholic beverages are being sold. The annual license fee is 
$1,500. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues increase to the extent the board issues 
Class B-GSF licenses under the bill. Frederick County can handle any additional 
enforcement activity with existing resources.       
  
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that golf simulator facilities currently operate in 
Frederick County, a facility that obtains an alcoholic beverages license may realize 
additional revenues as a result of being able to sell beer, wine, and liquor on site. Moreover, 
by offering a new avenue for golf simulator facilities to generate revenues, the bill may 
incentivize a small business to open such a facility in the county. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 644/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An applicant for a Class B-GSF license must submit a floor plan or layout 
of the proposed licensed premises to the board. The floor plan or layout must illustrate that 
the proposed licensed premises is predominantly dedicated to golf simulator bays and has 
seating dedicated to those bays. 
 
Additionally, the bill specifies that a licensee’s annual gross sales from alcoholic beverages 
must not exceed 35% of the licensee’s annual gross sales. Golf simulator bay rental fees 
and food sales must comprise, respectively, at least 50% and 15% of the licensee’s annual 
gross sales. Before the board may renew a Class B-GSF alcoholic beverages license, the 
licensee must provide the board with an annual gross sales report showing that the licensee 
has met the specified minimum gross sales percentages for golf simulator bay rental fees 
and food sales and stayed under the specified maximum gross sales percentage for 
alcoholic beverages. 
        
Current Law:  In Frederick County, the board is authorized to issue specified alcoholic 
beverages licenses, if certain conditions are met, for use by a range of different venues. 
Examples of such venues include art galleries engaged in the display and sale of original 
artwork; barbershops and beauty salons; cinemas; country and golf clubs; dinner theaters; 
hotel lobbies; municipal golf courses; and stadiums.        
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Frederick County advises that at least one small business is interested 
in applying for the Class B-GSF license. The annual license fee for a Class B-GSF license 
is $1,500, and there is an initial application fee of $750. Accordingly, Frederick County 
revenues increase by $2,250 in fiscal 2024 for each new license issued and $1,500 annually 
thereafter for each license renewal.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 644/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3