START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 679 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 679 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Display of License 
 
   
The bill specifies that an alcoholic beverages license holder in Frederick County must 
frame their license and display it conspicuously in the licensed premises. Thus, the bill 
creates an exception – in Frederick County only – to the statewide requirement that a 
license must be framed under glass. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Frederick County finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An alcoholic beverages license holder must frame their license under glass 
and display the license conspicuously in the licensed premises.     
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 679/ Page 2 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2