START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 675 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 675 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Commission to Study Trauma Center Funding in Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes a Commission to Study Trauma Center Funding in Maryland to study 
the adequacy of trauma center funding across the State for operating, capital, and workforce 
costs. The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) and 
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) must jointly staff the commission. A member 
of the commission may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under standard State travel regulations. By December 1, 2023, the commission 
must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MIEMSS and MHCC can staff the commission using existing budgeted 
resources. Any expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be 
minimal. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The commission’s study must include:   
 
 
current funding sources for trauma centers in the State; 
 
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund (MTPSF) expenditures and revenues 
since its inception; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 675/ Page 2 
 
statutory and regulatory requirements for trauma centers at the time MTPSF was 
established; 
 
changes to statutory and regulatory requirements for trauma centers since 
MTPSF was established; 
 
changes in staffing, recruitment, compensation, or other factors that would impact 
the funding needed to operate a trauma center in the State;  
 
changes to approved uses of MTPSF over time; 
 
the amount of funding needed to adequately fund trauma centers in the State; 
 
the funding mechanisms available to adequately fund trauma centers; and 
 
funding criteria that would impact the receipt of funds by existing or new trauma 
centers. 
 
The commission must make findings and recommendations regarding:   
 
 
changes in staffing, recruitment, compensation, or other factors that would impact 
the funding needed to operate a trauma center in the State; 
 
changes to approved uses of MTPSF over time; 
 
the amount of funding needed to adequately fund trauma centers in the State; 
 
the funding mechanisms available to adequately fund trauma centers; and 
 
funding criteria that would impact the receipt of funds by existing or new trauma 
centers. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund 
 
“Trauma center” means a facility designated by the MIEMSS as the State primary adult 
resource center (PARC), a Level I trauma center, a Level II trauma center, a Level III 
trauma center, a pediatric trauma center, or the Maryland Trauma Specialty Referral 
Centers.  
 
The purpose of MTPSF is to subsidize the documented costs (1) of uncompensated care 
incurred by a trauma physician in providing trauma care to a trauma patient on the State 
trauma registry; (2) of undercompensated care incurred by a trauma physician in providing 
trauma care to a Maryland Medicaid enrollee who is a trauma patient on the State trauma 
registry; (3) incurred by a trauma center to maintain trauma physicians on-call as required 
by MIEMSS; (4) incurred by the State PARC to maintain specified surgeons and 
anesthesiologists on-call and on standby as required by MIEMSS; and (5) incurred by 
MHCC and the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) to administer the fund 
and audit reimbursement requests to assure appropriate payments are made from the fund. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 675/ Page 3 
MTPSF is administered by MHCC and HSCRC. Disbursements from the fund must be 
made in accordance with a methodology established jointly by MHCC and HSCRC to 
calculate costs incurred by trauma physicians and trauma centers that are eligible to receive 
reimbursement. The methodology established must meet numerous requirements outlined 
in statute. Those requirements specifically outline the parameters to determine the amount 
of reimbursement made to trauma physicians and trauma centers for a Level I, Level II, 
and Level III trauma center; a pediatric trauma center; and the Maryland Trauma Specialty 
Referral Centers. 
 
MTPSF is financed by a $5 surcharge on all Maryland vehicle registrations. Expenditures 
from the fund for costs incurred in any fiscal year may not exceed revenues of the fund in 
that fiscal year. 
 
According to MHCC’s December 2022 annual report on MTPSF, in fiscal 2022, payments 
to all eligible providers (and the administrative costs associated with making those 
payments) totaled $11.5 million, with an additional $194,080 awarded as biennial trauma 
equipment grants to eligible trauma centers. The fund reserve at the end of fiscal 2022, 
including a $4.0 million fund transfer under the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act 
of 2022, was $6.7 million. Vehicle renewal fee revenues received by the fund totaled 
$12.2 million in fiscal 2022. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 493 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3