START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 204

Chapter 204

(House Bill 674)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Historic Trust – Historic Preservation ~~Partnership~~ ~~Program~~ ~~and~~
~~Fund~~ ~~–~~ ~~Established~~ Loan Fund – Qualified Cooperating Nonprofit Organizations
– Transfers

FOR the purpose of altering the uses of the Historic Preservation Loan Fund; ~~establishing~~
~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Partnership~~ ~~Program~~ ~~in~~ authorizing the Maryland Historic
Trust to ~~implement~~ ~~and~~ ~~encourage~~ ~~the~~ ~~preservation~~ ~~of~~ ~~historic~~ ~~properties~~ ~~in~~
~~partnership~~ ~~with~~ transfer funds from the Fund to a qualified cooperating nonprofit
organization for certain purposes; ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~
~~Partnership~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~special,~~ ~~nonlapsing~~ ~~fund;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~certain~~ ~~funds~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~
~~transferred~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Trust~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~qualified~~ ~~cooperating~~ ~~nonprofit~~ ~~organization~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~date~~ ~~each~~ ~~year;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~certain~~ ~~funds~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~Partnership~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ ~~transferring~~ ~~the~~ ~~funds~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~
~~Preservation~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Partnership~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~and~~ ~~dissolving~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~
~~Preservation~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Fund;~~ and generally relating to the Historic Preservation
~~Partnership~~ ~~Program~~ ~~and~~ Loan Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5A–327
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section ~~5A–327~~ 5A–331
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

~~[5A–327.~~

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “MHT Loan Fund” means the Historic Preservation Loan Fund of the
Trust.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 204 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “MHT Loan Program” means the Historic Preservation Loan Program
of the Trust.

(b) (1) There is an MHT Loan Program in the Trust.

(2) The purpose of the MHT Loan Program is to implement and encourage
the preservation of historic properties.

(3) The Trust shall administer the MHT Loan Program and coordinate the
MHT Loan Program with federal and State programs that complement or facilitate
carrying out the MHT Loan Program.

(c) There is an MHT Loan Fund in the Trust.

(d) The MHT Loan Fund may be used:

(1) to pay administrative costs directly related to the MHT Loan Program;

(2) to pay for the Trust to acquire historic properties or interests in historic
properties for its authorized purposes or for resale or lease subject to appropriate
preservation covenants;

(3) to pay costs, including preparation costs, to restore or rehabilitate
historic properties owned by the Trust for:

(i) the Trust’s authorized purposes; or

(ii) resale or lease subject to appropriate preservation covenants; ~~or~~

(4) to make loans to nonprofit organizations, political subdivisions,
business entities, and individuals to:

(i) acquire, rehabilitate, restore, or refinance historic properties; or

(ii) provide short–term financing for costs, including preparation
costs, directly related to work that the Trust or the State Historic Preservation Officer
requires or recommends to be undertaken before a construction project financed with
federal or State money is begun or continued; OR

(5) TO MAKE A TRANSFER TO A QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER § 5A–331 OF THIS PART.

(e) (1) The MHT Loan Fund is a continuing, nonlapsing special fund that is
not subject to § 7–302 of this article.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 204

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold and the Comptroller shall account for
the MHT Loan Fund.

(f) The MHT Loan Fund consists of:

(1) money appropriated in the State budget to the MHT Loan Program;

(2) money received as interest or repayment of principal on loans made
under the MHT Loan Program or the Capital Revolving Fund for Historic Preservation;

(3) the proceeds from the resale or lease of property originally acquired by
the Trust with money from the MHT Loan Fund or the Capital Revolving Fund for Historic
Preservation;

(4) money received from other public or private sources for the benefit of
the MHT Loan Fund; and

(5) money received from the sale of general obligation bonds.

(g) Money in the MHT Loan Fund shall be invested in the same manner as other
State money.

(h) (1) The Department shall adopt regulations to carry out the purposes of
the MHT Loan Program.

(2) The regulations shall include:

(i) application procedures;

(ii) procedures to give adequate notice to the public of assistance
available under the MHT Loan Program;

(iii) provisions for the review of plans and specifications;

(iv) provisions for the inspection of projects during construction; and

(v) selection criteria the Trust must consider in evaluating loan
applications, including:

1. the relative historical or cultural significance of, and the
urgency of need for, the project to be financed by the loan;

2. any proposed contribution by the appropriate political
subdivision to the project;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 204 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. the geographic distribution of loan assistance from the
MHT Loan Fund; and

4. other relevant factors.

(i) (1) With the approval of the Secretary, for each loan the Trust may set:

(i) the principal amount;

(ii) the maturity;

(iii) the repayment terms; and

(iv) an interest rate that complies with applicable federal regulations
governing State borrowing.

(2) A loan from the MHT Loan Fund may be granted at an interest rate
lower than rates on other loans from the MHT Loan Fund if:

(i) the loan recipient is a nonprofit organization or a political
subdivision; or

(ii) the Secretary of Housing and Community Development
determines under § 4–212 of the Housing and Community Development Article that after
restoration or rehabilitation, the historic property will be wholly or partly occupied by
individuals or families of limited income.

(3) A loan from the MHT Loan Program may be secured by:

(i) a mortgage lien, which may be subordinate to other mortgage
liens;

(ii) a guarantee of repayment; or

(iii) another form of collateral acceptable to the Trust.

(4) Without approval or execution by the Board of Public Works, the Trust
may take title to a mortgaged property by foreclosure or by deed in lieu of foreclosure and:

(i) convey title to a buyer; and

(ii) obtain and seek enforcement of a deficiency judgment.

(5) An individual or business entity may receive a loan only if the recipient
can document that private financing is unavailable.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 204

(6) The Trust shall ensure that no loan is made under the MHT Loan
Program to acquire, restore, or rehabilitate a historic property unless the historic property
is listed in or eligible to be listed in the Historic Register.

(j) (1) The Trust shall require the recipient of a loan from the MHT Loan
Program to enter into an agreement to preserve and maintain the property.

(2) If the property is real property, the agreement shall be a recordable
historic preservation easement.

(3) The Secretary may waive the agreement requirement if the Secretary
finds that an agreement is impracticable.

(k) The trustees shall review and make recommendations to the Secretary about
loans and expenditures from the MHT Loan Fund, and the Secretary shall approve each
loan and expenditure from the MHT Loan Fund.

(l) (1) To the extent required by regulations adopted by the Secretary and
approved by the Board of Public Works, the Secretary shall submit to the Board of Public
Works for approval a proposed loan or expenditure from the MHT Loan Fund that will be
financed through the sale of State general obligation bonds.

(2) Except for an expenditure under subsection (d)(2) or (3) of this section,
a loan or expenditure from the MHT Loan Fund is not subject to Titles 4 and 5 of this
article.

(m) On or before December 31 of each year, the Trust shall report to the Governor
and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the General Assembly
on the financial status and the activities of the MHT Loan Program for the preceding fiscal
year.

(n) (1) A person may not knowingly make or cause to be made a material false
statement of fact, including an understatement or overstatement of financial condition, in
a statement or report in or regarding an application for a loan or affecting an existing loan.

(2) A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and
on conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 2 years or a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or both.]

~~5A–327.~~ 5A–331.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “PARTNERSHIP FUND” MEANS THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
PARTNERSHIP FUND OF THE TRUST.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 204 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM” MEANS THE HISTORIC
PRESERVATION PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM OF THE TRUST.

(4) “QUALIFIED, A “QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION” MEANS A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE
STATE DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION THAT:

(I) (1) IS BASED IN THE STATE;

(II) (2) OPERATES STATEWIDE; AND

(III) (3) HAS DEMONSTRATED EXPERIENCE:

1. (I) REHABILITATING HISTORIC STRUCTURES;

2. (II) MANAGING PRESERVATION FUNDS; AND

3. (III) HOLDING PRESERVATION EASEMENTS.

(B) (1) THERE IS A PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM IN THE TRUST.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM IS TO
~~IMPLEMENT~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ENCOURAGE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRESERVATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~HISTORIC~~ ~~PROPERTIES~~ ~~BY~~
~~PARTNERING~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~COOPERATING~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~THAT~~
~~WILL~~ ~~ADMINISTER~~ ~~FLEXIBLE~~ ~~FINANCIAL~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~COMPLEX~~ ~~PRESERVATION~~
PROJECTS AROUND THE STATE.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE A
QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION MAY USE FUNDS PROVIDED
BY THE TRUST ONLY:

(I) TO PAY FOR THE QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION TO ACQUIRE HISTORIC PROPERTIES OR INTERESTS IN HISTORIC
PROPERTIES FOR RESALE OR LEASE;

(II) TO PAY COSTS, INCLUDING PREPARATION AND
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS, TO RESTORE OR REHABILITATE HISTORIC PROPERTIES
OWNED BY THE QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION FOR RESALE
OR LEASE;

(III) TO MAKE LOANS TO OTHER NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS,
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS, AND BUSINESS ENTITIES TO ACQUIRE, REHABILITATE,
RESTORE, OR REFINANCE HISTORIC PROPERTIES;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 204

(IV) TO MAKE LOANS TO INDIVIDUALS TO REHABILITATE OR
RESTORE HISTORIC PROPERTIES RECOGNIZED BY THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE AS
NATIONAL HISTORIC LANDMARKS; OR

(V) FOR NECESSARY ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROGRAMMATIC
EXPENSES ASSOCIATED WITH CARRYING OUT THE GOALS OF THE PARTNERSHIP
PROGRAM TRANSFER OF FUNDS.

(2) (I) THE TRUST A QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION SHALL DEVELOP A COMPETITIVE PROCESS FOR MAKING AWARDS OF
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM WITH FUNDS
RECEIVED FROM THE TRUST.

(II) THE QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
SHALL AWARD FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM IN A
MANNER CONSISTENT WITH THE PROCESS DEVELOPED BY THE TRUST IN
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(D) (1) THERE IS A PARTNERSHIP FUND.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PARTNERSHIP FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDS
~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FORM~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~GRANT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~COOPERATIVE~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~
COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION TO ADMINISTER THE PARTNERSHIP
~~PROGRAM.~~

(3) THE TRUST SHALL ADMINISTER THE PARTNERSHIP FUND.

(4) (I) THE PARTNERSHIP FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND
THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
~~ARTICLE.~~

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(5) THE PARTNERSHIP FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY RECEIVED AS INTEREST OR REPAYMENT OF
PRINCIPAL ON LOANS MADE UNDER THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM OR THE CAPITAL
REVOLVING FUND FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION;

(II) THE PROCEEDS FROM THE RESALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY
~~ORIGINALLY~~ ~~ACQUIRED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~COOPERATING~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 204 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ORGANIZATION WITH MONEY FROM THE PARTNERSHIP FUND OR THE CAPITAL
REVOLVING FUND FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION;

(III) MONEY RECEIVED FROM OTHER PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
SOURCES FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PARTNERSHIP FUND; AND

(IV) MONEY RECEIVED FROM THE SALE OF GENERAL
OBLIGATION BONDS.

(6) THE PARTNERSHIP FUND MAY BE USED FOR THE PURPOSE
IDENTIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(7) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
PARTNERSHIP FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE
~~INVESTED.~~

(8) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
TO THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM TRANSFERRING THE AMOUNT OF
UNENCUMBERED AND UNAPPROPRIATED FUNDS IN THE PARTNERSHIP FUND TO
~~THE~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~COOPERATING~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURPOSE~~
IDENTIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(E) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE TRUST SHALL
~~TRANSFER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~COOPERATING~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~THE~~
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM FOR THE CURRENT FISCAL
~~YEAR.~~

(II) TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE GOAL WILL BE TO
PRESERVE THE CORPUS OF THE PARTNERSHIP FUND AS A REVOLVING FUND.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SHALL
~~MAINTAIN~~ ~~A~~ ~~SEPARATE~~ ~~INTERNAL~~ ~~ACCOUNT~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~FUNDS~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~
~~PARTNERSHIP~~ ~~FUND.~~

(II) SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL OF THE QUALIFIED
COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S INVESTMENT POLICY BY THE BOARD
OF DIRECTORS OF THE QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION,
~~FUNDS~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~COMMINGLED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~FUNDS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~
FUNDS CAN BE ACCOUNTED FOR INDEPENDENTLY OF OTHER FUNDS.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 204

(3) ON THE TRANSFER OF FUNDS TO THE PARTNERSHIP FUND, THE
USE OF FUNDS IS NO LONGER SUBJECT TO § 5A–325 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(F) (C) THE A QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
SELECTED TO ADMINISTER THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM RECEIVING FUNDS FROM
THE TRUST, IN COORDINATION WITH THE DIRECTOR, SHALL ADOPT APPROPRIATE
GUIDELINES TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM
ENUMERATED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(G) (D) THE A QUALIFIED COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
SHALL MAKE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION AVAILABLE ON ITS WEBSITE:

(1) THE GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (F) (C) OF
THIS SECTION;

(2) THE AVAILABILITY OF PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM FUNDS; AND

(3) INFORMATION ON PROJECTS RECEIVING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
FROM THE PARTNERSHIP FUND TRANSFERRED FUNDS.

(H) (E) (1) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30 EACH YEAR, THE A QUALIFIED
COOPERATING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SHALL PROVIDE AN ANNUAL REPORT TO
THE TRUST OUTLINING THE USE, ACCOUNTING, AND SUCCESS OF THE
PARTNERSHIP FUND ALL FUNDS RECEIVED.

(2) THE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REVIEW OR AUDIT OF THE
ORGANIZATION SHALL BE PROVIDED AT THE REQUEST OF THE TRUST TO CONFIRM
THE INTENDED USE OF THE PARTNERSHIP FUND TRANSFERRED FUNDS.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That,~~ ~~notwithstanding~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~
~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~law,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~July~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~shall~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~the~~ ~~funds~~
~~appropriated~~ ~~in~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year~~ ~~2024~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Program~~ ~~established~~
~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~
~~Partnership~~ ~~Program~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

~~(a)~~ ~~After~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~credit~~ ~~any~~ ~~funds~~ ~~received~~ ~~for~~
~~the~~ ~~benefit~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Partnership~~ ~~Fund~~
~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~
~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 204 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(b)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~July~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~all~~ ~~funds~~ ~~remaining~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~
~~Loan~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article~~ ~~shall~~
~~be~~ ~~transferred~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Partnership~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~and~~ ~~shall~~
~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~only~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~§~~ ~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~
~~Procurement~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~After~~ ~~July~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~
~~5A–327~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~dissolved~~ ~~and~~ ~~no~~ ~~new~~
~~appropriations~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~made~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Fund.~~

SECTION ~~4.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10