START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 608 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 608 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Human Relations - Housing Discrimination - Service Dogs 
 
 
This bill prohibits discriminatory practices in the sale or rental of a dwelling against an 
individual with a disability who (1) has or obtains a service dog or (2) retains the 
individual’s former service dog after its retirement from service. Such individuals:  
(1) must be exempt from any provision in a lease or rental agreement prohibiting the 
keeping of dogs; (2) may not be required to pay any additional rent or fee for the dog; 
(3) may keep the former service dog in the dwelling for the life of the service dog after its 
retirement from service; and (4) must be liable for any damage done to the premises by the 
dog. A “service dog” is defined as a dog that is individually trained to do work or perform 
tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability. “Service dog” does not include a dog 
that (1) as a result of the animal’s presence, is meant to deter crime or (2) provides only 
emotional support, well‐being, comfort, or companionship to an individual.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finance or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, State law prohibits housing discrimination because of race, sex, 
color, religion, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, source of income, or disability. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 608/ Page 2 
Subject to limited exceptions, and among other provisions, a person may not: 
 
 
discriminate in the sale or rental of (or otherwise make unavailable or deny) a 
dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of the buyer or renter or an 
individual residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented, 
or made available; 
 
discriminate against any individual in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale 
or rental of a dwelling (or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with 
the dwelling) because of the disability of the individual or an individual residing in 
or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; 
 
refuse to allow, at the expense an individual with a disability, reasonable 
modifications, as specified; or 
 
refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services 
when the accommodations may be necessary to afford an individual with a disability 
equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
 
Generally, a person claiming to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice 
may file a complaint with the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR); an 
individual may also file a civil action in circuit court. Statutory provisions specify the 
process and requirements for complaints of housing discrimination, including the 
responsibilities of MCCR in investigating a claim and attempting conciliation and the 
circumstances under which a complainant, respondent, or aggrieved person must have an 
opportunity for an administrative hearing conducted by the Office of Administrative 
Hearings or may elect to file a civil action in circuit court. 
 
If an administrative law judge (ALJ) finds that the respondent has engaged in a 
discriminatory housing practice, the ALJ may order appropriate relief, including actual 
damages and injunctive or other relief, and may assess a civil penalty against the 
respondent. A court may award actual or punitive damages, grant injunctive relief, and 
allow reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 535 (Senator James, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 608/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Baltimore City; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3