START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 673 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 673 
(Delegate Edelson, et al.) 
Appropriations and Environment and 
Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Transit Administration – Fare Price Requirements – Alterations 
 
   
This bill repeals the statutory requirement that the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) 
increase its base fare prices every two years and every five years based on the Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) and other factors; it also makes conforming changes. MTA would still 
have the authority to modify transit fares as needed after a public hearing is held. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by as much as 
$6.9 million in FY 2024, $7.1 million in FY 2025, $18.1 million in FY 2026, $17.6 million 
in FY 2027, and $19.8 million in FY 2028. The revenue loss could be mitigated to the 
extent MTA uses its general authority to increase fares, as discussed below. Expenditures 
are not directly affected.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
($6.9) 
($7.1) 
($18.1) 
($17.6) 
($19.8) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($6.9) 
($7.1) 
($18.1) 
($17.6) 
($19.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 673/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit 
system throughout the 
Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in 
Baltimore and other services, such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter 
buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Except for the Washington 
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies 
responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
To address concerns that the State lacked adequate funding to build new transportation 
infrastructure, Chapter 429 of 2013 increased transportation funding by, among other 
things, increasing motor fuel taxes and requiring MTA to increase base fare prices 
beginning in fiscal 2015. Specifically related to MTA transit services, Chapter 429 requires 
fares to be adjusted every two years and every five years based on the annual CPI increase 
and other factors. Outside of these mandated increases, MTA has general authority to adjust 
its fares but may not do so until a public hearing is held on the matter.  
 
State Revenues:  The next mandated fare increase required by Chapter 429 is for 
fiscal 2024. From this increase and future mandated increases, MTA anticipates 
TTF revenues totaling: 
 
 
$6.9 million in fiscal 2024;  
 
$7.1 million in fiscal 2025;  
 
$18.1 million in fiscal 2026;  
 
$17.6 million in fiscal 2027; and  
 
$19.8 million in fiscal 2028.  
 
Because the bill repeals the mandated fare increases, the revenues resulting from those fare 
increases are foregone. However, as noted above, MTA has general authority to adjust its 
fares as needed (after a public hearing is held) and may do so to offset some or all of the 
TTF revenue loss resulting from the bill. The extent to which MTA increases fares using 
this general authority, thereby reducing the overall effect on TTF revenues, cannot be 
predicted.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 673/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 617 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3