START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 601 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 601 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Police Retirement System, Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System, and 
Judges’ Retirement System – Surviving Spouse Benefit – Same–Sex Spouses 
 
 
This bill allows a retiree of the State Police Retirement System (SPRS), Law Enforcement 
Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS), and Judges’ Retirement System (JRS) who retired 
before January 1, 2013, to convert his or her optional retirement allowance for a surviving 
same-sex spouse to an unreduced basic allowance, thereby making the surviving spouse 
eligible for a full spousal benefit. The request for such a conversion must be made by 
December 31, 2023, and required documentation must be submitted by that date as well. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in only a limited number of instances, there 
is only a minimal effect on State pension assets and no discernible effect on State pension 
contribution rates, as discussed below. No effect on revenues.     
  
Local Effect:  As with the State, there is no discernible effect on pension contribution rates 
for participating governmental units. No effect on local revenues.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to a retiree of SPRS, LEOPS, and JRS who: 
 
 
retired before January 1, 2013 (when same-sex marriage became legal in Maryland); 
 
at the time of retirement, selected an optional allowance and designated an 
individual of the same sex as a beneficiary; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 601/ Page 2 
 
married the designated beneficiary on or after January 1, 2013; and 
 
remains married to the designated beneficiary on July 1, 2023. 
 
The bill establishes similar procedures for eligible retirees in SPRS, LEOPS, and JRS that 
require a retiree to: 
 
 
request that the optional allowance be converted to a basic allowance, thereby 
making the spouse eligible for an automatic surviving spousal benefit under current 
law; 
 
present a valid marriage license confirming the marriage between the retiree and the 
designated beneficiary; 
 
verify that the retiree and the beneficiary are not (or have not been) divorced as of 
the bill’s effective date. 
 
The bill includes contingency arrangements in the event that the retiree has already 
predeceased the spouse (allowing the surviving spouse to submit the necessary paperwork). 
It also specifies the adjustments, including retroactive adjustments and cost-of-living 
increases, that the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) must make to the retiree’s 
benefits to reflect the conversion to a basic allowance. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Optional Benefits for Beneficiaries 
 
Most SRPS members who file retirement applications may choose from among 
six alternatives to the basic allowance in order to provide a survivor benefit for a surviving 
spouse, child, or other beneficiary. The basic allowance provides the maximum unreduced 
benefit payment to the retiree but offers no survivor benefit, so all payments stop when the 
retiree dies. State law requires that each optional allowance be actuarially equivalent to the 
basic allowance, so retirees who select one of the six survivor options are subject to an 
actuarially determined reduction in their monthly benefit payments to account for the 
additional payments that will be made following their death. The allowance reductions are 
calculated based on the ages of both the retiree and the beneficiary.   
 
The six options are as follows: 
 
 
Option 1 pays the balance of the actuarial equivalent present value of the retiree’s 
basic allowance at the time of retirement in a lump-sum payment to the beneficiary 
or the retiree’s estate. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 601/ Page 3 
 
Option 2 provides a 100% joint and survivor benefit in which the beneficiary 
receives 100% of the reduced benefit payment the retiree had been receiving prior 
to death. 
 
 
Option 3 provides a 50% joint and survivor benefit in which the beneficiary 
receives one-half of the reduced benefit payment. 
 
 
Option 4 pays the balance of the retiree’s accumulated contributions at the time of 
retirement, if any, in a lump-sum payment to the beneficiary or the retiree’s estate. 
 
 
Option 5 provides a 100% survivor benefit, except that if the beneficiary 
predeceases the retiree, the retiree begins receiving the basic allowance (also called 
a “pop-up” option). 
 
 
Option 6 provides a 50% “pop-up” survivor benefit. 
 
Once a retiree makes a selection of the basic allowance or one of the six options, the 
selection may not be changed after the first retirement payment is made. 
 
Automatic Benefits for Surviving Spouses or Dependent Children in Selected Plans          
 
As described above, a retiree who selects an optional allowance in order to provide a benefit 
to a surviving spouse or beneficiary receives an actuarially reduced retirement allowance 
in return for providing a survivor benefit. However, the following retirees who are married 
or who have dependent children are eligible to receive an unreduced basic retirement 
allowance at the time of retirement while still providing an automatic survivor benefit to 
their spouses or dependent children: 
 
 
a retiree of SPRS who has retired with a normal service allowance, a disability 
allowance, or a deferred vested allowance; 
 
a retiree of LEOPS who has retired with a normal service allowance or a disability 
allowance; and 
 
a retiree of JRS. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that active and former members of JRS also 
qualify for an automatic survivor benefit, but they are not affected by the bill. 
 
Surviving spouses or dependent children of deceased SPRS retirees receive 80% of the 
retiree’s allowance. Surviving spouses or dependent children of LEOPS and JRS retirees 
receive 50% of the retiree’s allowance. In all three plans, the survivor benefit is paid to a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 601/ Page 4 
surviving spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, to surviving dependent children in 
equal shares (if there is more than one dependent child).       
 
State Expenditures:  Prior to same-sex marriage becoming legal in Maryland on 
January 1, 2013, retirees of the three affected plans who wanted to provide a survivor 
benefit to a same-sex partner had to designate the same-sex partner as a beneficiary and 
receive an actuarially reduced basic allowance, as they did not qualify for the automatic 
spousal benefit. As a result, their beneficiary also received a reduced allowance upon the 
retiree’s death instead of the full spousal benefit. Under the bill, these retirees are entitled 
to: 
 
 
prospective restoration of the unreduced basic allowance, including any 
cost-of-living adjustments made in the intervening time; and 
 
a lump sum payment consisting of the retroactive difference between the retiree’s 
reduced benefit and the unreduced basic allowance, including any cost-of-living 
adjustments and interest. 
 
The bill includes similar but adjusted payments to the surviving spouse in the event that 
the retiree is deceased when the bill becomes effective. 
 
If the retiree dies after the bill becomes effective (and after submitting the necessary 
paperwork), the surviving spouse is entitled to the full spousal benefit. 
 
The State Retirement Agency (SRA) has identified a total of 109 accounts in the 
three affected plans (90 in LEOPS, 14 in SPRS, and 5 in JRS) in which a retiree was not 
married at the time of retirement and selected an optional allowance with a designated 
beneficiary. SRA’s search is unable to determine whether the retiree and beneficiary are of 
the same sex or if they are married. Nevertheless, this data indicates that the possible 
universe of affected retirees is relatively small, and likely smaller than the 109 total 
accounts identified by SRA. 
 
In the absence of more definitive data on the affected retirees, a reliable estimate of the 
bill’s effects on State pension liabilities and contribution rates is not feasible. However, 
given the bill’s limited applicability, the effect of the adjusted benefits and lump sum 
payments on total pension assets and unfunded liabilities is likely minimal and results in 
no discernible effect on State pension contributions. To the extent that eligible retirees 
and/or beneficiaries do not submit the necessary paperwork, the fiscal effect is even less.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 601/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 454 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5