START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 662

Chapter 662

(House Bill 665)

AN ACT concerning

Comptroller and State Department of Assessments and Taxation – Enhancing
Access to Property Tax Benefits – Report

FOR the purpose of requiring the Comptroller and the State Department of Assessments
and Taxation to confer to identify ways the Comptroller could collaborate with the
Department to enhance access to certain property tax benefits administered by the
Department; requiring the Comptroller and the Department to submit a joint report
of their findings and recommendations to certain committees of the General
Assembly on or before a certain date; and generally relating to enhancing access to
property tax benefits.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Department” means the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation.

(3) “Property tax benefits” means:

(i) the homeowners’ tax credit under § 9–104 of the Tax – Property
Article;

(ii) the homestead tax credit under § 9–105 of the Tax – Property
Article;

(iii) the renters’ tax credit under § 9–102 of the Tax – Property
Article; and

(iv) the property tax exemption for disabled veterans, disabled active
duty service members, and surviving spouses under § 7–208 of the Tax – Property Article.

(b) The Comptroller and the Department shall confer during the 2023 legislative
interim to identify ways the Comptroller could collaborate with the Department to:

(1) enhance access to the property tax benefits administered by the
Department;

(2) raise awareness of the property tax benefits and encourage taxpayers
to apply; and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 662 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) make the application process for the homeowners’ and renters’ tax
credits simpler and more user–friendly by reducing or eliminating the need for the
applicant to separately report income information to the Department on the homeowners’
and renters’ tax credit applications that the applicant has already reported to the
Comptroller.

(c) (1) On or before December 1, 2023, the Comptroller and the Department
shall submit a joint report of their findings and recommendations, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the House Ways and Means Committee and the
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee.

(2) The report submitted under this subsection shall include the amount of
funding required and the timeline to implement any changes in policies or procedures
recommended in the report.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
30, 2024, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2