START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 637 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 637 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Washington County - Deputy Sheriffs and Correctional Deputies - Employment 
Conditions and Collective Bargaining 
 
 
This bill authorizes full-time sworn deputy sheriffs and correctional deputies in the 
Washington County Sheriff’s Office, at or below the rank of sergeant, to engage in 
collective bargaining with the Washington County Sheriff and the Washington County 
Administrator. Any additional funding required as a result of a collective bargaining 
agreement is subject to approval by the County Commissioners. The bill’s provisions may 
not be construed to authorize or otherwise allow sworn deputy sheriffs or correctional 
deputies to engage in a strike, as specified. The bill also alters the statutory provisions that 
specify the grounds on which a deputy sheriff of a specified rank may be discharged. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County expenditures may increase minimally, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary 
 
Collective Bargaining 
 
Full-time sworn deputy sheriffs and correctional deputies of Washington County, at or 
below the rank of sergeant, are authorized to (1) take part in or refrain from taking part in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 637/ Page 2 
forming, joining, supporting, or participating in a labor organization (or its lawful 
activities); (2) select a labor organization as their exclusive representative; (3) engage in 
collective bargaining concerning wages and benefits through a labor organization certified 
as their exclusive representative; (4) enter into a collective bargaining agreement; and 
(5) decertify a labor organization as their exclusive representative. However, any additional 
funding required as a result of a negotiated collective bargaining agreement is subject to 
approval by the County Commissioners. 
 
A labor organization must be deemed certified as the exclusive representative if certain 
conditions are met. At least 51% of the sworn deputy sheriffs (or correctional deputies, as 
applicable) at or below the rank of sergeant must sign a petition indicating their desire to 
have the labor organization be their exclusive representative. The petition must be 
submitted to the Sheriff. If, after 20 days from the date the petition is submitted to the 
Sheriff, the Sheriff does not challenge the validity of the petition, the labor organization 
must be deemed certified as the exclusive representative. If the Sheriff challenges the 
validity of the petition, the American Arbitration Association (AAA) must be requested to 
appoint a neutral third party to conduct an election (by secret ballot) and certify whether 
the labor organization has been selected as the exclusive representative by a majority (51%) 
of votes cast. These costs must be shared equally by the parties. 
 
Following certification, the parties must meet at reasonable times and engage in collective 
bargaining in good faith. The parties must make every reasonable effort to conclude 
negotiations in a timely manner to allow for inclusion by the Sheriff’s Office of matters 
agreed on in its budget request. The Sheriff and County Administrator may not be required 
to engage in collective bargaining negotiations with the exclusive representative after the 
time that the County Commissioners approve the annual operating budget with regard to 
conditions of employment that require the appropriation of funds. 
 
A collective bargaining agreement must contain all matters of agreement reached in the 
collective bargaining process. Additionally, the agreement may contain a grievance 
procedure providing for nonbinding arbitration. The agreement must be in writing and must 
be signed by the designated representatives of the parties involved. The agreement, 
however, is not effective until ratified by a majority of votes cast by the sworn deputy sheriffs 
(or correctional deputies, as applicable) in the bargaining unit, the Washington County 
Sheriff, and the County Commissioners. Additional funding, if any, required as a result of 
the agreement must be subject to approval by the County Commissioners. 
 
The bill also (1) authorizes the exclusive representative, the Sheriff, and the 
County Administrator to each designate up to four individuals for representation in 
collective bargaining negotiations and (2) establishes that an agreement is not valid if it 
extends for less than one year or more than four years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 637/ Page 3 
Employment Conditions 
 
The bill alters the grounds on which a deputy sheriff (at or below the rank of major) may 
be discharged at the conclusion of continuous employment for two years by specifying that 
such an individual may be discharged by the Sheriff only for “police misconduct.” “Police 
misconduct” is a pattern, practice, or conduct by a deputy sheriff that includes (1) depriving 
a person of rights protected by the Constitution or State or federal laws; (2) a violation of 
a criminal statute; or (3) a violation of agency standards and policies of the 
Washington County Sheriff’s Office. This definition is consistent with the definition in 
Title 3, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article (Police Accountability and Discipline), as 
established by Chapter 59 of 2021. The bill also specifies that a deputy sheriff in 
probationary status may be dismissed by the Sheriff for any reason during the probationary 
period, except as otherwise provided by law. 
 
The bill also specifies that for the purpose of employment security or employee benefits, a 
special deputy sheriff in Washington County is not a State employee. 
 
Current Law:  The Sheriff of Washington County has the authority to appoint deputy 
sheriffs and other personnel necessary to perform the duties of the office at salary levels 
set by the County Commissioners. Washington County deputy sheriffs and correctional 
deputies do not have statutory authority to collectively bargain for wages and benefits. 
 
The Sheriff may also appoint special deputy sheriffs, who are under the authority of the 
Sheriff while performing duties as a special deputy sheriff and are not employees of the 
county for the purpose of employment security or employee benefits. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Washington County does not anticipate the bill to materially affect 
local finances or operations. Because any additional funding required as a result of a 
collective bargaining agreement is subject to approval by the County Commissioners, any 
impact on wages and benefits solely attributable to the bill is not anticipated to be material. 
Washington County expenditures may also increase if the Sheriff challenges the validity 
of a petition and AAA services are utilized, as required in the bill; any associated costs are 
shared equally by the parties and assumed by the county to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 428 (Washington County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 637/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4