START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 473

Chapter 473

(House Bill 671)

AN ACT concerning

Garrett County – Board of County Commissioners – Meetings

FOR the purpose of requiring the Board of County Commissioners for Garrett County to
meet at least twice a month; authorizing the Board to hold public meetings in person
or ~~over~~ ~~video~~ ~~broadcast~~ through ~~a~~ ~~live~~ ~~stream~~ live video streaming; prohibiting the
Board from meeting through ~~a~~ ~~live~~ ~~stream~~ live video streaming for more than a
certain number of consecutive meetings except under certain circumstances; and
generally relating to the meetings of the Board of County Commissioners of Garrett
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Garrett County
Section 30.03
Article 12 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2005 Edition and 2021 Supplement, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 12 – Garrett County

30.03.

The Board of County Commissioners will meet in public session [weekly] AT LEAST
TWICE A MONTH. THE BOARD MAY HOLD PUBLIC MEETINGS IN PERSON OR OVER
VIDEO BROADCAST THROUGH A LIVE STREAM LIVE VIDEO STREAMING. THE BOARD
MAY NOT MEET SOLELY THROUGH ~~A~~ ~~LIVE~~ ~~STREAM~~ LIVE VIDEO STREAMING FOR
MORE THAN TWO CONSECUTIVE MEETINGS WITHOUT A FORMAL DECLARATION OF A
STATE OF EMERGENCY. The Board will provide notice of all public meeting dates and
times to include notification of any change in schedule or cancellation. The Board will
schedule/announce administrative sessions to review matters that may require executive
action during forthcoming public sessions or to address personnel, administrative, or other
subjects. Each Commissioner will attend appointed commission, board or committee
meetings as scheduled or planned.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1