START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 626 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 626 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Animal Testing and Research - Human-Relevant Research Funding and Animal 
Testing and Research Contributions 
 
 
This bill requires specified entities that conduct research using nonhuman animals to make 
a payment to the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) each year based on the number 
of animals used in their research. The Secretary of Health must distribute the revenues to 
the Human-Relevant Research Fund (HRRF), a special fund created by the bill in the 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) to promote State-funded 
research intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish the program, as 
specified. HRRF may only be used for TEDCO’s administrative costs and to provide grants 
and loans. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for HRRF increase by as much as $915,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. Special fund expenditures increase 
correspondingly as funds are used by TEDCO for authorized purposes. Higher education 
expenditures increase by $120,000 annually beginning in FY 2024 due to required 
payments for certain public institutions of higher education. MDH can handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. General fund revenues are not materially 
affected by the bill’s penalty provisions. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$915,000 
$915,000 
$915,000 
$915,000 
$915,000 
SF Expenditure 
$915,000 
$915,000 
$915,000 
$915,000 
$915,000 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$120,000 
$120,000 
$120,000 
$120,000 
$120,000 
Net Effect 
($120,000) 
($120,000) 
($120,000) 
($120,000) 
($120,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 626/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures for the Community College of Baltimore County 
increase by $5,000 annually beginning in FY 2024 to make the required payment to MDH. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Required Annual Payment 
 
By January 15 each year, beginning in 2024, each research facility that is located in the 
State and is required to submit an Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) 
Form 7023 must make a payment to MDH based on the total number of animals used in its 
research. The annual amount ranges from $5,000 to $75,000, depending on the number of 
animals reported in Column F of the most recently submitted form. The Secretary of Health 
must distribute the funds collected to HRRF. A research facility that fails to pay as required 
may be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day. 
 
Human-Relevant Research Fund and Related Program 
 
HRRF is established as a special, nonlapsing, fund in TEDCO. The fund may only be used 
to award grants and loans, as specified, and pay TEDCO’s administrative expenses. Interest 
earnings of the fund accrue to the fund.   
 
TEDCO must establish a grant and loan program, as specified, which includes contracting 
with an independent scientific review board to review research proposals and make 
recommendations to TEDCO. The review board must: 
 
 
review, evaluate, rank, and rate research proposals under the bill, as specified; and 
 
based on the rankings and ratings awarded to the research proposals, make 
recommendations to TEDCO for the award and disbursement of grants and loans. 
 
Disbursement of a grant or loan is contingent on the recipient entering into a memorandum 
of understanding with TEDCO that establishes the scope of the State’s financial interests 
and reflects the intellectual property policies of TEDCO. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 626/ Page 3 
By January 1 each year, TEDCO and the review board must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the progress of the research conducted with money from grants or 
loans awarded under the bill. 
 
TEDCO, in consultation with the review board, must adopt regulations to establish 
procedures for awarding and disbursing grants and loans under the bill. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Animal Testing 
 
State law does not require an individual to be licensed or pay a fee to conduct animal 
testing. 
 
Under the federal Animal Welfare Act (AWA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 
(USDA) APHIS regulates commercial animal dealers, exhibitors (circuses, zoos, etc.), 
research facilities, and commercial businesses that transport animals. Research facilities 
that use or intend to use live animals in research, tests, or experiments must be registered 
with USDA and are inspected by APHIS at least once per year. A facility must also appoint 
an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) consisting of at least 
three members, including a veterinarian and one person who is not in any way affiliated 
with the facility. IACUC is responsible for, among other things, reviewing the facility’s 
program for humane care and use of animals and inspecting the research facility’s animal 
facilities. Research facilities must submit an annual report to APHIS providing information 
that includes the types and numbers of animals used for research purposes during a 
particular year (Form 7023, as referenced by the bill).  
 
For purposes of AWA, “animal” means any live or dead dog, cat, monkey (nonhuman 
primate mammal), guinea pig, hamster, rabbit, or such other warm-blooded animal, as the 
Secretary of Agriculture may determine is being used, or is intended for use, for research, 
testing, experimentation, or exhibition purposes, or as a pet. The term excludes, among 
other animals, birds, rats of the genus Rattus, and mice of the genus Mus, bred for use in 
research. 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
 
TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to 
facilitate the creation of technology companies and encourage collaboration between these 
emerging businesses and federal and State research laboratories. TEDCO also aims to 
promote new research activity and investments that lead to business development in 
Maryland. For further information on TEDCO, including a general overview and recent 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 626/ Page 4 
program additions, see the Appendix – Maryland Technology Development 
Corporation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Revenue Collection and Distribution 
 
The bill establishes an annual required payment of between $5,000 and $75,000 for 
research facilities, depending on the number of animals used to conduct medical or product 
testing or research beginning January 15, 2024. Based on the most recent Form 7023 data 
(2021 information), the Department of Legislative Services estimates annual revenue of as 
much as $915,000 from 35 registrants. This estimate assumes that all registrants maintain 
their registration and that the 15 federal registrants voluntarily make the payment. Further, 
overall revenues are highly sensitive to the number of entities required to pay higher annual 
amounts in any given year. 
 
Registrant payments are assumed to be received as special fund revenues by HRFF each 
year, although they are collected by MDH. Based on the small number of affected entities 
and that the payment is made one time per year, MDH administrative costs are minimal 
and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for HRRF increase by as much $915,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2024 as funds are received and used to pay for TEDCO administrative 
expenses and provide grants and/or loans to eligible recipients. TEDCO estimates total 
annual administrative costs of about $180,000, which includes costs for staff and related 
expenses and $28,000 to contract with a review board; this may leave as much as $735,000 
for financial assistance each year. TEDCO advises that administrative costs may reflect a 
half-time staff or a partial cost allocation of a full-time staff, depending on other staffing 
needs at the time of implementation. In either case, total revenues and expenditures for 
HRRF are unchanged, but there may be a slight change in funds available for financial 
assistance. 
 
TEDCO employees are not State employees. Grants and/or loans may be of any size as 
determined by TEDCO. Special fund revenues and expenditures may further increase 
beginning in fiscal 2025 to the extent TEDCO provides loans, the loans are repaid, and the 
funds reissued to additional recipients. 
 
Public Institutions of Higher Education 
 
Of the 35 registrants required to make annual payments under the bill based on the 
2021 APHIS Form data, 4 are public senior institutions of higher education. Based on the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 626/ Page 5 
number of animals listed on the form, those institutions must pay a combined $120,000 
each year beginning in fiscal 2024, as follows:  
 
 
Towson University, $5,000; 
 
Frostburg State University, $5,000; 
 
University of Maryland, College Park Campus, $55,000; and 
 
University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus, $55,000. 
 
Accordingly, higher education expenditures increase by $120,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2024. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that conduct medical or product testing or 
research in Maryland using nonhuman animals must make the applicable annual payment 
under the bill. Small businesses may also benefit from financial assistance received from 
TEDCO under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 560 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Maryland 
Department of Health; U.S. Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 626/ Page 6 
Appendix – Maryland Technology  
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development:  from early stage and technology transfer to growth 
stage.  
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The Maryland Venture Fund and a biotechnology grant program were 
transferred to TEDCO in fiscal 2016. The following programs have been established by 
legislation since 2021:   
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund:  The Pre-Seed Builder Fund supports the development of 
start-up companies run by entrepreneurs from socially or economically 
disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder access to traditional forms of capital and 
executive networks at the pre-seed stage. The Governor must include appropriations 
in the budget bill in the following amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million 
in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund:  The Inclusion Fund provides capital investment in 
technology-based businesses that (1) would qualify for investment under the Builder 
Fund, as provided in TEDCO regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals 
who demonstrate economic disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at 
least one year after the time of investment by an individual or individuals who 
demonstrate economic disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program:  The program encourages the 
establishment and expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor 
must include an appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 through 2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 626/ Page 7 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund:  The Maryland Equity Investment Fund 
allows unappropriated general fund surplus to be invested in a “qualified business” 
– with a goal to increase private equity and venture capital in the State – and the 
interest earnings and investment returns realized to the benefit of participants of the 
several pension systems managed by the State Retirement and Pension System. For 
fiscal 2024, the Governor must include an appropriation in the budget bill to the 
fund equal to 10% of the unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of 
$10.0 million from the second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, 
with a corresponding decrease in the typical required appropriation. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program:  The SBIR/STTR Program allows eligible small 
businesses to apply for State awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal 
grants, limited to $25,000 for Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. 
TEDCO may make up to 20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per 
fiscal year for a total of $1.25 million. 
 
For a more thorough discussion of TEDCO’s structure and programs, including how its 
programs support companies in different stages of development, see “Chapter 13. 
Economic Development and Business Regulation” of Volume II – Government Services in 
Maryland of the 2022 Legislative Handbook Series. 

END OF PAGE 7