START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 622 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 622 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Finance 
 
Economic Development - Industry 4.0 Technology Grant Program 
 
   
This bill establishes the Industry 4.0 Technology Grant Program and Fund (TGF) in the 
Department of Commerce to assist small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) 
manufacturers in the purchase, implementation, and related employee training of 
“Industry 4.0 technology” and related infrastructure. Subject to specified requirements, 
including provision of matching funds, a competitive application process, and a small 
company set-aside, an eligible company may receive a grant of $25,000 to $500,000. From 
fiscal 2025 through 2028, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $1.0 million to TGF.    
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.1 million annually from FY 2025 
through 2028 to provide funds to TGF and to pay for Commerce’s administrative expenses, 
as discussed below. Special fund revenues and expenditures for TGF increase by 
$1.0 million annually from FY 2025 through 2028 as funds are received and used to 
provide grants to eligible businesses. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation 
from FY 2025 through 2028. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.1 
$1.1 
$1.1 
$1.1 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($1.1) 
($1.1) 
($1.1) 
($1.1)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 622/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Industry 4.0 technology” means smart hardware and software manufacturing 
technologies. It includes advanced sensor integration, embedded software system 
applications, robotics and autonomous equipment that collect data, enterprise resource 
planning and data analytics software, cloud computing and cybersecurity solutions, 
artificial intelligence for continuous improvement of efficiency and productivity, and 
infrastructure required to implement a qualifying technology. 
 
“SME manufacturer” means a small or medium-sized enterprise manufacturer. Those 
business sizes and descriptions are not further defined in the bill. 
 
Authorization for State-chartered Corporation to Administer Instead of Commerce 
 
Commerce may enter into a memorandum of understanding with a State-chartered 
corporation under Title 10 of the Economic Development Article to authorize the 
corporation to administer the program. 
 
Eligible Recipients and Uses 
 
To qualify for a grant under the program, an SME manufacturer must submit an application 
to the program administrator that demonstrates that the company is a qualifying SME 
manufacturer, has business operations in Maryland, and has been in existence for more 
than one year. 
 
In awarding grants under the program, the program administrator (whether Commerce or 
another eligible entity) must award grants on a competitive basis based on:   
 
 
the proposed project’s alignment with the adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies; 
 
the applicant’s demonstrated overall commitment to or strategy for Industry 4.0  
technology adoption; 
 
the demonstrated positive impact of Industry 4.0 technology on the applicant’s 
business operations and competitiveness; and  
 
any other information requested by the program administrator. 
 
Grants may be $25,000 to $500,000. An SME manufacturer that receives a grant must 
provide matching funds in the amounts determined by Commerce based on a sliding scale 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 622/ Page 3 
formula that requires a higher matching percentage for larger businesses. Grants may be 
used for projects that directly affect manufacturing processes and focus on investments in 
Industry 4.0 technology commercial-ready equipment through established vendors or 
related infrastructure. 
 
Commerce must reserve at least 20% of the funds available during each fiscal year for 
awarding grants to SME manufacturers that employ 50 or fewer employees. If the total 
amount of grants applied for by those manufacturers is less than the amount reserved during 
a fiscal year, Commerce may utilize the balance for other SME manufacturers. 
 
Each SME manufacturer must submit a letter to Commerce within one year of receiving a 
grant that describes how the grant funding was used and includes any invoices related to 
the implementation of the Industry 4.0 technology or related infrastructure. Commerce may 
require a grant recipient that fails to fulfill the requirements of the grant to return all or part 
of the grant to the program. 
 
Commerce must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
Industry 4.0 Technology Grant Fund  
 
TGF is established as a special, nonlapsing, fund in Commerce, consisting of money 
appropriated in the State budget and any other money from any other source. The fund may 
be used only for providing grants under the program to eligible applicants. Interest earnings 
accrue to the general fund. From fiscal 2025 through 2028, the Governor must include in 
the annual budget bill an appropriation of $1.0 million to TGF. 
 
Current Law:  The fiscal 2023 budget includes $1.0 million in general funds for a similar, 
but temporary, program to the one established under the bill. As described on Commerce’s 
website, the Maryland Manufacturing 4.0 grant program provides grants to small or 
mid-sized manufacturing businesses to implement Industry 4.0 technologies, machinery 
and robotics, and digital business practices in order to remain competitive and drive 
growth. Awarded grants cover 50% of project costs, with a minimum grant of $15,000 and 
a maximum grant of $50,000. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes an additional $1.0 million for the program. 
 
Commerce’s Office of Finance Programs is charged with delivering and administering the 
department’s financial incentive and tax credit programs. Two programs that provide 
related incentives are discussed in more detail below. A more comprehensive list of 
financial incentives available for Maryland businesses can be found on Commerce’s 
website. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 622/ Page 4 
Innovation Investment Incentive Tax Credit 
 
The Innovation Investment Incentive Tax Credit (formerly the Cybersecurity Investment 
Incentive Tax Credit) is a refundable income tax credit for investments in qualified 
technology companies. An investor who invests at least $25,000 in a qualified Maryland 
technology can claim a refundable credit equal to 33% of a qualified investment, not to 
exceed $250,000. An enhanced credit of 50% of the investment, up to $500,000, is 
available if a qualified technology company is located in certain rural counties or a 
Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise (“RISE”) Zone and meets other specified 
requirements. Commerce administers the tax credit, and the total amount of credits 
awarded each year is generally limited to the amount appropriated to the program’s reserve 
fund. The program terminates June 30, 2025. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $2.0 million in funding for the program. 
 
More Jobs for Marylanders Program 
 
Chapter 149 of 2017 established the More Jobs for Marylanders program, which, after 
several modifications, provides a refundable State income tax credit to certain businesses 
that create and maintain a minimum number of qualified jobs. For businesses certified 
beginning June 1, 2022, the credit is equal to 4.75% of the wages paid to each qualified 
position. Credits are available for manufacturing businesses, or other businesses if they are 
located in opportunity zones. Credits may be claimed for 5 or 10 years, depending on the 
location of the business. Commerce may issue up to $5.0 million in credit certificates in 
each of fiscal 2023 and 2024 and may not issue new tax credit certificates after 
May 31, 2024. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes  
$34.0 million in funding for the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This estimate assumes that no discretionary funding is provided for 
TGF in fiscal 2024. The bill restricts the use of TGF funds to only providing grants, so this 
estimate reflects additional general funds for administrative expenses. Commerce advises 
that it requires one staff to administer the program. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $1,123,176 in fiscal 2025, consistent 
with the timing of the mandated funding. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring  
one program manager to administer all aspects of the program, including regulation 
development, establishment of processes and procedures, evaluation of applications, 
marketing, oversight, and general administrative functions. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and $1.0 million in grant 
awards. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 622/ Page 5 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$115,491 
Other Operating Expenses 
7,685 
Grant Awards 
  1,000,000 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$1,123,176 
 
Future year expenditures of $1.1 million annually reflect a full salary with annual increases 
and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and 
ongoing mandated appropriations to TGF of $1.0 million annually from fiscal 2026 through 
2028. While not required beyond fiscal 2028, expenditures are assumed to increase by 
similar amounts in future years, as the program is permanent. 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for TGF increase by $1.0 million each year as the 
mandated appropriation is received and then used to provide grants to eligible businesses. 
For purposes of this estimate, grants are assumed to be made in the fiscal year that general 
funds are appropriated, although grants could be made in subsequent years. 
 
This estimate assumes that Commerce administers the program directly, although the 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation (“TEDCO”) or the Maryland Economic 
Development Corporation (“MEDCO”) could administer the program if Commerce 
chooses that option under the bill. 
 
Although the fiscal 2024 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, includes funding for 
a similar (but temporary) program, this estimate assumes that program is distinct from the 
program established by the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  While the bill does not further define the size of SME 
manufacturers, Commerce must reserve at least 20% of the funds available during each 
fiscal year for awarding grants to SME manufacturers that employ 50 or fewer employees. 
Therefore, small manufacturing businesses benefit from at least $200,000 in available 
annual funding under the program from fiscal 2025 through 2028. Those businesses must 
provide matching funds, but the smaller the business, the lower the matching fund 
percentage will be. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 906 (Senator Rosapepe) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 622/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Economic Development Corporation; Maryland Technology 
Development 
Corporation; 
Maryland 
Public-Private 
Partnership/P3 
Marketing 
Corporation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 7, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6