START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 692 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 692 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Service Commission – Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity – 
Local Permits 
 
 
This bill specifies that a county or municipality has the authority to approve or deny any 
local permit required under a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) 
issued by the Public Service Commission (PSC). A county or municipality must approve 
or deny such a permit within a reasonable time and in accordance with local laws, to the 
extent that local laws are not preempted by State law. A county or municipality is 
prohibited from conditioning the approval of a local permit required under a CPCN on 
receipt of a conditional use approval, a special exception approval, or a floating zone 
approval for any aspect of a generating station, an overhead transmission line, or a qualified 
lead line proposed to be constructed under the CPCN.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State government finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill affects local government finances and operations to the extent that 
counties and municipalities must process permits required under a CPCN and do so within 
a reasonable amount of time and without zoning conditions they might have otherwise 
included. The overall effect on any particular local government is likely minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PSC is the lead agency for licensing the siting, construction, and operation 
of power plants and related facilities in the State through the CPCN process, which is a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 692/ Page 2 
comprehensive process involving several other State agencies, including the Department 
of Natural Resources and its Power Plant Research Program and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. 
 
Generally, a person may not begin construction in the State of a generating station, 
overhead transmission line, or a qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is first 
obtained from PSC. The application process involves notifying specified stakeholders, 
public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by State and local government 
entities, and the project’s effect on various aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, 
and environment. 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of the 
recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located and the effect of the project on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. For a generating station 
specifically, PSC must provide due consideration of (1) a CPCN application’s consistency 
with the comprehensive plan and zoning of each county or municipality where any portion 
of the generating station is proposed to be located and (2) the efforts to resolve issues 
presented by a county or municipality pertaining to a proposed generating station located 
within its geographic lines. 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland, in Bd. of Cty. Commissioners of Washington Cty. v. 
Perennial Solar, LLC, 464 Md. 610 (2019), held that State law impliedly preempts local 
zoning regulation of solar energy generating systems that require a CPCN. 
 
For additional information on the CPCN process, see the Appendix – Certificate of Public 
Convenience and Necessity. 
 
Additional Comments:  PSC advises that the bill addresses an emerging regulatory gap 
occasioned by the Supreme Court of Maryland’s decision in Perennial Solar between 
PSC’s exclusive authority over the siting of generating stations in the State and local 
authority over the issuance of permits by counties and municipalities. The bill clarifies that 
local governments do indeed have the authority to issue the permits and approvals required 
under a CPCN; as a result, PSC notes that the bill may eliminate a source of delay for 
renewable energy projects being developed in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 692/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 489 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of Natural Resources; 
Baltimore, Montgomery, and Frederick counties; City of Havre de Grace; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 692/ Page 4 
Appendix – Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
 
General Overview 
 
The Public Service Commission (PSC) is the lead agency for licensing the siting, 
construction, and operation of power plants and related facilities in the State through 
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN). The CPCN process is 
comprehensive and involves several other State agencies, including the Department of 
Natural Resources (and its Power Plant Research Program), and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. Subject to limited exemptions described below, a person may not 
begin construction in the State of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or 
qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is first obtained from PSC. “Generating 
station” is not defined in statute; however, the PSC definition in regulation excludes a 
facility with up to 2 megawatts of capacity if it meets other specified requirements. 
 
The CPCN process, detailed further below, involves the notification of specified 
stakeholders, the holding of public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by 
State and local government entities, and the consideration of the project’s effects on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
In December 2020, PSC initiated a rulemaking (RM 72) to revise regulations governing 
CPCNs for generating stations. Updated regulations became effective in September 2021. 
Among other changes, the regulations contain additional information requirements – to 
assist in project evaluation – and allow for electronic submission and distribution of 
application materials. 
 
Notification Process 
 
Upon receipt of a CPCN application, PSC – or the CPCN applicant, if required by PSC – 
must immediately provide notice to specified recipients, including the executive and 
governing body of affected local governments, affected members of the General Assembly, 
and other interested persons. When providing the notice, PSC must also forward the CPCN 
application to each appropriate unit of State and local government for review, evaluation, 
and comment and to each member of the General Assembly who requests a copy. 
 
Public Hearing and Comment 
 
PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on a 
CPCN application in each county and municipality in which any portion of the construction 
of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or qualified generator lead line is 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 692/ Page 5 
proposed to be located. PSC must hold the hearing jointly with the governing body of the 
county or municipality and must provide weekly notice during the four weeks prior to the 
hearing, both in a newspaper and online, and must further coordinate with each local 
government to identify additional hearing notification options. PSC must ensure 
presentation and recommendations from each interested State unit and must allow 
representatives of each State unit to sit during the hearing of all parties. PSC must then 
allow each State unit 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing to modify the unit’s initial 
recommendations. 
 
Public Service Commission Considerations 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of 
(1) recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; (2) various aspects of the State 
infrastructure, economy, and environment; and (3) the effect of climate change on the 
project. For example, PSC must consider the effect of the project on the stability and 
reliability of the electric system and, when applicable, air and water pollution. There are 
additional considerations specifically for a generating station or an overhead transmission 
line. For example, PSC must consider the impact of a generating station on the quantity of 
annual and long-term statewide greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Generating Station Exemptions 
 
There are three general conditions under which a person constructing a generating station 
may apply to PSC for an exemption from the CPCN requirement: 
 
 
the facility is designed to provide onsite generated electricity, the capacity is up to 
70 megawatts, and the excess electricity can be sold only on the wholesale market 
pursuant to a specified agreement with the local electric company; 
 
at least 10% of the electricity generated is consumed onsite, the capacity is up to 
25 megawatts, and the excess electricity is sold on the wholesale market pursuant 
to a specified agreement with the local electric company; or 
 
the facility is wind-powered and land-based, the capacity is up to 70 megawatts, and 
the facility is no closer than a PSC-determined distance from the Patuxent River 
Naval Air Station, among other requirements. 
 
However, PSC must require a person who is exempted from the CPCN requirement to 
obtain approval from the commission before the person may construct a generating station 
as described above. The application must contain specified information that PSC requires, 
including proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the independent system 
operator. 

END OF PAGE 5