START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 630

Chapter 630

(House Bill 775)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Emergency Management – Consumer Protections Against Price
Gouging

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from selling an essential good or service for more
than a certain increase in price during and for a certain time after a certain state of
emergency; requiring the Secretary of State to establish an electronic notification
system by which a person may register to receive certain information; and generally
relating to emergency management and consumer protections.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxvi)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxvii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 14–1301 through 14–1304 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 13.
Essential Goods and Services”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 630 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xxxv) Section 11–210 of the Education Article; [or]

(xxxvi) Title 14, Subtitle 44 of this article; or

(XXXVII) TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 13 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY
ARTICLE; OR

Article – Public Safety

SUBTITLE 13. ESSENTIAL GOODS AND SERVICES.

14–1301.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY THE GOVERNOR IN A DECLARATION
OF STATE OF EMERGENCY OR BY EXECUTIVE ORDER, “ESSENTIAL GOODS AND
~~SERVICES”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~FOOD;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~FUEL;~~

(3) WATER AND ICE;

~~(4)~~ ~~MEDICINE;~~

(5) MEDICAL SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT;

(6) CLEANING PRODUCTS;

(7) BUILDING SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT;

(8) ENERGY SOURCES;

(9) STORAGE SPACE;

(10) COMMUNICATION AND INTERNET SERVICES;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 630

(11) ACCOMMODATIONS AND LODGING; AND

(12) ANY OTHER GOODS OR SERVICES DESIGNATED AS ESSENTIAL BY
THE GOVERNOR.

~~(C)~~ (B) “PRICE” MEANS:

(1) FOR ESSENTIAL SERVICES, RETAIL PRICE; OR

(2) FOR ESSENTIAL GOODS, RETAIL OR WHOLESALE PRICE.

~~(D)~~ (C) “REPLACEMENT COSTS” MEANS:

(1) ACQUISITION COSTS;

(2) COSTS THAT ARE A RESULT OF A CONTRACT IN WHICH THE
FORMULA REFERENCES PUBLISHED MARKET PRICES; OR

(3) THE ACTUAL ANTICIPATED COSTS OF REPLACING AN ESSENTIAL
GOOD OR SERVICE OFFERED FOR SALE, BASED ON DOCUMENTED INFORMATION
AVAILABLE AT THE TIME OF THE INCREASE IN PRICE.

(E) (D) “STATE OF EMERGENCY” MEANS A STATE OF EMERGENCY
DECLARED BY THE GOVERNOR UNDER § 14–107 OF THIS TITLE.

14–1302.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, DURING A
STATE OF EMERGENCY, IN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA COVERED BY THE STATE OF
EMERGENCY DECLARATION, A PERSON MAY NOT SELL OR OFFER TO SELL ESSENTIAL
GOODS OR SERVICES DESIGNATED AS ESSENTIAL BY THE GOVERNOR FOR A PRICE
OF 10% 15% OR MORE ABOVE THE HIGHEST PRICE AT WHICH THE PERSON MADE
ACTUAL SALES OR RENTALS OF THOSE ESSENTIAL GOODS OR SERVICES BETWEEN:

(1) 60 DAYS BEFORE THE STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARATION; AND

(2) 4 DAYS BEFORE THE STATE OF EMERGENCY.

(B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, DURING A
STATE OF EMERGENCY AND FOR THE 90 DAYS FOLLOWING THE END OF THE STATE
OF EMERGENCY, A PERSON MAY NOT SELL OR OFFER TO SELL REPAIR OR
RECONSTRUCTION SERVICES USED FOR EMERGENCY CLEANUP FOR A PRICE OF 10%
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 630 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

15% OR MORE ABOVE THE AVERAGE PRICE CHARGED BY THE PERSON FOR THOSE
SERVICES DURING THE 30 DAYS BEFORE THE STATE OF EMERGENCY.

(C) A PERSON MAY INCREASE A PRICE BY 10% 15% OR MORE FOR GOODS
AND SERVICES IF THE PERSON CAN PROVE THAT:

(1) THE PRICE INCREASE IS DIRECTLY ATTRIBUTABLE TO
ADDITIONAL COSTS IMPOSED ON THE PERSON BY THE SUPPLIER OF GOODS,
INCLUDING REPLACEMENT COSTS, COSTS OF CREDIT, AND CREDIT CARD
PROCESSING COSTS; OR

(2) THE PRICE INCREASE IS DIRECTLY ATTRIBUTABLE TO
ADDITIONAL COSTS FOR LABOR OR MATERIALS USED TO PROVIDE THE SERVICE OR
PRODUCE THE GOODS, INCLUDING COSTS TO REPAIR ANY DAMAGE RELATING TO
THE STATE OF EMERGENCY; OR

(3) THE PRICE INCREASE IS CONSISTENT WITH SEASONAL PRICES
CHARGED BY THE PERSON BASED ON HISTORICAL DATA SHOWING PRICES CHARGED
DURING THE SEASON OVER THE PAST 3 YEARS.

(D) AT LEAST 20 DAYS BEFORE AN ACTION IS FILED UNDER § 14–1303 OF
THIS SUBTITLE, THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PROVIDE A
PERSON WHOSE ACTIONS MAY BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION NOTICE OF THE
GENERAL RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO GIVE
THE PERSON AN OPPORTUNITY TO PRESENT EVIDENCE THAT THE PRICE INCREASE
WAS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

14–1303.

(A) A SALE OR OFFER FOR SALE OF ESSENTIAL GOODS AND SERVICES IN
VIOLATION OF § 14–1302 OF THIS SUBTITLE IS:

(1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE, AS
DEFINED UNDER TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

(2) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS OF
TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE, EXCEPT FOR THE CRIMINAL
PENALTIES IN § 13–411 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE.

(B) A PERSON WHO SUFFERS INJURY OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION
OF § 14–1302 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY BRING AN ACTION UNDER §
13–408 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 630

PERSON IS A CONSUMER, AS DEFINED IN § 13–101 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW
~~ARTICLE.~~

14–1304.

THE SECRETARY OF STATE SHALL ESTABLISH A SYSTEM BY WHICH A PERSON
MAY REGISTER TO RECEIVE ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATIONS STATING:

(1) THAT A STATE OF EMERGENCY HAS BEEN DECLARED AND AN
EXECUTIVE ORDER HAS BEEN ISSUED;

(2) THAT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE ARE IN EFFECT; AND

(3) THE CATEGORIES OF ESSENTIAL GOODS AND SERVICES OR
INDIVIDUAL ESSENTIAL GOODS AND SERVICES THAT ARE COVERED BY THE
EXECUTIVE ORDER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5