START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 778 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 778 
(Montgomery County Delegation and Prince George's 
County Delegation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County - Bicounty Agencies - Commissioner Discipline, Disclosures, 
Training, and Ethics  
MC/PG 105-23 
 
 
This bill alters provisions of law pertaining to commissioners appointed from Montgomery 
County to the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission (M-NCPPC). 
The bill authorizes a commissioner of a bi-county agency from Montgomery County or an 
applicant for appointment as commissioner to M-NCPPC from Montgomery County to 
electronically submit financial disclosures to the Montgomery County Council instead of 
submitting a paper copy. Additionally, the bill requires the Montgomery County Planning 
Board to report to the Montgomery County Delegation to the General Assembly on its 
ability to publish frequently updated, timely information on regulatory matters over which 
the board has decision-making authority on its website by December 31, 2023, as specified. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect M-NCPPC operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  M-NCPPC consists of 10 commissioners. Five of the 
commissioners are required to be residents and registered voters of Montgomery County 
and five must be residents and registered voters of Prince George’s County. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 778/ Page 2 
Removal or Disciplinary Actions – Commissioners of Montgomery County 
 
Under current law, the Montgomery County Council may remove any commissioner 
appointed from Montgomery County, under specified conditions, before the expiration of 
the commissioner’s term. 
 
The bill specifies that before an appointed commissioner may be removed or disciplined, 
the cause for removal or disciplinary action must be stated in writing and a public hearing 
held on the removal or disciplinary action. 
 
Engaging in Other Employment – Montgomery County 
 
The bill prohibits the chair of the Montgomery County Planning Board from engaging in 
any other full-time employment while serving as chair. 
 
Prohibited Solicitations  – Montgomery County 
 
The bill prohibits commissioners appointed from Montgomery County from accepting or 
soliciting a financial contribution from any person with business before M-NCPPC, for any 
political candidate, political organization, or ballot question, or soliciting an endorsement 
of or opposition to a political candidate.  
 
Code of Conduct of a Former Commissioner – Montgomery County 
 
Within one calendar year after leaving office, a former commissioner of 
Montgomery County is prohibited from assisting or representing another party for 
compensation in a matter that was the subject of action before the Montgomery County 
Planning Board while the commissioner served on the board, as specified. 
 
Training – Montgomery County 
 
The bill requires the commissioners appointed from Montgomery County to successfully 
complete training within the first three months of being appointed, in the following areas:   
(1) open meetings laws; (2) the Maryland Department of Planning’s Planning 
Commissioner, Planning Board, and Board of Appeals Education Course; and 
(3) appropriate training on Maryland Public Ethics Law and M-NCPPC policies and 
practices on ethics, drug- and alcohol-free workplace, and workplace harassment and 
intimidation. 
 
Failure of a commissioner to meet the training requirements does not invalidate a decision 
made by M-NCPPC or establish a private cause of action.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 778/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3