START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 702 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 702 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Care Facilities - Nursing Homes - Acquisitions and Licensure 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), when evaluating a 
notice of acquisition or transfer of interest of a nursing home, to provide specified written 
findings and recommendations to the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ). The 
Secretary of Health must consider MHCC’s findings and recommendations before taking 
action to approve, deny, approve with conditions, or revoke a nursing home license. By 
December 1, 2023, MHCC, in consultation with specified stakeholders, must (1) complete 
a specified study regarding the expansion of the Certificate of Need (CON) program over 
the acquisition of nursing homes and (2) submit a specified report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee. The bill’s 
provisions relating to the required study and report take effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.      
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  When evaluating a notice of acquisition or transfer of interest of a nursing 
home, the findings and recommendations from MHCC must include: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 702/ Page 2 
 
the quality ratings of facilities currently or previously owned, within or outside the 
State, by the purchaser, as specified;  
 
for the immediately preceding three-year period, for facilities currently or 
previously owned, within or outside the State, by the purchaser:  (1) evidence that 
facilities maintained quality assessment and assurance committees that met at least 
quarterly; (2) inspection of care reports and corrective action plans; (3) licensing 
and certification surveys and corrective action plans; and (4) lawsuits or arbitration 
filings by any patient or patient representative against facilities; 
 
the tax identification number of each purchaser; 
 
the personal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services certification number of 
each purchaser; and  
 
a summary of the findings and the basis for the recommendations. 
 
Current Law:  A nursing home is a facility that offers nonacute care to patients suffering 
from a disease, chronic illness, condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease 
requiring maximal nursing care without continuous hospital services. In Maryland, nursing 
homes are licensed by OHCQ within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). 
 
MHCC is an independent commission within MDH with a mission to plan for health 
system needs, promote informed decision making, increase accountability, and improve 
access in a rapidly changing health care environment by providing timely and accurate 
information on availability, cost, and quality of services to policymakers, purchasers, 
providers, and the public.  
 
Certificate of Need 
 
The CON program, located within MHCC, requires review and approval of certain types 
of proposed health care facility and service projects by MHCC, including before a person 
acquires a health care facility, with specified exceptions. A CON is not required for 
acquisition of a health care facility if, at least 30 days before making the contractual 
arrangement to acquire the facility, written notice of intent is filed with MHCC and MHCC 
finds, within 30 days of receipt of the notice, that the health services or bed capacity of the 
facility will not change. 
 
As part of the nursing home licensure process, the person acquiring a nursing home must 
also provide MDH with written notice of the acquisition or change in the operator of a 
nursing home at the same time the written notice of intent is filed with MHCC. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 702/ Page 3 
Nursing Home Ownership Interest 
 
A nursing home must include in the application for licensure the identify of any person 
with an ownership interest in a nursing home and any management company, landlord, or 
other business entity that will operate or contract with the applicant to manage the nursing 
home. If there are any changes to this information, a nursing home must notify MDH within  
30 days after the effective date of the change. On review of the required ownership 
information, (and other information that affirmatively demonstrates an applicant’s ability 
to comply with specified standards) the Secretary of Health may approve or deny a nursing 
home license application, as specified, or revoke a license to operate a nursing home. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 509 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3