START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 774 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 774 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Assisted Living Programs - Unlicensed Programs - Resident Abuse, Exploitation, 
and Neglect (The Senator Delores Kelley Residents of Unlicensed Programs 
Protection Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) or the Office of Health Care 
Quality (OHCQ) to investigate whether assisted living residents have been subjected to 
neglect, exploitation, or abuse if MDH finds a credible allegation that a person is operating 
an assisted living program without a license. The person operating the unlicensed program 
must be subject to immediate prosecution (1) on receipt of a credible allegation or after an 
investigation finds that residents have been subjected to neglect, exploitation, or abuse or 
(2) if the person fails or refuses to cooperate fully in an investigation. If MDH finds no 
reason to believe that residents have been subject to neglect, exploitation, or abuse, MDH 
must provide written notice to the unlicensed program requiring compliance with licensure 
requirements within 30 days. A person operating an unlicensed program may not be subject 
to prosecution if they have promptly and in good faith submitted a complete application 
for licensure. MDH, the Attorney General, a State’s Attorney, or a local health officer may 
petition a circuit court for injunctive relief against the operation of an unlicensed assisted 
living program. MDH may adopt regulations to carry out the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Imposition of existing penalty provisions are not expected to materially affect State 
finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Imposition of existing penalty provisions and the authority to petition a 
circuit court for injunctive relief are not expected to materially affect local government 
operations or finances. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 774/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill also repeals the requirement that MDH send written notice to an 
assisted living program found to be operating without a license 30 days before filing 
charges in order to give the program time to come into compliance with licensure 
requirements. The State is not required to consider the ability of an assisted living facility 
to pay a penalty when recommending the amount of the criminal penalty for operating 
without a license. 
 
Current Law:  An “assisted living program” is a residential or facility-based program that 
provides housing and supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, 
health-related services, or a combination of such services that meets the needs of 
individuals who need assistance with the activities of daily living. Assisted living programs 
are licensed by OHCQ within MDH. OHCQ must conduct an annual unannounced on-site 
inspection of each assisted living facility. Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.07.14) set 
the minimum, reasonable standards for licensure of assisted living programs. 
 
A person may not knowingly and willfully operate, maintain, or own an assisted living 
program without a license. A violation is a felony subject to (1) for a first offense, a fine 
of up to $10,000 or imprisonment for up to five years or (2) for a subsequent offense, a fine 
of up to $20,000 or imprisonment for up to five years. A violation is also a violation of the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA). A person may not be subject to prosecution 
if the person has (1) applied in good faith for an assisted living program license; (2) is 
awaiting a decision regarding the application; and (3) has not been denied an assisted living 
program license on a prior occasion. When recommending the amount of the criminal 
penalty, the State must consider factors including the (1) nature, number, and seriousness 
of the violations and (2) ability of the assisted living program to pay the penalty. 
 
If MDH finds an assisted living program to be in violation of licensure requirements, MDH 
must send written notice to the program 30 days before the State files charges for operating 
without a license. 
 
A person also may not advertise, represent, or imply to the public that an assisted living 
program is authorized to provide a service that the program is not licensed, certified, or 
otherwise authorized to provide. A person may not advertise an assisted living program in 
a misleading or fraudulent manner. A violation is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding 
$10,000 for each offense. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 774/ Page 3 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
Additional Comments:  As of February 10, 2023, there were 1,723 licensed assisted living 
programs in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 665 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Aging; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 774/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4