START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 758 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 758 
(Delegates Bartlett and Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits - Preservation and Storage 
 
   
This bill increases, from 20 to 75 years, the time after the collection of evidence during 
which a sexual assault evidence collection kit or other specified evidence cannot be 
destroyed or disposed of by a law enforcement agency, unless specified criteria are met. 
The bill also establishes that a self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kit must 
be transferred to a law enforcement agency, as specified. The bill must be construed to 
apply to and interpreted to affect physical evidence of sexual assault collected from victims 
before and after October 1, 2023. Among other provisions, the bill also requires the 
Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee, by 
December 1, 2023, to submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
specified information regarding sexual assault evidence collection kits and 
self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kits.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations in 
the near term; however, general fund expenditures may increase in future years should the 
Department of State Police (DSP) need to acquire additional storage for retaining sexual 
assault evidence collection kits and related evidence. The Office of the Attorney General 
(OAG) advises it can meet the bill’s guidance and reporting requirement within existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected.        
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations 
in the near term. Potential increase in local expenditures in future years for storage costs. 
Local revenues are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 758/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A sexual assault evidence collection kit collected before January 1, 2000, 
and stored by a hospital or child advocacy center must be (1) retained consistent with the 
requirements regarding the retention of sexual assault evidence collection kits and 
(2) transferred to a law enforcement agency for testing within 30 days after being identified 
as a sexual assault evidence collection kit, or as directed by OAG.   
 
By December 1, 2023, the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding 
Committee must issue a report to the Governor and the General Assembly making 
recommendations for (1) guidelines for the transfer of sexual assault evidence collection 
kits collected before January 1, 2000, to be transferred to law enforcement agencies for 
testing; (2) guidance on the use of self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kits; 
and (3) in consultation with the Consumer Protection Division of OAG, educating 
consumers about use of self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kits, including 
information regarding the kits’ admissibility in a criminal prosecution and identifying other 
resources for victims of sexual assault.  
 
“Sexual assault evidence collection kit” means physical evidence collected (1) by a 
qualified health care provider; (2) from the body or clothing of a living or deceased person; 
(3) following an allegation or suspicion of sexual assault; and (4) for the purpose of 
preserving the physical evidence. “Sexual assault evidence collection kit” does not include 
a self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kit.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Collection, Testing, and Storage Requirements for Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits 
 
A sexual assault evidence collection kit must be transferred to a law enforcement agency 
(1) by a hospital or child advocacy center within 30 days after an exam is performed or 
(2) by a government agency in possession of a kit, unless the agency is otherwise required 
to retain the kit by law or court rule. A law enforcement agency is prohibited from 
destroying or disposing of a sexual assault evidence collection kit or other crime scene 
evidence relating to a sexual assault that has been identified by the State’s Attorney as 
relevant to prosecution within 20 years after the evidence is collected, unless the case for 
which the evidence was collected resulted in a conviction and the sentence has been 
completed or all suspects identified by testing of a kit are deceased. A law enforcement 
agency with custody of a sexual assault evidence collection kit, on written request by the 
victim, must (1) notify the victim at least 60 days before the date of intended destruction 
or disposal of the evidence or (2) retain the evidence for 12 months longer, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 758/ Page 3 
Except when a specified exception applies, an investigating law enforcement agency that 
receives a sexual assault evidence collection kit must (1) submit the kit and all requested 
associated reference standards to a forensic laboratory for analysis within 30 days of receipt 
of the kit and all requested associated reference standards and (2) make use of certified 
sexual assault crisis programs or other qualified community-based sexual assault victim 
service organizations that can provide services and support to survivors of sexual assault. 
 
A sexual assault evidence collection kit must be submitted to a forensic laboratory for 
analysis unless (1) there is clear evidence disproving the allegation of sexual assault; (2) the 
facts alleged, if true, could not be interpreted to violate specified provisions of the Criminal 
Law Article; (3) the victim from whom the evidence was collected declines to give consent 
for analysis; or (4) the suspect’s profile has been collected for entry as a convicted offender 
for a qualifying offense in the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) and the suspect has 
pleaded guilty to the offense that led to the sexual assault evidence collection kit. 
 
A forensic laboratory that receives a sexual assault evidence collection kit and all requested 
associated reference standards for analysis must determine the suitability of testing the kit 
and complete screening, testing, and analysis in a timely manner. Failure to complete the 
screening, testing, and analysis in a timely manner as specified may not constitute the basis 
for excluding the analysis or results as evidence in a criminal proceeding.  
 
The eligible results of an analysis of a sexual assault evidence collection kit must be entered 
into CODIS. The DNA collected from a victim may not be used for any purpose except as 
authorized. 
 
Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee 
 
Chapter 659 of 2017 established the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and 
Funding Committee to, among other things, develop and disseminate best practices 
information and recommendations regarding the testing and retention of sexual assault 
evidence collection kits. In January 2023, the committee released its annual report.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  DSP advises that the department maintains one long-term 
evidence storage facility in Hanover, Maryland. DSP advises that the department may 
require additional long-term storage facilities to comply with the bill’s requirement of 
maintaining custody of sexual assault evidence collection kits and related evidence for 
75 years (instead of 20 years as required under existing requirements). Similarly, DSP also 
advises that local law enforcement agencies may also need to acquire additional long-term 
storage facilities. However, any material fiscal impact will likely not occur until beyond 
the timeframe accounted for in this fiscal and policy note and therefore cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 758/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 789 (Senator Hettleman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Governor’s 
Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Department of State Police; Office of the Attorney General; Baltimore County; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4