START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 443

Chapter 443

(House Bill 707)

AN ACT concerning

Office of the Comptroller – Taxpayer Advocate Division

FOR the purpose of establishing the Taxpayer Advocate Division in the Office of the
Comptroller to assist taxpayers and their representatives in resolving certain
taxpayer problems and complaints and represent taxpayers’ interests in a certain
manner; and generally relating to the Office of the Comptroller.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – General
Section 2–102.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

2–102.2.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “DIVISION” MEANS THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE
DIVISION.

(B) THERE IS A TAXPAYER ADVOCATE DIVISION IN THE OFFICE OF THE
COMPTROLLER.

(C) (1) THE HEAD OF THE DIVISION IS THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE.

(2) THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE SHALL HAVE:

(I) A BACKGROUND IN CUSTOMER SERVICE AND TAX LAW; AND

(II) EXPERIENCE REPRESENTING INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYERS.

(3) SUBJECT TO THE SUPERVISION OF THE COMPTROLLER, THE
TAXPAYER ADVOCATE HAS ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL OVER THE DIVISION.

(D) (1) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL SELECT THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE
AND THE EMPLOYEES OF THE DIVISION, WHO MAY INCLUDE EMPLOYEES FROM THE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 443 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE AND RESIDENTS OF THIS STATE WITH KNOWLEDGE OF
TAXATION.

(2) THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE SHALL APPOINT OTHER OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES OF THE DIVISION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE
STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE.

(3) THE DIVISION SHALL INCLUDE A MINIMUM OF SIX EMPLOYEES,
INCLUDING THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE, AS WELL AS APPROPRIATE SUPPORT STAFF,
ONE OF WHOM SHALL HAVE EXPERIENCE IN THE FIELD OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY TO SERVE AS WEBMASTER.

(4) OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE DIVISION ARE ENTITLED TO A
SALARY AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(5) THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT, IN
COORDINATION WITH THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER, SHALL MAKE
APPROPRIATE ALLOCATIONS FOR PERSONNEL, INCLUDING THE ABILITY TO
RECLASSIFY POSITIONS.

(E) THE DIVISION SHALL:

(1) BE SUBJECT TO ALL CONFIDENTIALITY AND DISCLOSURE
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE;

(2) BE RESPONSIBLE FOR ASSISTING TAXPAYERS AND THEIR
REPRESENTATIVES TO ENSURE THAT TAXPAYERS AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
UNDERSTAND AND UTILIZE THE POLICIES, PROCESSES, AND PROCEDURES
AVAILABLE FOR THE RESOLUTION OF PROBLEMS RELATED TO TAX PROGRAMS AND
DEBT COLLECTION PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE COMPTROLLER;

(3) ASSIST TAXPAYERS IN RESOLVING PROBLEMS WITH THE
COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE;

(4) IDENTIFY AREAS IN WHICH TAXPAYERS EXPERIENCE PROBLEMS
IN DEALING WITH THE COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE;

(5) PROVIDE EXPEDITIOUS SERVICE TO TAXPAYERS WHOSE
PROBLEMS ARE NOT RESOLVED THROUGH ORDINARY CHANNELS;

(6) COLLABORATE WITH OTHER EMPLOYEES OF THE
COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE TO RESOLVE THE MOST COMPLEX AND SENSITIVE
TAXPAYER PROBLEMS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 443

(7) RESOLVE SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED BY TAXPAYERS;

(8) REPORT TO THE COMPTROLLER IF, IN THE OPINION OF THE
DIVISION, THE COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE IS ADMINISTERING A LAW IMPROPERLY;

(9) PARTICIPATE AND REPRESENT TAXPAYERS’ INTERESTS AND
CONCERNS IN PLANNING MEETINGS, REVIEWING INSTRUCTIONS, AND
FORMULATING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES OF THE COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE;

(10) COMPILE DATA EACH YEAR ON THE NUMBER AND TYPE OF
TAXPAYER COMPLAINTS AND EVALUATE THE ACTIONS TAKEN TO RESOLVE THE
COMPLAINTS;

(11) SURVEY TAXPAYERS EACH YEAR TO OBTAIN THEIR EVALUATION
OF THE QUALITY OF SERVICE PROVIDED BY THE COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE;

(12) PROPOSE CHANGES IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES OF THE
COMPTROLLER’S OFFICE TO MITIGATE ISSUES IN RESOLVING PROBLEMS AND
COMPLAINTS IDENTIFIED UNDER ITEMS (3) AND (10) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

(13) IDENTIFY POTENTIAL LEGISLATIVE OR REGULATORY CHANGES
THAT MAY BE APPROPRIATE TO RESOLVE ANY PROBLEMS OR COMPLAINTS
IDENTIFIED UNDER ITEMS (3) AND (10) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

(14) ESTABLISH AN ELECTRONIC PORTAL ON THE COMPTROLLER’S
WEBSITE WHERE TAXPAYERS CAN INTERACT WITH THE DIVISION DIRECTLY; AND

(15) PERFORM OTHER RELATED DUTIES AS ASSIGNED BY THE
COMPTROLLER IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 1A OF THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3