START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 702

Chapter 702

(House Bill 758)

AN ACT concerning

Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits – Preservation and Storage

FOR the purpose of altering requirements for the storage and preservation of sexual assault
evidence collection kits; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~to~~ ~~direct~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~person~~
~~to~~ ~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~to~~ ~~apply~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~court~~ ~~for~~ ~~an~~ ~~order~~ ~~to~~ ~~show~~ ~~cause~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances~~ requiring
sexual assault evidence collection kits collected before a certain date to be retained
and transferred in a certain manner; requiring the Maryland Sexual Assault
Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee, on or before a certain date, to make a
report on certain recommendations, in consultation with the Consumer Protection
Division of the Office of the Attorney General; and generally relating to the
preservation and storage of sexual assault evidence collection kits.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–926
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–926.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Child advocacy center” has the meaning stated in § 13–2201 of the
Health – General Article.

(3) “HEALTH CARE PROVIDER” MEANS A PERSON WHO IS LICENSED,
CERTIFIED, OR OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS
ARTICLE TO PROVIDE HEALTH CARE IN THE ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS OR
~~PRACTICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROFESSION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~APPROVED~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TRAINING~~
~~PROGRAM.~~

(4) (3) “Hospital” has the meaning stated in § 19–301 of the Health –
General Article.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 702 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) “QUALIFIED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 11–1007 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(5) (I) “SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT” MEANS
PHYSICAL EVIDENCE COLLECTED:

1. BY A QUALIFIED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER;

2. FROM THE BODY OR CLOTHING OF A LIVING OR
DECEASED PERSON;

3. IN RELATION TO FOLLOWING AN ALLEGATION OR
SUSPICION OF SEXUAL ASSAULT; AND

4. FOR THE PURPOSE OF PRESERVING THE PHYSICAL
EVIDENCE FOR USE IN A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION.

(II) “SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT” DOES NOT
INCLUDE PHYSICAL EVIDENCE COLLECTED BEFORE JANUARY 1, 1975 A
SELF–ADMINISTERED SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT.

(b) A QUALIFIED health care provider that performs a sexual assault evidence
collection kit exam on a victim of sexual assault shall provide the victim with:

(1) contact information for the investigating law enforcement agency that
the victim may contact about the status and results of the kit analysis; and

(2) written information describing the laws and policies governing the
testing, preservation, and disposal of a sexual assault evidence collection kit.

(c) An investigating law enforcement agency that receives a sexual assault
evidence collection kit, within 30 days after a request by the victim from whom the evidence
was collected, shall provide the victim with:

(1) information about the status of the kit analysis; and

(2) all available results of the kit analysis except results that would impede
or compromise an ongoing investigation.

(d) (1) A sexual assault evidence collection kit OR A SELF–ADMINISTERED
SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT shall be transferred to a law enforcement
agency:

(i) by a hospital or a child advocacy center within 30 days after the
exam is performed; or

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 702

(ii) by a government agency in possession of a kit, unless the agency
is otherwise required to retain the kit by law or court rule.

(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, within [20] 75
years after the evidence is collected, a law enforcement agency, HEALTH CARE PROVIDER,
OR HOSPITAL may not destroy or dispose of:

(i) a sexual assault evidence collection kit; or

(ii) other crime scene evidence relating to a sexual assault that has
been identified by the State’s Attorney as relevant to prosecution.

(3) A law enforcement agency is not required to comply with the
requirements in paragraph (2) of this subsection if:

(i) the case for which the evidence was collected resulted in a
conviction and the sentence has been completed; or

(ii) all suspects identified by testing a sexual assault evidence
collection kit are deceased.

(4) On written request by the victim from whom the evidence was collected,
a law enforcement agency, A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER, OR A HOSPITAL with custody of
a sexual assault evidence collection kit or other crime scene evidence relating to a sexual
assault shall:

(i) notify the victim no later than 60 days before the date of intended
destruction or disposal of the evidence; or

(ii) retain the evidence for 12 months longer than the time period
specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection or for a time period agreed to by the victim and
the law enforcement agency, HEALTH CARE PROVIDER, OR HOSPITAL.

(e) (1) [A] FOR A SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT IN THE
CUSTODY OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, THE sexual assault evidence collection kit
shall be submitted to a forensic laboratory for analysis unless:

[(1)] (I) there is clear evidence disproving the allegation of sexual
assault;

[(2)] (II) the facts alleged, if true, could not be interpreted to violate a
provision of Title 3, Subtitle 2, Title 3, Subtitle 3, Title 3, Subtitle 6, or Title 11, Subtitle 3
of the Criminal Law Article;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 702 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(3)] (III) the victim from whom the evidence was collected declines to give
consent for analysis; or

[(4)] (IV) the suspect’s profile has been collected for entry as a convicted
offender for a qualifying offense in the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) maintained
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the suspect has pleaded guilty to the offense
that led to the sexual assault evidence collection kit.

(2) FOR A SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT IN THE
CUSTODY OF A PERSON, OTHER THAN AN EMPLOYEE OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY, THE PERSON:

(I) SHALL STORE THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE
COLLECTION KIT IN A MANNER THAT:

1. REASONABLY PREVENTS UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS TO
OR TAMPERING WITH THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT; AND

2. IS NOT LIKELY TO RESULT IN THE DEGRADATION OR
LOSS OF THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT; OR

(II) TRANSFER THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION
KIT TO:

1. A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT AGREES TO TAKE
CUSTODY OF THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT; OR

2. ANOTHER PERSON IN THE STATE WHO WILL STORE
THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITEM (I)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(f) (1) If a victim of sexual assault wishes to remain anonymous and not file a
criminal complaint, the victim shall be informed that the victim may file a criminal
complaint at a future time.

(2) If a provision of subsection (e) of this section is determined to be
satisfied after the submission of the victim’s sexual assault evidence collection kit for
analysis, testing may be terminated or not initiated.

(g) Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, an investigating law
enforcement agency that receives a sexual assault evidence collection kit shall:

(1) submit the kit and all requested associated reference standards to a
forensic laboratory for analysis within 30 days of receipt of the kit and all requested
associated reference standards; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 702

(2) make use of certified sexual assault crisis programs or other qualified
community–based sexual assault victim service organizations that can provide services and
support to survivors of sexual assault.

(h) (1) (i) A forensic laboratory that receives a sexual assault evidence
collection kit and all requested associated reference standards for analysis shall determine
suitability and complete screening, testing, and analysis in a timely manner.

(ii) Failure to complete the screening, testing, and analysis in a
timely manner as required in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may not constitute the
basis for excluding the analysis or results as evidence in a criminal proceeding.

(2) Forensic laboratories shall report annually to the Maryland Sexual
Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee regarding the duration required to
complete testing, beginning with receipt of the kit until a report is prepared, of each sexual
assault evidence collection kit.

(i) (1) The eligible results of an analysis of a sexual assault evidence collection
kit shall be entered into CODIS.

(2) The DNA collected from a victim under this section may not be used for
any purpose except as authorized by this section.

(j) IF A PERSON FAILS TO COMPLY WITH A REQUIREMENT RELATING TO
~~THE~~ ~~STORAGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~SEXUAL~~ ~~ASSAULT~~ ~~EVIDENCE~~ ~~COLLECTION~~ ~~KIT~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~
SECTION, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY:

(1) DIRECT THE PERSON TO COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENT; AND

(2) IF THE PERSON DOES NOT COMPLY, APPLY FOR AN ORDER TO
~~SHOW~~ ~~CAUSE~~ ~~WHY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUIREMENT~~ ~~SHOULD~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~COMPLIED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE COUNTY:

(I) IF THE PERSON IS AN INDIVIDUAL, WHERE THE INDIVIDUAL
WORKS OR RESIDES; OR

(II) IF THE PERSON IS NOT AN INDIVIDUAL, WHERE THE PERSON
OR THE SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT IS LOCATED.

(K) (j) The Attorney General shall adopt regulations for uniform statewide
implementation of this section.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 702 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply to and interpreted to affect physical evidence of sexual assault collected from victims
before and after October 1, 2023.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) A sexual assault evidence collection kit collected before January 1, 2000, and
stored by a hospital or child advocacy center shall be:

(1) retained consistent with the requirements of § 11–926(d) of the
Criminal Procedure Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act; and

(2) transferred to a law enforcement agency for testing within 30 days after
being identified as a sexual assault evidence collection kit, or as directed by the ~~Maryland~~
~~Sexual~~ ~~Assault~~ ~~Evidence~~ ~~Kit~~ ~~Policy~~ ~~and~~ ~~Funding~~ ~~Committee~~ Office of the Attorney General.

(b) On or before December 1, 2023, the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit
Policy and Funding Committee shall issue a report to the Governor and, in accordance with
§ 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly making recommendations
for:

(1) guidelines for the transfer of sexual assault evidence collection kits
collected before January 1, 2000, to be transferred to law enforcement agencies for testing;

(2) guidance on the use of self–administered sexual assault evidence
collection kits; and

(3) in consultation with the Consumer Protection Division of the Office of
the Attorney General, educating consumers about use of self–administered sexual assault
evidence collection kits, including information regarding the kits’ admissibility in a
criminal prosecution and identifying other resources for victims of sexual assault.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6