START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 753

Chapter 753

(House Bill 751)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant Fund

FOR the purpose of establishing the Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant
Fund; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~budget~~ ~~bill~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~appropriation~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~grant~~ ~~assistance~~ ~~to~~ ~~local~~ ~~law~~ ~~enforcement~~
~~agencies;~~ requiring the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim
Services to administer the Fund and report to the Governor and the General
Assembly annually on the uses of the Fund; and generally relating to the Officer and
Community Wellness Training Grant Fund.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 4–1012
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

4–1012.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR” MEANS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES.

(3) “FUND” MEANS THE OFFICER AND COMMUNITY WELLNESS
TRAINING GRANT FUND.

(4) “LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY” MEANS A POLICE
DEPARTMENT OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY A GOVERNMENTAL POLICE FORCE,
SHERIFF’S OFFICE, OR SECURITY FORCE OR LAW ENFORCEMENT ORGANIZATION OF
THE STATE OR A COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE THAT BY
STATUTE, ORDINANCE, OR COMMON LAW IS AUTHORIZED TO ENFORCE THE
GENERAL CRIMINAL LAWS OF THE STATE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 753 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THERE IS AN OFFICER AND COMMUNITY WELLNESS TRAINING GRANT
FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES FOR:

(1) MENTAL HEALTH FIRST AID FOR PUBLIC SAFETY TRAINING; AND

(2) CRITICAL INCIDENT STRESS MANAGEMENT PEER SUPPORT
TRAINING.

(D) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF AT LEAST $1,000,000 FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND; AND

(2) MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR THE BENEFIT
OF THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY
AND THE COMPTROLLER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(H) MONEY DISBURSED FROM THE FUND SHALL BE USED SOLELY TO
SUPPLEMENT, AND NOT SUPPLANT, FUNDS OTHERWISE AVAILABLE TO LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.

(I) WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE END OF A GRANT CYCLE, AN ELIGIBLE
LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT RECEIVED A GRANT UNDER THIS SECTION
SHALL SUBMIT, FOR THE FISCAL YEAR, TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR THE
FOLLOWING:

(1) PROOF OF THE EXPENDITURE OF THE GRANT FUNDS AND THE
PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE FUNDS WERE EXPENDED;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 753

(2) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF GRANTS AWARDED AND AMOUNT PER
POLICE OFFICER;

(3) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF GRANTS AWARDED SEPARATED BY
TRAINING PROGRAM; AND

(4) ANY RELATED OUTCOME–BASED PERFORMANCE MEASURES AS
REQUIRED BY § 4–1009 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(J) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2023, AND ON OR BEFORE EACH
DECEMBER 31 THEREAFTER, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL REPORT TO THE
GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THIS
SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3