START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 777 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 777 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Cigarettes - Wholesalers - Disclosure of Information 
 
This bill requires each licensed cigarette wholesaler to submit complete and accurate 
information in the form and manner the Comptroller’s Office requires to facilitate 
compliance with specific reporting requirements.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each licensed wholesaler must submit specific information about the 
number of cigarettes sold to the Comptroller’s Office and maintain specific sales records 
for five years. Information must be submitted no later than 21 days after the end of each 
calendar quarter (more frequently if directed by the Comptroller) and include a list by brand 
family of the total number of cigarettes or – in the case of roll-your-own cigarettes, the 
equivalent stick count – for which the licensed wholesaler affixed stamps during the 
previous calendar quarter or otherwise paid the tax due for the cigarettes. Statute allows 
the Comptroller to share this information with the Attorney General and the 
Executive Director of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC) for compliance and 
enforcement purposes. Existing statutory provisions authorize ATC to impose penalties for 
a violation of reporting and record keeping requirements.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 777/ Page 2 
ATC is responsible for monitoring the manufacture, storage, transportation, sale and 
distribution of alcoholic beverages and tobacco in Maryland. ATC issues licenses and 
permits, maintains automated credit control information for the alcoholic beverage 
industry, and promotes fair trade practices in accordance with the law. The Comptroller’s 
Office collects State taxes on beer, wine, distilled spirits, cigarettes, and other tobacco 
products.  
 
Additional Comments:  For more information regarding the activities of the 
Comptroller’s Office and ATC in fiscal 2022, see the 2022 Alcohol and Tobacco Tax 
Annual Report. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 541 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2