START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 763 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 763 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County - Collective Bargaining for Sheriff's Office Employees - 
Binding Arbitration Procedures  
MC 13-23 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions regarding the collective bargaining process for 
Sheriff’s Office employees in Montgomery County to specify that if the Sheriff and the 
bargaining representative are unable to reach an agreement during negotiations on matters 
applicable to employees of the Sheriff’s Office, the procedures for declaring an impasse 
and submission of a dispute to binding arbitration must be conducted in accordance with 
Chapter 33, Article VII of the Montgomery County Code.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County does not anticipate the bill will materially affect local 
finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Both Chapter 33, Article VII of the Montgomery County Code and § 2-329 
of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article set forth provisions regarding collective 
bargaining rights for Sheriff’s Office employees in Montgomery County.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 763/ Page 2 
Pursuant to State statute, there is only one collective bargaining agreement for both county 
government employees and employees of the Sheriff’s Office. Generally, if a single 
bargaining representative represents both county government employees and employees of 
the Sheriff’s Office, the Sheriff may only bargain over certain matters applicable to 
employees of the Sheriff’s Office not involving compensation, pension, fringe benefits, 
and hours. Any required funding for the terms of an agreement negotiated by the Sheriff is 
subject to the budget and fiscal policies of the county. 
 
Chapter 33, Article VII of the Montgomery County Code includes explicit provisions 
regarding impasse and binding arbitration procedures. Specifically, § 33‐108 specifies that  
either party during the course of collective bargaining may declare an impasse and request 
the services of a mediator/arbitrator. The parties may also jointly request such services 
without declaring an impasse. If the parties are unable to reach agreement by a specified 
timeframe, an impasse exists. Any issue regarding the negotiability of any bargaining 
proposal must be referred to the Labor Relations Administrator for an expedited 
determination. Generally, any dispute must be submitted to the mediator/arbitrator 
whenever an impasse has been reached. The mediator/arbitrator must engage in mediation 
by bringing the parties together voluntarily under such favorable circumstances as will 
encourage settlement of the dispute. 
  
If at the mediator/arbitrator’s sole discretion it is found that the parties are at a bona fide 
impasse (or an impasse is automatically reached, as specified), the dispute must be 
submitted to binding arbitration. If binding arbitration is invoked, the mediator/arbitrator 
must require each party to submit a final offer, as specified. The mediator/arbitrator may 
require the parties to submit oral or written evidence in support of their proposals and may 
hold a hearing for this purpose.  
 
The mediator/arbitrator must select the final offer submitted by the parties that is 
determined to be more reasonable when viewed as a whole, subject to additional limitations 
and the consideration of other factors, as specified. The offer selected, integrated with all 
other previously agreed on items, is the final agreement and need not be ratified by any 
party. The parties must execute the agreement, and any provisions requiring action in the 
county budget must be included in the budget submitted to the county council.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 763/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3