START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 706 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 706 
(Delegate A. Jones) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Community Development - Sustainable Communities - Business Facade 
Improvement Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Business Facade Improvement Program in the Department of 
Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to assist qualified businesses with 
improving the outside appearance of the businesses’ buildings and facilities. DHCD must 
distribute funds from the program to counties, including Baltimore City, and municipalities 
that have at least one sustainable community and that apply for the funds. Each local 
government that receives funds must then distribute grants to qualified businesses that 
apply for a grant. Both DHCD and the local governments that receive program funds must 
establish an application process and award criteria, as appropriate. DHCD may adopt 
implementing regulations. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million to the program. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Bond expenditures for DHCD increase by $1.5 million in FY 2024, and 
general fund expenditures for DHCD increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2025, under the assumptions discussed below. The FY 2024 capital budget includes 
$1.5 million in bond funding for grants to local governments, contingent on enactment of 
this bill. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation 
beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
Bond Exp. 
1.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($1.5) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 706/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase by $1.5 million in FY 2024 and 
by $4.9 million annually thereafter from grants received and distributed under the program. 
Some local expenditures may further increase for additional staff to administer the 
competitive application process at the local level. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
   
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “sustainable community” is defined as a part of a priority funding area 
that (1) is designated by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the 
Secretary of Housing and Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base 
Realignment and Closure Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a 
transit-oriented development. Every county and Baltimore City has at least one sustainable 
community designation, and most have several. There is also significant geographic 
overlap between municipalities and sustainable communities. 
 
DHCD’s State Revitalization Programs (SRP) under its Division of Neighborhood 
Revitalization offer a range of funding to further the revitalization goals of communities 
across the State. All projects awarded SRP funds must be located in a sustainable 
community and help achieve the outcomes identified in a sustainable community’s action 
plan. SRP funds are provided through a variety of DHCD programs, such as the 
Community Legacy Program and the Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative. 
According to the DHCD website, common types of projects include, but are not limited to, 
commercial façade improvement programs to enhance the marketability of a downtown or 
main street. DHCD advises that it provides about $3.0 million to $4.0 million in façade 
improvement funding annually. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2024 capital budget includes $1.5 million in bond funding 
for grants to political subdivisions to assist businesses located in sustainable communities 
with improving the outside appearance of the businesses’ building and facilities, contingent 
on enactment of this bill. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million to the Business Facade Improvement Program. 
This analysis assumes that (1) existing DCHD staff absorb administrative responsibilities 
associated with the contingent capital funding in fiscal 2024 and (2) a full-time staff is 
required beginning in fiscal 2025, concurrent with the mandated program funding. 
 
Accordingly, bond expenditures for DHCD increase by $1.5 million in fiscal 2024, which 
reflects the use of contingent capital funds, and general fund expenditures for DHCD 
increase by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025, which reflects the bill’s fiscal 2025 funding 
mandate. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one community program administrator in 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 706/ Page 3 
fiscal 2025 to oversee the program, which includes a competitive application process and 
evaluations. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating 
expenses, and $4.9 million in grants. 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
Position 
0.0 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$0 
$103,010 
Operating Expenses 
0 
7,685 
Grants to Local Governments 
1,500,000 
  4,889,305 
Total State Expenditures 
$1,500,000 
$5,000,000 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the annual $5.0 million 
mandated appropriation, which leaves approximately $4.9 million for grants each year after 
administrative costs. 
 
The bill does not specify whether the mandated funding can (or cannot) be used for 
administrative expenses; even so, this analysis reflects the bill establishing that mandated 
funding is for the program (not necessarily just for the grants), which is assumed to 
encompass administrative expenses. Otherwise, total general fund expenditures increase 
beyond $5.0 million annually to cover those costs (by about $109,000 to $119,000 annually 
through fiscal 2028). 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase by $1.5 million in 
fiscal 2024 and by $4.9 million annually thereafter from grants received and distributed 
under the program. Some local expenditures may further increase for additional staff to 
administer the competitive application process at the local level. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in sustainable communities potentially benefit 
from access to additional grant funding for façade improvements. While grant amounts and 
their allocations are unknown, a sizeable percentage of overall funding each year can be 
expected to benefit small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 706/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 6, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4