START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 716 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 716 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Managed Care Organizations - Retroactive Denial of Reimbursement - 
Information in Written Statement 
 
 
This emergency bill alters the information that must be included in a written statement to 
a health care provider from a Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) when the 
MCO retroactively denies reimbursement as a result of coordination of benefits. The 
written statement must include the name and address of the entity that the MCO has 
identified as responsible for payment of the claim. An MCO is not required to obtain an 
acknowledgement of responsibility from the responsible payor to retroactively deny the 
claim based on coordination of benefits. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A carrier (including an MCO) may only retroactively deny reimbursement 
for services within six months after the date that the carrier paid the provider. Claims for 
services subject to coordination of benefits with another carrier, Medicaid, or Medicare 
may be denied for up to 18 months. 
 
A carrier that retroactively denies reimbursement to a health care provider must provide 
the health care provider with a written statement specifying the basis for the retroactive 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 716/ Page 2 
denial. Under ยง 15-1008(c)(2)(ii) of the Insurance Article, if the retroactive denial of 
reimbursement results from coordination of benefits, the written statement must provide 
the name and address of the entity acknowledging responsibility for payment of the denied 
claim. 
 
A carrier that does not comply with these requirements may not retroactively deny 
reimbursement or attempt in any manner to retroactively collect reimbursement already 
paid to a health care provider. 
 
A carrier may retroactively deny reimbursement at any time if information submitted was 
fraudulent or improperly coded, if the claim was duplicative, or, for a claim submitted to 
an MCO, if the claim was for services provided during a time period for which Medicaid 
has permanently retracted the capitation payment for the recipient from the MCO. If a 
carrier retroactively denies reimbursement for services as a result of coordination of 
benefits, the health care provider must have six months from the date of denial (unless the 
carrier permits a longer time period) to submit a claim for reimbursement for the service to 
the carrier, Medicaid, or Medicare program responsible for the payment. 
 
Additional Comments:  When an individual has commercial insurance in addition to 
Medicaid or Medicare, the commercial insurer is the primary payor responsible for the 
payment of claims and Medicaid is the payor of last resort and considered a supplemental 
insurance. 
 
According to the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA), during the time period that a 
claim can be reversed on a coordination of benefits ground, the reversal cannot be based 
on the identification of a primary payor but only if the identified primary payor has 
acknowledged the claim obligation. MIA advises that MCOs believe that they should have 
greater flexibility to recoup costs when a primary payor is identified. However, in cases 
where the MCO has identified a primary payor and recouped payment, if the primary payor 
disputes liability or declines the claim, a health care provider may have to pursue the 
coverage, absorb the loss, or pursue payment from the patient. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 474 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 716/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3