START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 759 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 759 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Governor's Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services - Sexual 
Assault Evidence Collection Kit Reporting Program 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services 
(GOCPYVS) to establish and administer a reporting program for tracking the location, 
status, and chain of custody of sexual assault evidence collection kits. Related requirements 
are established for law enforcement agencies and others that have control or possession of 
such kits. GOCPYVS must adopt regulations relating to the reporting program, as 
specified. The bill also clarifies that the existing Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund may be used 
for equipment, supplies, personnel, and outsourcing necessary for the testing of kits 
collected before or after the establishment of the fund. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $119,400 in FY 2024 for staff; future 
years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. No costs to procure the reporting system are 
reflected because GOCPYVS is already in the process of procuring such a system even in 
the absence of the bill, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
119,400 
145,900 
152,400 
159,100 
167,400 
Net Effect 
($119,400) 
($145,900) 
($152,400) 
($159,100) 
($167,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances; it is assumed that local law enforcement agencies, forensic laboratories, and 
State’s Attorneys offices can implement the bill’s changes with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. It is assumed that medical care providers are not 
significantly affected by the bill’s changes. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 759/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The reporting program must (1) track the location, status, and chain of 
custody of sexual assault evidence collection kits in the State; (2) receive information 
relating to the location, status, and chain of custody from any law enforcement agency or 
person with control or possession of a kit; and (3) allow for a victim or a victim’s 
representative to track the location, status, and chain of custody of a kit containing samples 
taken from the victim. 
 
Information contained in the reporting system is not open to public inspection. GOCPYVS 
may disclose information contained in the reporting system only to (1) the victim about 
whom the information pertains; (2) a victim’s representative for the victim about whom 
the information pertains; (3) a sexual assault crisis program; (4) a child advocacy center; 
(5) a law enforcement agency; (6) a State’s Attorney; (7) a person authorized by 
GOCPYVS to receive the information; or (8) a person entitled to receive the information 
by federal or State law, subpoena, court rule, or court order. 
 
Beginning October 1, 2023, a law enforcement agency or any person that has control or 
possession of a sexual assault evidence collection kit, including a health care provider, 
forensic laboratory, or State’s Attorney, must (1) report location, status, and chain of 
custody information to the reporting program in a manner required by GOCPYVS and 
(2) comply with all regulations developed by GOCPYVS under the bill. A law enforcement 
agency or a person that had control or possession of a sexual assault evidence collection 
kit before October 1, 2023 – or has control or possession of a kit on or after  
October 1, 2023 – must report location, status, and chain of custody information to the 
reporting program by December 31, 2025. 
 
GOCPYVS, in consultation with the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and 
Funding Committee, must adopt any regulations necessary to carry out the reporting 
program. The regulations must include (1) requirements for reporting the location and 
chain of custody of a kit to the reporting program and (2) procedures for disclosing 
information about kits included in the reporting program. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits 
 
A health care provider that performs a sexual assault evidence collection kit exam on a 
victim of sexual assault must, among other things, provide the victim with contact 
information for the investigating law enforcement agency that the victim may contact about 
the status and results of the kit analysis. In addition, an investigating law enforcement 
agency that receives a sexual assault evidence collection kit, within 30 days after a request 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 759/ Page 3 
by the victim from whom the evidence was collected, must provide the victim with 
information about the status of the kit analysis and all other results except results that would 
impede or compromise an ongoing investigation, as specified. 
 
Except when a specified exception applies, an investigating law enforcement agency that 
receives a sexual assault evidence collection kit must (1) submit the kit and all requested 
associated reference standards to a forensic laboratory for analysis within 30 days of receipt 
of the kit and all requested associated reference standards and (2) make use of certified 
sexual assault crisis programs or other qualified community-based sexual assault victim 
service organizations that can provide services and support to survivors of sexual assault. 
 
A forensic laboratory that receives a sexual assault evidence collection kit and all requested 
associated reference standards for analysis must determine the suitability of testing the kit 
and complete screening, testing, and analysis in a timely manner. Failure to complete the 
screening, testing, and analysis in a timely manner as specified may not constitute the basis 
for excluding the analysis or results as evidence in a criminal proceeding. 
 
Forensic laboratories must report annually to the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit 
Policy and Funding Committee regarding the required time to complete testing, from 
receipt of the kit until a report is prepared, for each sexual assault evidence collection kit 
it receives. The eligible results of an analysis of a sexual assault evidence collection kit 
must be entered into the Combined DNA Index System (known as CODIS). The DNA 
collected from a victim may not be used for any purpose except as authorized. 
 
Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund 
 
Chapters 508 and 509 of 2019 established the Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund, a special fund 
administered by the Executive Director of GOCPYVS, to provide law enforcement 
agencies with funding to pay for testing of sexual assault evidence collections kits by 
forensic laboratories. The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget, interest 
earnings, and any other money accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may only be 
used for equipment, supplies, personnel, and outsourcing necessary for the testing of sexual 
assault evidence kits in forensic laboratories. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes 
an appropriation of $3.5 million in general funds to the fund. 
 
Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee 
 
Chapter 659 of 2017 established the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and 
Funding Committee to develop and disseminate best practices information and 
recommendations regarding, among other things, the creation and operation of a statewide 
sexual assault evidence collection kit tracking system that is accessible to victims of sexual 
assault and law enforcement. In January 2023, the committee released its annual report, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 759/ Page 4 
which includes information regarding GOCPYVS’s efforts to procure a sexual assault 
evidence kit tracking system. According to the report, a request for proposal for the 
procurement of a tracking system was published on October 7, 2022, and all proposals 
were due by December 9, 2022. The report also stated the committee’s intent to introduce 
legislation requiring the participation of all necessary end-users (prosecutors, forensic 
nurse examiners, law enforcement, and forensic laboratory personnel). 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victims Services 
 
GOCPYVS serves as a coordinating office that advises the Governor on criminal justice 
strategies. The office plans, promotes, and funds efforts with government entities, private 
organizations, and the community to advance public policy, enhance public safety, reduce 
crime and juvenile delinquency, and serve victims. 
 
Among other funds and grants, GOCPVYS coordinates the disbursements of federal funds 
awarded through the Crime Victims Fund and the National Sexual Assault Kit Initiative 
(SAKI). The purpose of the Crime Victims Fund, established by the federal Victims of 
Crime Act (VOCA) of 1984, is to improve the treatment of victims of crime by providing 
victims with the assistance and services necessary to aid their restoration after a violent 
criminal act and to support and aid victims as they move through the criminal justice 
process. The purpose of SAKI is to, among other things, support multidisciplinary 
community response teams to inventory, track, and expeditiously test previously 
unsubmitted sexual assault evidence collection kits, in addition to optimize victim 
notification protocols and services. 
 
GOCPYVS advises that as of February 2023, there is approximately $661,600 in federal 
funds remaining from a multi-year $2.6 million SAKI grant awarded in federal fiscal 2018. 
In federal fiscal 2022, the State was awarded $26.3 million through VOCA, and 
GOCPYVS reports that the federal fiscal 2023 award is expected to be between 
$18.9 million and $26.3 million. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Procurement of the Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kit Reporting System 
 
GOCPVYS advises that it is already in the process of procuring a sexual assault evidence 
collection reporting system and that the request for proposals from vendors closed in  
December 2022. GOCPVYS advises that even though the procurement process is 
underway, the office is unable to provide an estimate as to when the reporting system will 
be purchased and available for tracking sexual assault evidence collection kits. GOCPYVS 
further estimates that the initial cost for purchasing the reporting system is approximately 
$1.0 million, although the office cannot provide an estimate for ongoing maintenance. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 759/ Page 5 
GOCPYVS anticipates using federal funds from the 2018 SAKI grant and VOCA to 
purchase and maintain the tracking system. 
 
Because GOCPYVS plans to procure the reporting system even in the absence of the bill, 
the bill’s requirement for GOCPYVS to establish a reporting system – and maintain it over 
time – does not affect State finances, as GOCPYVS would be incurring those costs even 
in the absence of the bill. 
 
Administrative Expenditures 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $119,352 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program 
manager for GOCPYVS to develop regulations, oversee the reporting system in accordance 
with the bill’s provisions, and assist with training law enforcement and others that must 
report information to the system (such as health care providers, forensic laboratories, and 
State’s Attorneys). Although GOCPYVS is planning to establish a reporting system even 
in the absence of the bill, the timeline established in the bill under which reporting must 
begin necessitates additional staff. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$111,943 
Operating Expenses 
7,409 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$119,352 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The Department of State Police (DSP) advises that it needs to hire a coordinator to act as a 
liaison between the system vendor and GOCPYVS and to provide the necessary 
coordination of data entry into the reporting system from the State police crime laboratory. 
However, given that GOCPYVS is establishing the reporting system even in the absence 
of the bill, DSP will need to upload information to the reporting system even in the absence 
of the bill. Therefore, it is assumed that DSP can implement the bill with existing staff. To 
the extent existing staff prove insufficient, DSP may request additional resources through 
the annual budget process. 
 
It is assumed that any other affected State law enforcement agencies can implement the bill 
with existing resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 759/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 615 (Senator Hettleman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore and Frederick counties; City of Havre de Grace; 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6