START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 749 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 749 
(Delegate Crutchfield) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Juvenile Court - Concurrent Jurisdiction - Juvenile Offenses on Military 
Installations 
 
 
This bill establishes that the jurisdiction of the juvenile court is concurrent with a federal 
court sitting in the State over proceedings involving a violation of federal law committed 
by a child on a military installation of the U.S. Department of Defense if (1) the federal 
court waives exclusive jurisdiction and (2) the violation of federal law is also a crime under 
State law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is procedural and is not expected to materially affect State finances 
and operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is procedural and is not expected to materially affect local finances 
and operations.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Jurisdiction Between the State and Military Installations 
 
With respect to land that the United States or any unit of the United States leases or 
otherwise holds in the State, the State reserves jurisdiction and authority over the land, and 
persons, property, and transactions on the land, to the fullest extent that is allowed by the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 749/ Page 2 
U. S. Constitution and not inconsistent with the governmental purpose for which the land 
is held. This does not affect the jurisdiction and authority of the State over land, or persons, 
property, and transactions on the land, that the United States or a unit of the United States 
acquired on or before May 31, 1943, to the extent that the State ceded jurisdiction, as 
specified. However, for the purpose of enforcing the civil or criminal laws of the State, the 
Governor may enter into an agreement with the United States to establish full or partial 
concurrent jurisdiction of the State and the United States over any land in the State held by 
the United States.  
 
The State has ceded exclusive jurisdiction to the United States over land situated in 
Anne Arundel County that is part of the Fort George G. Meade Military Reservation. 
However, the State retains the right to (1) serve all civil and criminal process of the courts 
of the State and (2) enforce and ensure compliance with all applicable environmental and 
Public Service Commission laws and regulations. 
 
Juvenile Court Jurisdiction  
 
In general, the juvenile court has jurisdiction over children who are alleged to be 
delinquent, in need of supervision, or who have received a citation for specified violations. 
However, except under limited circumstances involving a child who is at least age 10 and 
alleged to have committed a “crime of violence,” as defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal 
Law Article, the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over a child younger than 
age 13 for purposes of a delinquency proceeding and such a child may not be charged with 
a crime. In addition, the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over (1) a child at least 
age 14 alleged to have committed an act which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime 
punishable by life imprisonment; (2) a child at least age 16 alleged to have violated certain 
traffic or boating laws; (3) a child at least age 16 alleged to have committed certain violent 
crimes; or (4) a child who previously has been convicted as an adult of a felony and is 
subsequently alleged to have committed an act that would be a felony if committed by an 
adult. These cases would be tried in adult criminal court. Provisions exist for an adult court 
to transfer a case to the juvenile court and for the juvenile court to transfer a case to adult 
court. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 115 (Senator Jackson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 749/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3