START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 745 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 745 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - False Statements - Emergency or Commission of Crime 
(Antiswatting Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill establishes prohibitions related to the making of a false statement, report, or 
complaint of an “emergency” or alleging the commission of a crime to a “governmental 
emergency report recipient.” Violators are subject to criminal penalties and are civilly 
liable, as specified. The bill may not be construed to conflict with specified federal statutes. 
The bill contains a severability clause specifying that if any provision of the bill or the 
application of the bill is held invalid for any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, 
the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other application of the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finance and operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances and operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
An “emergency” is a condition that poses an imminent threat to public safety and results 
in or is likely to result in (1) the response of a public official or (2) the evacuation of an 
area, a building, a structure, a vehicle, or any other place. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 745/ Page 2 
A “governmental emergency report recipient” is (1) a peace officer; (2) a police agency of 
the State or a unit of local government; (3) a person involved in the operation of a public 
safety answering point; or (4) any other government employee or contractor who is 
authorized to receive reports of a crime or an emergency. 
 
Prohibitions and Criminal Penalties 
 
A person may not make, or cause to be made, a statement, report, or complaint of an 
emergency or alleging the commission of a crime that the person knows to be false as a 
whole or in material part to a governmental emergency report recipient with reckless 
disregard of causing bodily harm to an individual as a direct result of a response to the 
statement, report, or complaint. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to three years and/or a fine of up to $2,000. 
 
The bill establishes a separate prohibition and penalty if a person violates this prohibition 
by making a false statement, report, or complaint alleging the commission of a crime and 
the result of the act is a response from law enforcement and serious physical injury or 
severe emotional distress to a person or the death of a person as a proximate result of lawful 
conduct arising out of the response. Under these circumstances, a violator is guilty of a 
felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a $20,000 maximum fine. 
 
If a person is convicted under §10-304(1)(i) of the Criminal Law Article (hate crimes – 
harassment and destruction of property) based on a violation of the bill’s provisions, the 
sentence imposed for the hate crime must be concurrent with a sentence imposed under the 
bill. 
 
In addition to these penalties, a court, in imposing a sentence on a person convicted under 
the bill, may order the person to reimburse any individual who incurs damages as a 
proximate result of lawful conduct arising out of the response to the statement, report, or 
complaint. 
 
Civil Liability 
 
In addition to the criminal penalties, a person who violates the bill’s prohibitions is civilly 
liable to any individual who incurs damages as a proximate result lawful conduct arising 
out of the response to the statement, report, or complaint. 
 
Juvenile Cases 
 
A first-time violation of the bill’s prohibitions by a minor is a civil offense subject to the 
procedures and dispositions provided in specified statutory provisions pertaining to 
juvenile cases. A child may not be committed to the Department of Juvenile Services for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 745/ Page 3 
out-of-home placement if the child’s most serious offense is a first-time violation for 
making a false statement, report, or complaint of an emergency or a crime as prohibited 
under the bill. 
 
Venue 
 
A person who violates the bill’s provisions may be charged, prosecuted, tried, and 
convicted in (1) the county where the defendant made the false statement, report, or 
complaint; (2) the county in which the statement, report, or complaint was received by a 
governmental emergency report recipient; or (3) the county in which a governmental 
emergency report recipient responded to the statement, report, or complaint. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Swatting 
 
While there is no statutory definition of “swatting,” the term is often used to refer to the 
making of fake calls to 9-1-1 in an effort to elicit a significant response by law enforcement 
and other emergency services personnel. Several statutory prohibitions are related to this 
type of conduct. 
 
Section 9-501 of the Criminal Law Article (False Statement – To Law Enforcement Officer) 
and Related Hate Crimes Violations 
 
Generally, a person is prohibited from making, or causing to be made, a statement, report, 
or complaint that the person knows to be false as a whole or in material part, to a law 
enforcement officer with the intent to deceive and to cause an investigation or other action 
to be taken as a result of the statement, report, or complaint. Violators are guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to six months and/or a $500 maximum 
fine. 
 
It is a hate crime for a person to make or cause to be made a false statement, report, or 
complaint that the person knows to be false, either as a whole or in material part, to a law 
enforcement officer, in violation of § 9-501 of the Criminal Law Article, about a group or 
person with the intent to deceive and to cause an investigation or other action to be taken 
as a result of the statement, report, or complaint when the perpetrator’s actions were 
motivated in whole or in substantial part by the subject’s race, color, religious beliefs, 
sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, disability, national origin, or homeless status. 
In general, violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
three years and/or a $5,000 maximum fine. A sentence imposed for this hate crime may be 
separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the 
act establishing the hate crime violation. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 745/ Page 4 
Section 9-503 (False Statements – To Public Official Concerning Crime or Hazard) 
 
A person may not make or cause to be made a statement or report that the person knows to 
be false as a whole or in material part to an official or unit of government, as specified, 
concerning the commission of a crime or the existence of a condition that is imminently 
dangerous to public safety or health, with the intent that the official or unit investigate, 
consider, or act upon the statement or report. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, 
punishable by imprisonment for up to six months and/or a $500 maximum fine. 
 
Section 9-504 (False Statement – Destructive Device or Toxic Material) 
 
With specified exceptions, a person may not circulate or transmit to another, with intent 
that it be acted on, a statement or rumor that the person knows to be false about the location 
or possible detonation of a destructive device or the location or possible release of toxic 
material. A violator is guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years 
and/or a fine of up to $10,000. In addition to these penalties, a court may order a person 
convicted or found to have committed a delinquent act under § 9-504 to pay restitution, as 
specified. 
 
Task Force to Study the Practice Known as “Swatting” 
 
Chapter 150 of 2022 established the Task Force to Study the Practice Known as 
“Swatting.” The task force must (1) study the laws applicable to, and otherwise relating to, 
the practice known as “swatting” and (2) make recommendations relating to legislative 
changes needed to prohibit the practice known as “swatting.” By June 1, 2023, the 
task force must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that the bill will 
result in new cases and may require an additional attorney, at a cost of $110,101. The 
Judiciary advises that there may be an increase in court operations, such as hearings, as 
well as an increase in felony charges to be adjudicated. However, the Judiciary does not 
anticipate that the bill will have a significant fiscal or operational impact on the courts. 
 
While the bill may result in additional OPD cases and increased court activity, the 
Department of Legislative Services advises that any potential expenditures solely 
attributable to the bill are likely to be minimal and do not materially affect State finances. 
 
Additional Comments:  While “swatting” statistics are not currently available, the 
Judiciary reports that during fiscal 2022, there were 721 alleged violations and 
47 convictions in the District Court and 131 alleged violations and 23 convictions in the 
circuit courts under § 9-501 of the Criminal Law Article (see above). Information is not 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 745/ Page 5 
available as to how many of these cases involved behavior that would also be a violation 
of the bill’s prohibitions. According to the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services, during fiscal 2022, there were no incarcerations in Baltimore City for violations 
of § 9-501 (the incarceration penalty for that offense does not qualify for the Division of 
Correction), and the Division of Parole and Probation opened cases for 53 individuals for 
violations of § 9-501. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 881 of 2022 and SB 635 and HB 960 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 340 (Senators Kagan and Waldstreicher) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; City of 
Havre de Grace; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Department of General Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 15, 2023 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5