START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 770 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 770 
(Delegate Atterbeary)(By Request - Accountability and 
Implementation Board) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Blueprint for Maryland's Future - Various Policies and Prekindergarten 
Enrollment and Funding - Alterations 
 
 
This emergency bill alters the definition of “Tier I child” within the Publicly Funded 
Full-Day Prekindergarten aid program to include additional categories of children in 
fiscal 2023 and 2024, and correspondingly, these children are included in the 
prekindergarten enrollment count for purposes of determining the program amount to be 
funded by the State and local governments in fiscal 2023 and 2024. The bill alters 
(1) provisions regarding the State alternative income eligibility form and (2) requirements 
within the Career Ladder for Educators program, and adds a school counselor to the 
Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports (MCCCS). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures increase by $6.4 million in FY 2024, decrease by 
$497,700 in FY 2025, and are altered by substantially lesser amounts through FY 2028.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
120,200 
113,400 
3,500 
23,700 
SF Expenditure 
6,377,000 
(617,900) 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($6,377,000) 
$497,700 
($113,400) 
($3,500) 
($23,700)  
Note() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  County government expenditures increase by approximately $1.7 million in 
FY 2024, increase by $636,800 in FY 2025, and are altered by substantially lesser amounts 
through FY 2028. Local school systems receive a portion of State aid under the bill, 
beginning in FY 2024. The impact on State aid is lessened to the extent that available 
prekindergarten slots cannot accommodate anticipated increased enrollment under the bill. 
This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 770/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill alters the definition of “Tier I child” within the Publicly Funded 
Full-Day Prekindergarten aid program to include, beginning in fiscal 2023, a child who is 
three or four years old who is a homeless youth, and in the 2023-2024 school year only, to 
include Tier II children (1) with a disability, or (2) who are from a home in which English 
is not the primary spoken language. Correspondingly, these children are included in the 
prekindergarten enrollment count for purposes of determining the program amount to be 
funded by the State and local governments, beginning in fiscal 2023 and in fiscal 2024, as 
specified. 
 
Under the Career Ladder for Educators program, assistant principals who are on 
level three of the career ladder must participate in classroom activity involving direct 
interactions with students (instead of teach in the classroom, per current law) for at least 
20% of their working hours and spend a portion of (instead of all, per current law) 
remaining time on other activities, including setting priorities for the subject level 
departments or grade levels of the school, and fulfilling specialized roles, such as head of 
professional development. These requirements do not further require that the assistant 
principal be designated as a teacher of record. The bill clarifies that a county board of 
education must select (1) a mentor teacher for induction programs and teacher training 
practicums and (2) an expert to write curriculum and assessment items and develop certain 
model lessons only when the Accountability and Implementation Board determines the 
career ladder to be well established throughout the State. 
 
The State alternative income eligibility form to be collected by each school participating 
in the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) community eligibility provision (CEP) 
must be available in an electronic format and allow a family to opt out of returning the 
form to the collecting school. CEP schools may not be required to collect the form until 
the school year after the form is adopted by the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE), after a period of comment from local school systems. 
 
The bill adds one school counselor certified by MSDE, designated by the Maryland School 
Counselor Association, to the MCCCS and staggers the term of the new member. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Publicly Funded Full-Day Prekindergarten 
 
A “Tier I child” is a child who is three or four years old and whose family income is less 
than or equal to 300% of the federal poverty level; a “Tier II child” is a child who is 
four years old and whose family income is more than 300% of, but not more than 600% of, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 770/ Page 3 
the federal poverty level; a “Tier III child” is a child who is four years old and whose family 
income is more than 600% of the federal poverty level. 
 
Chapter 36 of 2021 established a new funding formula providing for voluntary full-day 
prekindergarten for four-year-olds and three-year-olds from low-income families (Tier I). 
Low-income is defined as at or below 300% of the federal poverty level. Expansion of 
full-day prekindergarten first focuses on making full-day prekindergarten available for all 
four-year-olds from low-income families as half-day slots are being converted into full-day 
slots and new slots are coming online. This occurs at the same time as full-day 
prekindergarten is expanded gradually for three-year-olds from low-income families. 
 
MSDE must develop a sliding scale to calculate the family share for families with income 
above 300% of the federal poverty level. Beginning in the 2024-2025 school year 
(fiscal 2025), four-year-olds from families whose income is between 300% and 600% of 
the federal poverty level (Tier II) may be offered full-day prekindergarten if space is 
available to encourage socioeconomic diversity in prekindergarten classrooms. Priority in 
expanding full-day prekindergarten slots is given to children from low-income families and 
children with disabilities and children living in homes where English is not the primary 
spoken language regardless of income. For four-year-olds from families with income above 
600% (Tier III), the family share pays the full cost of full-day prekindergarten. However, 
a county board may provide up to 100% of the family share on behalf of the family. 
 
“Prekindergarten enrollment” means (1) beginning in fiscal 2023, the number of Tier I 
children enrolled with an eligible prekindergarten provider; and (2) beginning in 
fiscal 2025, the number of Tier I and Tier II children enrolled with an eligible 
prekindergarten provider. Tiers I through III each include only children whose family 
chooses to enroll the child in full-day prekindergarten. 
 
Public and private providers must meet specified requirements to be eligible to participate 
in the publicly funded full-day program. County governments (including Baltimore City) 
must appropriate the greater of the combined local share of several aid programs, after 
certain local relief provisions are applied, or the per pupil maintenance of effort (MOE) 
result. 
 
Career Ladder for Educators 
 
Under Chapter 36, a four-level career ladder must be implemented by each county board 
of education by July 1, 2023. Level one is a State-certified teacher. Level two is a teacher 
pursuing a master’s degree, 30 credits of a State board-approved program of study, or 
National Board Certification (NBC). Level three is a teacher who has an NBC, if NBC or 
a comparable assessment is not available in the teacher’s content area, a master’s degree in 
that area; level three includes an assistant principal. Level four is a teacher on the teacher 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 770/ Page 4 
leadership track or administrative track of the career ladder, each of which are further 
divided into tiers. If a teacher achieves level three or four on the career ladder by being an 
NBC teacher, the teacher must retain NBC status in order to remain at that level.  
 
An assistant principal is on level three of the career ladder and must be an NBC teacher 
and have an advanced professional certificate for administration. An assistant principal 
must teach in a classroom for at least 20% of his or her working hours and spend the 
remaining time on other teacher activities, as specified. 
 
Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports  
 
Chapter 36, The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (The Blueprint) established MCCCS 
within the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission. The consortium must 
complete certain tasks related to the development of coordinated community supports 
partnerships to meet students’ behavioral health needs and other related challenges, 
including developing a statewide framework for the creation of coordinated community 
supports partnerships, implementing a related grant program, evaluating a payment 
reimbursement program for providers, and developing a program for uninsured students. 
 
Consortium members serve for a term of four years beginning on the date of their 
appointment until a successor is appointed and qualified. Members may not serve more 
than two consecutive terms. The chair of the consortium is jointly appointed from among 
the members. The consortium consists of 24 members, including: 
 
 
8 government officials (including one Senator and one Delegate appointed by the 
President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, respectively); 
 
4 members appointed jointly by the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the 
House;  
 
3 members appointed by the Governor; and 
 
9 members appointed by various professional associations and public health 
officials.  
 
Members of the consortium may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the 
State budget. 
 
Community Eligibility Provision and State Alternative Income Eligibility Form 
 
The federal Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, in part, amended the National School 
Lunch Act to provide an alternative to household applications for free or reduced-priced 
meals (FRPM) in high-poverty local education agencies (LEAs) and schools. This 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 770/ Page 5 
alternative is referred to as CEP. To be eligible, LEAs and schools must meet a minimum 
level of students directly certified for free meals (40% of enrollment) in the year prior to 
implementing the option, agree to serve free lunches and breakfasts to all students, and 
agree to cover with nonfederal funds any costs of providing free meals to all students above 
amounts provided in federal assistance. 
 
Reimbursement is based on claiming percentages derived from the percentage of students 
directly certified as increased by use of a multiplier determined by the USDA. An LEA 
may participate in CEP for all schools in an LEA or only some schools, depending on the 
eligibility of the individual schools and financial considerations based on the anticipated 
level of federal reimbursement and other nonfederal support that may be available. 
 
Since fiscal 2004, the compensatory aid formula, providing additional State support for 
students with educational needs resulting from educationally or economically 
disadvantaged environments, has used the number of students eligible for FRPM. Children 
from families (1) with incomes at or below 130% of the federal poverty level are eligible 
for free meals and (2) with incomes no greater than 185% of the federal poverty level are 
eligible for reduced-price meals. The State compensatory aid formula applies a per pupil 
cost to the FRPM student count. The compensatory enrollment count for LEAs that 
participate, in whole or in part, in CEP is the greater of: 
 
(1) 
the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students in CEP participating schools identified by direct 
certification for the prior fiscal year; 
 
the number of students identified by the income information provided by the 
family to the school system on an alternative form developed by MSDE for 
the prior fiscal year; and 
 
the number of students eligible for FRPM from any schools not participating 
in CEP for the prior fiscal year; or 
 
(2) 
the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students eligible for FRPM from any schools not participating 
in CEP for the prior fiscal year; and 
 
for schools participating in CEP, the result of multiplying the prior fiscal year 
total enrollment by the percentage of FRPM-eligible students as compared to 
total enrollment in the year prior to participating in CEP. However, for the 
purpose of this calculation, schools participating in CEP in the pilot year may 
use the percentage of FRPM-eligible students during the pilot year; or 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 770/ Page 6 
(3) 
the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students directly certified and who are enrolled in a public 
school in the county in the prior fiscal year. 
 
Under Chapter 55 of 2021, this provision of the State law is in effect through fiscal 2026. 
For fiscal 2027 and each fiscal year thereafter, the greater of (1) the number of 
FRPM-eligible students using the USDA count, or the alternative State form for the prior 
fiscal year or (2) the number of direct certification students who are enrolled in a public 
school in the county in the prior fiscal year. The alternative form must include a statement 
indicating that the income information requested on the from is used to determine local and 
State funding for education. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The guaranteed tax base (GTB) program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions 
to maintain or increase local education tax effort, i.e., local education appropriation as a 
percent of local tax base. The program provides additional State education aid to counties 
that have less than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and provide local 
education funding above the minimum local share required by the Foundation Program. 
The program uses local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for 
each eligible school system. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of MOE requirement or the 
local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The per pupil MOE amount is based 
upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment and (2) the 
three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. (There is a certain adjustment for 
fiscal 2024 MOE for specified counties.) The local share amount equals the local share of 
the foundation formula, compensatory education, English language learner, special 
education, comparable wage index (CWI), full-day prekindergarten, college and career 
ready, transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant 
programs. Also, counties that benefit from the compensatory education State funding floor 
are required to fund the local share of the concentration of poverty grant programs. 
However, for some counties, the combined local share across these several programs is 
subject to adjustments described below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 770/ Page 7 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several existing and new funding formula programs. The law also 
includes a mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund each 
year. This involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by 
dividing the county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An 
“education effort index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average 
education effort” is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for each 
county, which is the county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid) is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or 
(3) at least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased up 
from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. State 
relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education effort 
adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per pupil MOE is met each year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the GTB program, the 
local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except that for Baltimore City 
only the amount above $10 million may be reduced from the local share; (2) if a county 
receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% for the foundation and 
40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at least 0.13, the local 
share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, the local share may 
not be reduced below the required per pupil MOE amount. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State expenditures for public schools and private prekindergarten 
providers increase by $6.4 million in fiscal 2024, largely explained by a $6.1 million 
increase in Publicly Funded Full-Day Prekindergarten aid. Exhibit 1 shows estimated 
changes in State funding under the bill through fiscal 2028, which includes changes due to 
the Education Effort Adjustment and GTB. Changes to GTB reflect changes to general 
fund expenditures; other changes are assumed to be changes to Blueprint for Maryland’s 
Future Fund special fund expenditures. The impact on State expenditures is lessened to the 
extent that available prekindergarten slots cannot accommodate anticipated increased 
enrollment under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 770/ Page 8 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Changes in State Aid under the Bill 
($ in Thousands) 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Full-Day Prekindergarten 
$6,116 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Education Effort 
261 
(618) 
0 
0 
0 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
0 
120 
113 
3 
24 
Total 
$6,377 
($498) 
$113 
$3 
$24 
 
 
Based upon fall 2022 enrollment figures, MSDE estimates that the bill results in a statewide 
increase of 1,055 students eligible for funding under the Publicly Funded Full-Day 
Prekindergarten aid program. This estimate is based on: 
 
 
all homeless students having a family income below 300% of the federal poverty 
level (and thus being counted under current law for fiscal 2024 and beyond; 
 
the estimated number of students who (1) have a disability, (2) are homeless youth, 
or (3) are English language learners; 
 
students who are age 4 with family incomes more than 300% of, but not more than 
600% of, the federal poverty level (Tier II), and who (1) have a disability, or (2) are 
English language learners; and  
 
students who represent more than one of these categories or who already qualify as 
low-income, in order to generate a nonduplicative count.  
 
Given this estimated student enrollment increase, State expenditures under the program 
increase by $6.1 million in fiscal 2024. Funding for this purpose is not included in the 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly. 
 
The bill also alters local shares by county for the program through the Education Effort 
Adjustment, which provides local share relief, supplemented by additional State aid. 
Education Effort Adjustment State aid increases by $ 261,200 in fiscal 2024 and decreases 
by $617,900 in fiscal 2025. Further, GTB State aid is altered beginning in fiscal 2025, as 
shown in Exhibit 1, due to changes in local appropriations, discussed below.  
 
Any expense reimbursements for the new member of the MCCCS are assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable with existing resources. Changes to the Career Ladder for 
Educators, and provisions of the bill related to the collection of the State alternative income 
eligibility form are not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 770/ Page 9 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Statewide, the increased State expenditures described above are met 
by an equivalent increase in the local share for the Publicly Funded Full-Day 
Prekindergarten program, as partially offset via the Education Effort Adjustment. Given 
both the local share and MOE requirements under current law, the increased local share 
amount under the bill may not necessarily require the local government to increase the local 
board appropriation by that exact amount. Exhibit 2 shows the estimated changes in local 
appropriations under the bill. Exhibit 3 shows estimated increases in combined State aid 
and local appropriations under the bill, based on factors discussed above. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Estimated Changes in Local Appropriations under the Bill 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Allegany 
$50 
$50 
$50 
$49 
$0 
Anne Arundel 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Baltimore City 
527 
517 
-93 
17 
-3 
Baltimore 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Calvert 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Caroline 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Carroll 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Cecil 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Charles 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Dorchester 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Frederick 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Garrett 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Harford 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Howard 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Kent 
7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Montgomery 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Prince George’s 
1,023 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Queen Anne’s 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
St. Mary’s 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Somerset 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Talbot 
70 
69 
0 
0 
0 
Washington 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Wicomico 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Worcester 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
$1,678 
$637 
-$44 
$66 
-$3 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 770/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 3 
Estimated Increases in State Aid and Local Appropriations under the Bill 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Allegany 
$162 
$70 
$69 
$69 
$20 
Anne Arundel 
282 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Baltimore City 
1,995 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Baltimore  
156 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Calvert 
41 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Caroline 
58 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Carroll 
77 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Cecil 
164 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Charles 
162 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Dorchester 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Frederick 
352 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Garrett 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Harford 
236 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Howard 
157 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Kent 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Montgomery 
1,068 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Prince George’s 
2,738 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Queen Anne’s 
33 
0 
0 
0 
0 
St. Mary’s 
42 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Somerset 
18 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Talbot 
93 
69 
0 
0 
0 
Washington 
117 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Wicomico 
66 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Worcester 
14 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
$8,055 
$139 
$69 
$69 
$20 
 
 
Small Business Effect:  Private prekindergarten providers, many of which are small 
businesses, benefit from increased State funding to support higher enrollments of 
prekindergarten students. 
 
Additional Comments:  The fiscal 2023 State budget based State formula funding on all 
public prekindergarten full-day enrollment to serve as a transition period, because local 
school systems did not collect income tier data from students for the current school year. 
Thus, fiscal 2023 funding was provided for all children in public prekindergarten programs.  
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 770/ Page 11 
Consequently, it is assumed that though the bill is an emergency bill and likely takes effect 
in fiscal 2023, it does not affect fiscal 2023 State or local finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 913 (Senator Guzzone) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Accountability and 
Implementation Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised – Amendment(s) – May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - July 17, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11