START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 705 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 705 
(Delegate A. Jones, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Declaration of Rights - Right to Reproductive Freedom 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next general 
election to be held in November 2024, (1) establishes an individual’s fundamental right to 
reproductive freedom, including, but not limited to the ability to make and effectuate 
decisions to prevent, continue, or end one’s own pregnancy and (2) prohibits the State from 
directly or indirectly denying, burdening, or abridging the right unless justified by a 
compelling State interest achieved by the least restrictive means. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the State may not interfere with a woman’s decision to end a 
pregnancy before the fetus is viable, or at any time during a woman’s pregnancy, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the life or health of the woman, or if the fetus is affected 
by a genetic defect or serious deformity or abnormality. A viable fetus is one that has a 
reasonable likelihood of surviving outside of the womb. The Maryland Department of 
Health may adopt regulations consistent with established medical practice if they are 
necessary and the least intrusive method to protect the life and health of the woman. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 705/ Page 2 
Pursuant to Chapter 56 of 2022, if an abortion is provided, it must be performed by a 
“qualified provider,” which includes a physician, nurse practitioner, nurse-midwife, 
licensed certified midwife, physician assistant, or any other individual who is licensed, 
certified, or otherwise authorized by law to practice in the State and for whom the 
performance of an abortion is within the scope of the individuals’ license or certification. 
A qualified provider is not liable for civil damages or subject to a criminal penalty for a 
decision to perform an abortion made in good faith and in the qualified provider’s best 
clinical judgment using accepted standards of clinical practice. 
 
For a detailed discussion of both federal and State abortion laws, please see the 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1171 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 798 (Senator Ferguson, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Board of 
Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 705/ Page 3 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion 
 
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
The Dobbs decision does not impact Maryland law as § 20-209 of the 
Health-General Article codifies the protections of Roe and Casey by prohibiting the State 
from interfering with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the health or life of the woman in cases of fetal defect, 
deformity, or abnormality. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 expanded beyond physicians the types of health care providers who 
may provide abortions to include nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives, licensed certified 
midwives, physician assistants, and other qualified licensed health care providers. The Act 
established the Abortion Care Clinical Training Program to (1) ensure there are a sufficient 
number of health care professionals to provide abortion services in the State and (2) require 
health insurers and Maryland Medicaid to cover abortion services without a deductible, 
coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. 
 
A qualified health care provider who performs an abortion is not liable for civil damages 
or subject to a criminal penalty for a decision to perform an abortion made in good faith 
and in the provider’s best clinical judgment using accepted standards of clinical practice. 
The Maryland Department of Health may adopt regulations consistent with established 
clinical practice if they are necessary and the least intrusive method to protect the life and 
health of the woman. 
 
After Dobbs, Maryland is authorized to enact additional laws protecting access to abortion 
or enact restrictions on abortion access that were unconstitutional under Roe and Casey. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 705/ Page 4 
State Actions Following the Dobbs Decision 
 
Exhibit 1 indicates which states have banned abortion or have an abortion ban on hold. 
As of January 2023, 14 states have banned abortion and 9 states have bans on hold. In states 
such as Louisiana, Texas, and Utah, laws restricting abortion access took effect 
immediately following the Dobbs decision (the Utah ban is currently blocked by the 
courts). Seven states passed laws restricting abortion access prior to Roe but never repealed 
the laws following Roe. Those states may be able to enforce these laws post-Dobbs, but 
parties in several states have sought injunctions to prevent enforcement. Other states, such 
as Florida, Idaho, and Kentucky, passed laws restricting abortion, but specified that the 
laws would only take effect if existing precedent protecting the right to an abortion was 
overturned. These laws are also being challenged in state courts, with many challenges 
alleging that restrictions violate provisions of state constitutions. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
States with Abortion Bans in Effect or on Hold 
As of January 2023 
 
 
Note:  State laws with bans include near-total bans on abortion and bans after the detection of a fetal heartbeat or 
six weeks gestational age. Although Michigan is included as having a “Ban on Hold,” Michigan voters approved an 
amendment to its state constitution including the right to an abortion. This will impact the court’s decision on the 
validity of the pre-Roe law banning abortion as the law will now be considered unconstitutional.  
 
Source:  Guttmacher Institute; Center for Reproductive Rights; National Public Radio; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 705/ Page 5 
Seventeen states and the District of Columbia currently have laws that protect the right to 
abortion, mostly before the point of fetal viability. Several states are seeking to establish 
the right to an abortion, either in statute or the state constitution. In November 2022, voters 
in California, Michigan, and Vermont approved ballot initiatives establishing the right to 
an abortion in their state constitutions. In some states where abortions are accessible, there 
have been efforts to limit liability and prevent enforcement of any judgment against an 
individual performing or obtaining an abortion in the state. This is in response to laws 
similar to Texas’ law allowing civil actions against individuals who assist an individual in 
obtaining an abortion. Other states have taken additional measures to expand abortion 
access. For example, several states (including Maryland) require health insurance plans to 
cover abortions without imposing cost-sharing on beneficiaries, and several other states 
(also including Maryland) permit providers other than licensed physicians to perform 
abortions. Several states have introduced or passed laws to weaken or prohibit investigation 
of in-state providers by out-of-state officials to counteract laws in states that subject 
abortion providers to criminal penalties. 
 

END OF PAGE 5