START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 764 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 764 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County Housing Opportunities Commission - Collective Bargaining 
Agreement Implementation - Impasse Arbitration  
MC 10-23 
 
 
This bill authorizes the appointment of a mediator-arbitrator during the term of a collective 
bargaining agreement of the Montgomery County Housing Opportunities Commission 
(HOC), as specified, and establishes the powers and responsibilities of the 
mediator-arbitrator. Both HOC and the employee organization must equally share the costs 
of the mediator-arbitrator’s services. The bill also requires the Executive Director of HOC 
to submit to the commission any term or condition of a final offer that requires (1) an 
appropriation of funds or that may result in a present or future impact on HOC or its 
customers or (2) action by HOC to implement the collective bargaining agreement, as 
specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  HOC expenditures increase, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent a mediator-arbitrator is appointed under the bill. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that either party during the term of a collective 
bargaining agreement may declare an impasse and request the services of a 
mediator-arbitrator. The parties may also jointly request the services of a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 764/ Page 2 
mediator-arbitrator without declaring an impasse and must jointly appoint a 
mediator-arbitrator. If the parties are unable to mutually agree on the selection of a jointly 
appointed mediator-arbitrator, as specified, the labor relations administrator must name the 
jointly appointed mediator-arbitrator within seven days after the services of a 
mediator-arbitrator were requested. 
 
If at the mediator-arbitrator’s discretion it is found that the parties are at a bona fide 
impasse, each party must submit a separate memorandum of each party’s last final offer on 
items under dispute. Within 10 days after the submission of the memoranda, the 
mediator-arbitrator must hold a closed hearing on the parties’ offers at a time, date, and 
place of the mediator-arbitrator’s choice. Each party may submit in writing or oral 
testimony, all information or data supporting the party’s final offer. The mediator-arbitrator 
may not open the hearing to a person who is not a party to the mediation-arbitration. 
 
Within five days after the hearing, the mediator-arbitrator must issue a report selecting the 
final offer determined to be more reasonable when viewed as a whole. In determining the 
more reasonable offer, the mediator-arbitrator may only consider:   
 
 
past collective bargaining contracts between the parties, including the past 
bargaining history that led to such agreements or the precollective bargaining 
history of employee wages, hours, benefits, and other working conditions; 
 
a comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of employment of employees 
performing similar services in public employment in the Washington Metropolitan 
Area and the State; 
 
a comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of employment of employees 
performing similar services in private employment in Montgomery County; 
 
the public interest and welfare; 
 
the ability of HOC to finance economic adjustments under the proposed agreement 
and the effect of such economic adjustments on the standard of public services 
normally provided by HOC; 
 
the annual changes in consumer prices for all items as reflected in the most recent 
Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the 
Washington Metropolitan Area; and 
 
all items on which the parties agreed before the mediation-arbitration began to be 
integrated into each offer. 
 
However, in considering the terms and conditions of the final offer, the mediator-arbitrator 
must first consider and give the highest priority to HOC’s ability to pay for additional 
short- and long-term expenses. Specifically, the mediator-arbitrator must consider (1) the 
limits on HOC’s ability to raise revenue; (2) the added burden raising revenue would have 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 764/ Page 3 
on HOC customers; and (3) the ability of HOC to continue providing the current level of 
service to its customers. 
 
Under the bill, the mediator-arbitrator is prohibited from considering or receiving any 
history of collective bargaining relating to the immediate dispute, including any offers of 
settlement not contained in the offer submitted to the mediator-arbitrator. The 
mediator-arbitrator is prohibited from compromising or altering the final offer that the 
mediator-arbitrator selects. 
 
The offer selected by the mediator-arbitrator, as integrated with the collective bargaining 
agreement at the time of the dispute, must be the final agreement between HOC and the 
exclusive representative without ratification by the parties. The economic provisions of the 
final agreement are subject to funding by HOC, and HOC must appropriate funds in its 
final budget for all economic provisions of the final agreement. 
 
Within 45 days after the execution of an agreement, or a later date determined by mutual 
agreement of the parties due to extenuating circumstances, the executive director of HOC 
must submit to the commission any term or condition of the final offer that requires (1) an 
appropriation of funds or that may result in a present or future fiscal impact on HOC or its 
customers or (2) action by HOC to implement the collective bargaining agreement. HOC 
may subsequently accept or reject all or part of any of those terms or conditions. 
 
Current Law:  Title 16, Subtitle 3 of the Housing and Community Development Article 
establishes statutory collective bargaining rights for HOC employees. 
 
HOC and a certified employee organization must meet by September 1 each year and 
engage in collective bargaining about specified issues, including salaries and wages, for 
the following fiscal year for which an agreement has not been reached, and must complete 
the collective bargaining on or before February 1 of the following year. A mediator panel 
may be used in collective bargaining when (1) HOC and the employee organization agree 
to mediation or (2) an impasse results, and HOC or the employee organization requests 
mediation. 
 
HOC and the employee organization must each choose one mediator from a list supplied 
by the American Arbitration Association, or the Federal Mediation and Conciliation 
Service and together choose a third mediator that must be selected jointly from the list. 
 
If the parties are unable to agree on the selection of a jointly appointed mediator, the 
mediator must be selected by the labor relations administrator. The costs of mediation must 
be shared equally by both parties and the arbitrator does not have authority to amend, add 
to, or subtract from the collective bargaining agreement. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 764/ Page 4 
Requirement of Executive Director 
 
By April 1 or a later date determined by mutual agreement of the parties due to extenuating 
circumstances, the executive director of HOC must submit to the commission any term or 
condition of the final offer regarding wages that requires (1) an appropriation of funds or 
(2) the adoption of a regulation that may result in a present or future fiscal impact on HOC 
or its customers. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The cost of the services of a mediator-arbitrator appointed under the 
bill must be shared equally between the parties. HOC, a component unit of 
Montgomery County, will be responsible for half of any mediator-arbitrator costs incurred 
under the bill, beginning in fiscal 2024. Actual expenditures cannot be reliably estimated 
but are assumed to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4