START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 797 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 797 
(Montgomery County Delegation and Prince George's 
County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission - Collective 
Bargaining Agreement Implementation - Dispute Arbitration  
MC/PG 103-23 
 
 
This bill authorizes the appointment of a mediator-arbitrator during the collective 
bargaining process of the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission 
(M-NCPPC) and establishes the powers and responsibilities of the mediator-arbitrator. 
Both M-NCPPC and the employee organization must equally share the costs of the 
mediator-arbitrator’s services. The bill also clarifies that any terms or conditions of a final 
agreement that require an appropriation of funds or the adoption of regulations or that have 
a present or future fiscal impact are subject to approval by the Montgomery and 
Prince George’s county councils. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  M-NCPPC expenditures increase, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2024 
to the extent a mediator-arbitrator is appointed under the bill. Local revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that either party during the term of a collective 
bargaining agreement may declare an impasse and request the services of a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 797/ Page 2 
mediator-arbitrator. The parties may also jointly request the services of a 
mediator-arbitrator without declaring an impasse and must jointly appoint a 
mediator-arbitrator. If the parties are unable to mutually agree on the selection of a 
mediator-arbitrator, the labor relations administrator must appoint the mediator-arbitrator 
within seven days after the services of a mediator-arbitrator were requested. 
 
If at the mediator-arbitrator’s sole discretion it is found that the parties are at a bona fide 
impasse, each party must submit a separate memorandum of each party’s last final offer on 
items under dispute. Within 10 days after the submission of the memoranda, the 
mediator-arbitrator must hold a closed hearing on the parties’ offers at a time, date, and 
place of the mediator-arbitrator’s choice. Each party may submit in writing or oral 
testimony, all information or data supporting the party’s final offer. The mediator-arbitrator 
may not open the hearing to a person who is not a party to the mediation-arbitration. 
 
Within five days after the hearing, the mediator-arbitrator must issue a report selecting the 
final offer determined to be more reasonable when viewed as a whole. In determining the 
more reasonable offer, the mediator-arbitrator may only consider:   
 
 
past collective bargaining agreements between the parties, including the past 
bargaining history that led to such agreements or the precollective bargaining 
history of employee wages, hours, benefits, and other working conditions; 
 
a comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of employment of employees 
performing similar services in public employment in the Washington Metropolitan 
Area and the State; 
 
a comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of employment of employees 
performing similar services in private employment in Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties; 
 
the public interest and welfare; 
 
the ability of M-NCPPC to finance economic adjustments under the agreement and 
the effect of such economic adjustments on the standard of public services normally 
provided by M-NCPPC; 
 
the annual changes in consumer prices for all items as reflected in the most recent 
Consumer Price Index-Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the 
Washington Metropolitan Area; and 
 
all items on which the parties agreed before the mediation-arbitration began to be 
integrated into each offer. 
 
Under the bill, the mediator-arbitrator is prohibited from considering or receiving any 
history of collective bargaining relating to the immediate dispute, including any offers of 
settlement not contained in the offer submitted to the mediator-arbitrator. The 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 797/ Page 3 
mediator-arbitrator is prohibited from compromising or altering the final offer that the 
mediator-arbitrator selects. 
 
The offer selected by the mediator-arbitrator, as integrated with the collective bargaining 
agreement at the time of the dispute, must be the final agreement between M-NCPPC and 
the exclusive representative without ratification by the parties. M-NCPPC must request 
funding in the commission’s final budget from the Montgomery and Prince George’s 
county councils for all economic provisions of the final agreement. 
 
Current Law:  Title 16, Subtitle 2 of the Land Use Article establishes statutory collective 
bargaining rights for M-NCPPC employees divided into four bargaining units:   
 
 
the office unit, which includes office classification titles in which employees are 
responsible for internal and external communications and all paperwork that is 
generally required in an office; 
 
the professional/technical unit, which includes professional, paraprofessional, and 
technical classification titles, as specified; 
 
the service/labor unit, which includes classification titles in which employees 
perform service and maintenance and other duties, as specified; and 
 
the trade unit, which includes classification titles in which employees are required 
to possess special manual skills and other skills as required by the role, as specified. 
 
The services of a mediator in a collective bargaining process may be used when both parties 
agree to mediation or an impasse results, and either party requests mediation. The mediator 
must be selected jointly from a list provided by the American Arbitration Association or 
the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. If the parties are unable to agree on the 
selection of a mediator, the mediator will be selected by the labor relations administrator. 
The costs of mediation must be shared equally by both parties. The economic provisions 
of the final agreement between both parties are subject to funding by the Montgomery and 
Prince George’s county councils. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The cost of the services of a mediator-arbitrator appointed under the 
bill must be shared equally between the parties. M-NCPPC will be responsible for half of 
any mediator-arbitrator costs incurred under the bill, beginning in fiscal 2024. Actual 
expenditures cannot be reliably estimated but are assumed to be minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 797/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2023 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4