START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 709 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 709 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Modernization of State Financial Systems - 21st Century Financial Systems 
Enterprise 
 
 
This bill requires specified departments, in consultation with the Modernize Maryland 
Oversight Commission (MMOC), to generally oversee the transformation of the State’s 
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) into the 21st Century Financial 
Systems Enterprise. By December 31, 2023, and every six months thereafter until a final 
report is due January 1, 2027, the Office of the Comptroller must report to the  
General Assembly on the status of the development of the 21st Century Financial Systems 
Enterprise. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The departments identified by the bill are the: 
 
 
Office of the Comptroller; 
 
Office of the State Treasurer; 
 
Department of Budget and Management; 
 
Department of Information Technology; and 
 
Department of General Services. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 709/ Page 2 
“Financial management infrastructure” means the information technology (IT) 
infrastructure that is used to maintain the general ledger and accountancy for the State, 
including subledger functions that enable the management of all payments and fund 
transfers throughout the State. 
 
“21st Century Financial Systems Enterprise” means a modern cloud-based IT 
infrastructure. 
 
The departments, in consultation with a designated representative from MMOC, must: 
 
 
set policies, objectives, and priorities, as specified, for the transformation of the 
FMIS infrastructure into the 21st Century Financial Systems Enterprise; 
 
learn the needs and priorities of all FMIS users and future known users of the 
enterprise; 
 
collaborate with consultants to create a project proposal for, and oversee 
implementation of, the enterprise; 
 
oversee, coordinate, and authorize the assignment of resources for the development 
of the enterprise; 
 
establish working groups as needed; and 
 
recommend any legislative changes considered necessary by the departments to 
address FMIS issues. 
 
Current Law:  Article VI of the Maryland Constitution states that the Comptroller has the 
general superintendence of the fiscal affairs of the State and must, among other duties: 
 
 
digest and prepare plans for the improvement and management of revenues; 
 
prepare and report estimates of the revenue and expenditures of the State; 
 
preserve all public accounts; and 
 
decide on the forms of keeping and stating accounts. 
 
The purpose of MMOC is to: 
 
 
ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information held by the State 
concerning State residents; and 
 
advise the Secretary of Information Technology and the State Chief Information 
Security Officer on appropriate IT and cybersecurity investments and upgrades and 
other related issues. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) notes that 
it is not included as a participating department despite the fact that it (1) operates a separate 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 709/ Page 3 
version of FMIS; (2) has completed the first phase of an FMIS modernization effort; (3) is 
about to launch the second phase of that effort; and (4) could provide valuable input about 
its experience to the other departments. Moreover, including MDOT may enhance the 
opportunity to have a truly integrated financial system for the State.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 659 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3