START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 717 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 717 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Nursing - Peer Advisory Committees, Scopes of Practice, and 
Licensure Requirements 
 
   
This bill (1) authorizes a licensed certified midwife to delegate a technical task to an 
assistant, as specified; (2) authorizes a registered certified nurse-midwife or a licensed 
certified midwife to personally prepare and dispense a starter dosage of a drug, as specified; 
(3) eliminates the requirement that an applicant for a certified midwife license complete 
coursework in health and sciences; (4) alters the definitions of “practice certified 
midwifery,” “practice nurse midwifery,” “certified medication technician,” and “certified 
nursing assistant”; (5) adds an exception to the licensure requirement to practice certified 
midwifery; (6) authorizes the Maryland Board of Nursing (MBON) to appoint peer 
advisory committees to provide advice related to midwifery; (7) requires MBON to 
develop regulations governing the delegation of technical tasks by licensed certified 
midwives to assistants; and (8) requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to 
submit a report on recommendations to expand access to birthing services in birthing 
centers in the State. The bill also makes conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBON and MDH can likely handle the bill’s requirements using existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 717/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In general, an individual must be licensed as a certified 
nurse-midwife to practice nurse midwifery, licensed as a direct-entry midwife to practice 
direct-entry midwifery, or licensed as a certified midwife to practice certified midwifery in 
Maryland. 
 
Delegation of Tasks to Assistants 
 
An advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) is authorized to delegate a nursing or other 
technical task to an assistant, so long as the assistant performs only tasks that the assistant 
is trained to perform and the delegating APRN provides instruction to and on-site 
supervision of the assistant. 
 
The bill similarly authorizes a licensed certified midwife to delegate a technical task to an 
assistant if the assistant performs only tasks that the assistant is trained to perform, and the 
delegating licensed certified midwife provides instruction to and on-site supervision of the 
assistant. The bill specifies that MBON must adopt regulations that (1) provide for the 
manner in which a licensed certified midwife delegates a technical task to an assistant; 
(2) establish limitations on the authority of a licensed certified midwife to delegate 
technical tasks; and (3) otherwise clarify the scope of a licensed certified midwife’s 
authority to delegate tasks to an assistant. 
 
Dispensing of a Starter Dosage 
 
A “starter dosage” means an amount of drug sufficient to begin therapy that is for a duration 
of 72 hours or less or prescribed prior to a patient obtaining a larger quantity of the drug to 
complete therapy. Current law authorizes a nurse practitioner to personally prepare and 
dispense a starter dosage of any drug the nurse practitioner is authorized to prescribe to a 
patient if (1) the starter dosage complies with specified labeling requirements; (2) no charge 
is made for the starter dosage; and (3) the nurse practitioner enters an appropriate record in 
the patient’s medical record. 
 
“Practice nurse midwifery” and “practice certified midwifery” mean the management and 
care of essentially normal newborns and of essentially normal women antepartally, 
intrapartally, and postpartally. Under current law, “practice nurse midwifery” and “practice 
certified midwifery” both include family planning and well woman reproductive care; the 
prescribing of substances commonly used in the practice of midwifery, including 
Schedule II, III, IV, or V controlled dangerous substances; and the dispensing of such 
substances in the course of treating a patient at specified medical facilities, health centers, 
or clinics. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 717/ Page 3 
The bill authorizes a registered nurse certified as a nurse-midwife or a licensed certified 
midwife to personally prepare and dispense a starter dosage of any drug, subject to the 
same requirements specified above for a nurse practitioner. The definitions of “practice 
nurse midwifery” and “practice certified midwifery” are expanded to include the 
dispensing of a starter dosage of a drug. 
 
Certified Medication Technicians and Certified Nursing Assistants 
 
Under current law, a “certified medication technician” (CMT) is an individual who has 
completed a medication technician training program approved by MBON and is certified 
by MBON as a medication technician. A “certified nursing assistant” (CNA) is an 
individual, regardless of title, who routinely performs nursing tasks delegated by a 
registered nurse (RN) or a licensed practical nurse (LPN) for compensation and does not 
include a certified dialysis technician or a certified medication technician. 
 
The bill expands the definition of “certified medication technician” by specifying that a 
CMT, subject to regulations adopted by MBON, routinely performs (1) nursing tasks 
related to the administration of medication delegated by an RN, an LPN, or an advanced 
practice nurse or (2) technical tasks related to the administration of medication delegated 
by a licensed certified midwife. The definition of “certified nursing assistant” is expanded 
by specifying that a CNA routinely performs, for compensation and subject to regulations 
adopted by MBON, nursing tasks delegated by an APRN or technical tasks delegated by a 
licensed certified midwife. 
 
Requirements for Licensure 
 
To obtain a certified midwife license, an applicant must (1) be of good moral character; 
(2) submit to a criminal history records check; (3) hold a current, valid certification as a 
certified midwife from the American Midwifery Certification Board (AMCB); (4) have 
graduated from a graduate-level accredited program for midwifery education approved by 
the Accreditation Commission for Midwifery Education; (5) have completed coursework 
in health and sciences (prior to or while enrolled in a graduate-level accredited program for 
midwifery education); and (6) have passed the AMCB examination.  
 
The bill repeals the requirement that an applicant complete coursework in health and 
sciences.  
 
Exceptions to Licensure Requirement 
 
Current law specifies that the licensure requirement to practice certified midwifery does 
not apply to (1) an individual assisting at a birth in an emergency; (2) an individual licensed 
as a health care practitioner whose scope of practice allows the individual to practice 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 717/ Page 4 
certified midwifery; and (3) a student practicing certified midwifery while engaged in an 
approved clinical midwifery education experience under the supervision of a licensed 
certified midwife or a nurse certified as a nurse-midwife. 
 
The bill adds a fourth exception to the licensure requirement:  an individual who has 
graduated from a graduate level accredited program for midwifery education approved by 
the Accreditation Commission for Midwifery Education and who is practicing under the 
supervision of a licensed certified midwife or a nurse certified as a nurse-midwife and 
meets any other requirements set by MBON. 
 
Peer Advisory Committees 
 
Under current law, MBON may appoint peer advisory committees to provide the board 
with expert advice related to the practice of nursing by advance practice nurses. 
 
The bill specifies that peer advisory committees may also be appointed to provide expert 
advice related to the practice of midwifery by licensed certified midwives. 
 
Recommendations to Expand Access to Birthing Services in Birthing Centers 
 
By December 1, 2023, MDH, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, must develop 
recommendations to expand access to birthing services in birthing centers in the State and 
report its findings to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 772 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 717/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5