START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 794 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 794 
(Delegate Bridges) 
Appropriations and Environment and 
Transportation 
Finance 
 
Baltimore Regional Transit Commission - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Baltimore Regional Transit Commission. The commission must 
be staffed by the Baltimore Metropolitan Council (BMC), and the Maryland Transit 
Administration (MTA) must allocate funds for the operational expenses incurred by the 
commission, including funding for one senior planner and two junior planner staffing 
positions. By December 1 each year, the commission must report its findings and 
recommendations on the Baltimore region transit systems to MTA, the Governor, and the 
General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $431,300 in 
FY 2024 and by $575,000 annually thereafter to cover staffing costs incurred by BMC. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
431,300 
575,000 
575,000 
575,000 
575,000 
Net Effect 
($431,300) 
($575,000) 
($575,000) 
($575,000) 
($575,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  It is assumed that local governments can participate in commission activities 
as necessary and appropriate using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 794/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies various administrative responsibilities for the 
commission, including that it establish operating policies and procedures, meet at least 
quarterly, accept public comments, include specified topics in the quarterly agenda at least 
once each year, and keep minutes of its meetings. The commission must also:   
 
 
provide input and engage in advocacy for the Baltimore region public transit 
systems maintained by MTA; 
 
request and review information from the Annual Attainment Report and MTA 
concerning the attainment of its goals, as specified, evaluate other performance 
measures, and issue related recommendations; 
 
review and comment on service change reports and major service change proposals 
on a quarterly basis; 
 
review and comment on MTA’s annual operating and capital budget request for the 
Baltimore region, including bus, light rail, metro, commuter bus, MARC service, 
and paratransit as part of the development of the draft and final Consolidated 
Transportation Program; 
 
review and approve any update to the Central Maryland Regional Transit Plan; 
 
review and comment on the Capital Needs Inventory Report; and 
 
review local transit plans and services in the Baltimore region to ensure coordination 
between the local transit services and MTA. 
 
In carrying out its duties, the commission must endeavor to ensure that MTA’s plans, 
budgets, decisions, policies, goals, priorities, operations, and services address the public 
transit needs of residents and businesses in the Baltimore region. 
 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses, as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Transit Administration 
 
MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit system throughout the Baltimore-Washington 
metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, 
such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter buses, MARC trains, and 
mobility/paratransit vehicles. Except for the Washington Metropolitan Area transit system, 
MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies responsible for the construction and operation 
of transit lines in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 794/ Page 3 
To the extent practicable, MTA’s transit plans must (1) implement the general development 
plan of BMC and (2) in order to provide for a balanced transportation system and for the 
coordination of transit planning and general planning, be prepared in consultation with 
BMC. 
 
Baltimore Metropolitan Council 
 
BMC is a private nonprofit regional council of governments that includes all of 
Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Howard, and 
Queen Anne’s counties. Broadly, the purposes of BMC are to:   
 
 
serve as a forum for local officials and their representatives to identify and address 
problems in the region; 
 
provide a central source of information and coordination for fashioning responses 
to needs in the region; 
 
assist local jurisdictions in developing regional policies, prioritizing regional 
infrastructure needs, and developing regional strategies; and 
 
facilitate coordination and collaboration among local jurisdictions and organizations 
in the Baltimore region to foster economic growth and development in the region in 
areas that include transportation, housing, workforce development, and renewable 
energy projects and usage. 
 
State Expenditures:  BMC is a private nonprofit organization and does not receive a direct 
appropriation from the State and, as such, BMC does not have resources to support the 
work of the commission without additional funding. Because the bill requires MTA to 
allocate funds for the operating expenses of the commission, including funding for 
one senior planner and two junior planner staffing positions, TTF expenditures increase by 
$431,250 in fiscal 2024 (which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date) and 
by $575,000 annually thereafter for additional BMC staff (specifically, one senior planner 
and two junior planners) to manage and support the activities of the commission. 
 
Expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 876 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 794/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Baltimore Metropolitan 
Council; Baltimore and Howard counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
Enrolled - April 13, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4