START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 781 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 781 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Equitech Growth Fund and 
Commission 
 
   
This bill establishes the Equitech Growth Commission and Fund (EGF) in the Maryland 
Technology Corporation (TEDCO) to support economic competitiveness and inclusive 
growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State. TEDCO must staff the 
commission, which must develop and report on a strategic plan and 10-year goals by 
July 1, 2025, for growing the State’s innovation economy. From fiscal 2025 through 2033, 
the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million for 
awards from EGF. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. Provisions related to the 
commission terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $3.0 million in FY 2024 and by 
$5.6 million annually from FY 2025 through 2033 to provide funds to EGF for awards and 
to cover TEDCO administrative expenses. Special fund revenues and expenditures for EGF 
increase correspondingly. State revenues and expenditures may increase from awards 
under the program beginning as early as FY 2024 (not shown but discussed below). The 
FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a general fund appropriation 
of $3.0 million for EGF, contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation from FY 2025 through 2033. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$3.0 
$5.6 
$5.6 
$5.6 
$5.6 
GF Expenditure 
$3.0 
$5.6 
$5.6 
$5.6 
$5.6 
SF Expenditure 
$3.0 
$5.6 
$5.6 
$5.6 
$5.6 
Net Effect 
($3.0) 
($5.6) 
($5.6) 
($5.6) 
($5.6)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 781/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that local 
governments, including community colleges, receive funds and provide matching funds 
beginning as early as FY 2024.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Equitech Growth Commission 
 
The Equitech Growth Commission is established, consisting of specified membership and 
staffed by TEDCO. By July 1, 2025, the commission must develop an inclusive, 
comprehensive, long-term strategic plan and 10-year goals for growing the State’s 
innovation economy to be highly competitive with other states and regions relative to 
growing, attracting, and retaining a skilled workforce and high-growth businesses. The 
strategic plan must include mechanisms to increase the participation of communities in the 
innovation economy, create pathways for high-paying jobs, and increase and expand 
wealth in minority communities. The strategic plan must be reported to the Governor and 
the Presiding Officers by July 1, 2025. 
 
Equitech Growth Fund 
 
EGF is established in TEDCO as a special, nonlapsing fund to support the economic 
competitiveness and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State 
through the creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce 
that builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must administer the fund. The 
fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, and 
any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. EGF must 
leverage investment from the private sector, funding from federal sources, and other 
sources of funding. 
 
TEDCO must award grants, investments, loans, or other financial assistance from EGF to 
public, nonprofit, or private entities in the State, including institutions of higher education 
and public-private partnerships (P3s). Awards must target workforce development and 
infrastructure that will attract and retain businesses in the State. Awards must be consistent 
with the 10-year goals in the strategic plan developed by the Equitech Growth Commission. 
 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from EGF.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 781/ Page 3 
TEDCO must adopt regulations to establish:  
 
 
a competitive application process; 
 
review criteria and procedures for making awards, including private leverage 
requirements for awards; 
 
processes and metrics for monitoring each project and the success, economic 
impact, and impact of the award on the State’s diversity, equity, and inclusion in the 
State’s innovation economy; and 
 
processes for ensuring that the programmatic funds and leveraged funds are invested 
within the State. 
 
By July 1 each year, beginning in 2024, TEDCO must report to the Governor, the President 
of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House on awards made from EGF. 
 
Current Law:  TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland 
General Assembly in 1998 to facilitate the creation of technology companies and encourage 
collaboration between these emerging businesses and federal and State research 
laboratories. TEDCO also aims to promote new research activity and investments that lead 
to business development in Maryland. For further information on TEDCO, including a 
general overview and recent program additions, see the Appendix – Maryland 
Technology Development Corporation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
a general fund appropriation of $3.0 million for EGF, contingent on enactment of this bill 
or its cross file establishing EGF in TEDCO. No further usage limitation on the funding is 
specified. The bill also requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from EGF from fiscal 2025 through 2033. The bill 
is silent as to whether EGF may be used to cover administrative costs but does specify that 
the mandated appropriations are for awards. Therefore, this estimate assumes fiscal 2024 
contingent budget funding can be used for administrative costs, but that mandated funding 
from fiscal 2025 through 2033 cannot. TEDCO anticipates total administrative expenses 
of approximately $0.6 million annually, including two staff and other study, marketing, 
accounting, and overhead costs. TEDCO employees are not State employees. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $3.0 million in fiscal 2024 due to 
contingent budget funding and by $5.0 million annually from fiscal 2025 through 2033 due 
to the bill’s mandated appropriation. General fund expenditures further increase, by 
approximately $0.6 million annually from fiscal 2025 through 2033, to provide funding for 
TEDCO’s administrative expenses. For purposes of this estimate, the additional funding is 
assumed to also flow through EGF. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 781/ Page 4 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for EGF increase correspondingly as those funds 
are received and used to provide financial assistance and pay for TEDCO’s administrative 
expenses. For purposes of this estimate, awards are assumed to be made in the fiscal year 
that general funds are appropriated, although awards could be made in subsequent years. 
Awards must be consistent with the 10-year goals in the strategic plan developed by the 
Equitech Growth Commission, due by July 1, 2025 (fiscal 2026). Therefore, this estimate 
further assumes the goals are sufficiently developed in time for awards to be made in 
fiscal 2024 and 2025 that are consistent with those goals. If not, special fund expenditures 
for awards are delayed. 
 
While not required by the bill, TEDCO anticipates a 40%/60% split between programmatic 
funding for workforce infrastructure and physical infrastructure awards, with workforce 
infrastructure awards averaging $250,000 and physical infrastructure awards averaging 
$1.0 million.  
 
The program may provide several types of financial assistance. Some types, such as loans 
and investments, can reasonably be assumed to generate revenue for the program in future 
years. The additional revenue may then be used to provide additional financial assistance 
(or possibly cover administrative expenses). Accordingly, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025, special fund revenues and expenditures for EGF further increase beyond 
annual general fund appropriations to the extent that revenue-generating financial 
assistance is provided by TEDCO under the program. 
 
Expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Public entities in the State, including institutions of higher education and P3s, are eligible 
recipients of EGF funds. However, EGF must leverage investment from other sources of 
funding. Accordingly, special fund revenues (Executive Branch agencies) and/or higher 
education revenues increase to the extent that funds are received from EGF. State 
expenditures (all funds) and/or higher education expenditures increase as necessary to 
fulfill any matching requirement, beginning as early as fiscal 2024. 
 
As the program is permanent, related program activities, including annual discretionary 
general fund appropriations, are assumed to continue after the final mandated appropriation 
in fiscal 2033. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Public entities in the State are eligible recipients of EGF funding. 
However, EGF must leverage investment from other sources of funding. Therefore, local 
government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that local governments and 
community colleges receive funding and provide matching funds beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 781/ Page 5 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses benefit significantly from investments made 
under the bill, both directly as recipients of funding and indirectly as beneficiaries from the 
infrastructure and resources supported by the program’s investments. 
 
Additional Comments:  The fiscal 2023 budget restricted $250,000 for TEDCO to 
conduct a study on the effectiveness and impact of the State’s current economic 
development strategy as it relates to specific areas, including financial, policy, and 
governance recommendations for the establishment of a Maryland Equitech Growth Fund. 
TEDCO hired a consultant to conduct the study, and the resulting report was submitted in 
January 2023. The report analyzed Maryland’s high-tech industry growth in comparison 
with other states; employment in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) jobs 
and business ownership by race, ethnicity, and gender; and opportunities for Maryland to 
support high-tech industry growth in an inclusive way. 
 
Recommendations from the report include that Maryland should (1) develop a high-tech 
industry recruitment and expansion strategy with a focus on high-tech manufacturing; 
(2) focus on workforce development, including degree and non-degree certificate 
programs, to expand the participation of women, people of color, first-generation college 
students in STEM careers; and (3) expand entrepreneurial leadership training and 
mentoring for people of color and women as well as investments in companies and venture 
funds led by people of color and women. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 699 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Finance and Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Commerce; Maryland Department of Labor; University System of Maryland; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 781/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 5, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 781/ Page 7 
Appendix – Maryland Technology  
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development:  from early stage and technology transfer to growth 
stage.  
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The Maryland Venture Fund and a biotechnology grant program were 
transferred to TEDCO in fiscal 2016. The following programs have been established by 
legislation since 2021:   
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund:  The Pre-Seed Builder Fund supports the development of 
start-up companies run by entrepreneurs from socially or economically 
disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder access to traditional forms of capital and 
executive networks at the pre-seed stage. The Governor must include appropriations 
in the budget bill in the following amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million 
in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund:  The Inclusion Fund provides capital investment in 
technology-based businesses that (1) would qualify for investment under the Builder 
Fund, as provided in TEDCO regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals 
who demonstrate economic disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at 
least one year after the time of investment by an individual or individuals who 
demonstrate economic disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program:  The program encourages the 
establishment and expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor 
must include an appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 through 2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund:  The Maryland Equity Investment Fund 
allows unappropriated general fund surplus to be invested in a “qualified business” 
– with a goal to increase private equity and venture capital in the State – and the 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 781/ Page 8 
interest earnings and investment returns realized to the benefit of participants of the 
several pension systems managed by the State Retirement and Pension System. For 
fiscal 2024, the Governor must include an appropriation in the budget bill to the 
fund equal to 10% of the unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of 
$10.0 million from the second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, 
with a corresponding decrease in the typical required appropriation. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program:  The SBIR/STTR Program allows eligible small 
businesses to apply for State awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal 
grants, limited to $25,000 for Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. 
TEDCO may make up to 20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per 
fiscal year for a total of $1.25 million. 
 
For a more thorough discussion of TEDCO’s structure and programs, including how its 
programs support companies in different stages of development, see “Chapter 13. 
Economic Development and Business Regulation” of Volume II – Government Services in 
Maryland of the 2022 Legislative Handbook Series. 
 

END OF PAGE 8