START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 108

Chapter 108

(House Bill 716)

AN ACT concerning

Managed Care Organizations – ~~Acknowledgment~~ ~~of~~ ~~Responsibility~~ ~~for~~ ~~Payment~~
~~of~~ ~~a~~ Retroactive Denial of Reimbursement – ~~Repeal~~ ~~of~~ ~~Applicability~~ Information
in Written Statement

FOR the purpose of ~~providing~~ ~~that~~ ~~a~~ ~~managed~~ ~~care~~ ~~organization~~ ~~that~~ ~~retroactively~~ ~~denies~~
~~reimbursement~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~provider~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~required~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~certain~~
~~information~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~the~~ ~~entity~~ ~~acknowledging~~ ~~responsibility~~ ~~for~~ ~~payment~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~denied~~ ~~claim~~ altering the information that must be included in a written statement
provided by a managed care organization to a health care provider when
retroactively denying reimbursement as a result of coordination of benefits; and
generally relating to managed care organization and retroactive denial of
reimbursement.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–102.3(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–102.3(k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, ~~without~~ with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section ~~15–1008(c)(2)(ii)~~ 15–1008(c)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–102.3.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 108 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The provisions of §§ 4–311, 15–604,, AND 15–605, and [15–1008] 15–1008(A),
(B), (C)(1) AND (2)(I), (D), (E), AND (F) of the Insurance Article shall apply to managed
care organizations in the same manner they apply to carriers.

(K) (1) TO THE EXTENT AUTHORIZED UNDER FEDERAL LAW AND SUBJECT
TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PROVISIONS OF § 15–1008(A), (B),
(C)(1) AND (2)(I), (D), (E), AND (F) OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE SHALL APPLY TO
MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS IN THE SAME MANNER THEY APPLY TO CARRIERS.

(2) IF A RETROACTIVE DENIAL OF REIMBURSEMENT IS THE RESULT
OF COORDINATION OF BENEFITS, A WRITTEN STATEMENT PROVIDED BY A MANAGED
CARE ORGANIZATION TO A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
15–1008(C)(2)(I) OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE SHALL INCLUDE THE NAME AND
ADDRESS OF THE ENTITY IDENTIFIED BY THE MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATION AS
RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF THE CLAIM.

Article – Insurance

15–1008.

~~(c)~~ ~~(2)~~ ~~(ii)~~ ~~If~~ ~~the~~ ~~retroactive~~ ~~denial~~ ~~of~~ ~~reimbursement~~ ~~results~~ ~~from~~
~~coordination~~ ~~of~~ ~~benefits,~~ ~~the~~ ~~written~~ ~~statement~~ ~~shall~~ ~~provide~~ ~~the~~ ~~name~~ ~~and~~ ~~address~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~entity~~ ~~acknowledging~~ ~~responsibility~~ ~~for~~ ~~payment~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~denied~~ ~~claim.~~

(c) (2) (i) A carrier that retroactively denies reimbursement to a health
care provider under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall provide the health care provider
with a written statement specifying the basis for the retroactive denial.

(ii) If the retroactive denial of reimbursement results from
coordination of benefits BY A CARRIER THAT IS NOT A MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATION,
the written statement shall provide the name and address of the entity acknowledging
responsibility for payment of the denied claim.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2