START OF PAGE 1
  HB 735 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 735 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - University System of Maryland) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
University System of Maryland - Facilities - Bonding Authority and Sale 
 
   
This departmental bill authorizes the use of $30.0 million in academic facilities bonds for 
the purpose of financing and refinancing construction, renovation, and renewal projects at 
University System of Maryland (USM) buildings and campuses. In addition to current uses, 
with the approval of the Board of Regents of USM, money received from the sale of 
property by a nonresidential campus in USM, may be used for operating expenses at the 
nonresidential campus. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No likely impact in FY 2023. Revenues and expenditures from bond 
proceeds increase by $30.0 million in FY 2024. The revenues and expenditures are 
included in the FY 2024 Capital Improvement Program (CIP) as introduced. Higher 
education expenditures increase by an estimated $2.5 million annually, beginning in 
FY 2025, to pay debt service on the revenue bonds. To the extent property sales of a 
nonresidential USM campus (i.e., University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) or the 
University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science) increase because of the bill’s 
expansion of authorized uses of money from a sale, higher education revenues and 
(potentially) expenditures increase, as explained below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Bond Rev. 
$30.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$0 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
Bond Exp. 
$30.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  USM has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 735/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  USM must gain legislative approval to use academic revenue 
bond (ARB) proceeds for certain capital improvement projects at academic facilities. 
 
The maximum aggregate principal amount of bonds that USM may issue was increased by 
$300.0 million, from $1.4 billion to $1.7 billion, by Chapter 233 of 2022. This bill does 
not affect the cap on bond principal; it only authorizes the issuance of bonds within the 
existing limit for specific capital projects.  
 
The fiscal 2024 CIP as introduced proposes $30.0 million in ARBs in fiscal 2024 and 
$30.0 million each year from fiscal 2025 through 2028. The proposed amount of debt is 
consistent with the Capital Debt Affordability Committee recommendation for fiscal 2024. 
 
With the approval of the Board of Public Works (BPW), the Board of Regents may sell or 
exchange any part of its real properties. Money received from the sale of property may be 
used, if approved by BPW, only to purchase or improve property and facilities. This money 
may not be applied to the Annuity Bond Fund Account.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  USM revenues and expenditures from bond proceeds increase by 
$30.0 million in fiscal 2024. The revenues and expenditures are included in the fiscal 2024 
capital budget as introduced. Beginning in fiscal 2025, USM expenditures to pay debt 
service on the ARBs increase by an estimated $2.5 million annually for 20 years. USM 
advises that total annual debt service is limited since at least an equal amount of previously 
authorized debt will be retired. However, DLS advises that, absent the bill, annual debt 
service payments by USM would decrease as outstanding debt is retired unless new debt 
is authorized. Thus, debt service costs increase due to the bill.  
 
Under the bill, a nonresidential USM campus may use the money received from the sale of 
property for operating expenses with approval of the Board of Regents of USM in addition 
to the purposes allowed under current law (the purchase of property and the improvement 
of property and facilities). As under current law the sale of property must be approved by 
BPW.  
 
UMGC, a nonresidential USM campus, recently announced the sale of its Largo properties 
to the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission for $75 million. This 
action occurred during the same period that UMGC laid off 43 workers, a cost-savings 
measure of $5 million. Thus, it is assumed that, under the bill and with the required 
approval, UMGC uses at least a portion of the $75 million in property sale proceeds to 
cover operating expenses. In this instance, as the sale has already been announced, the bill 
has no effect on overall revenues from it. Nevertheless, the bill may encourage future 
property sales to allow for proceeds to also be used for operating expenses. Likewise, to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 735/ Page 3 
the extent that these monies are used to replace planned higher education operating 
spending (as is likely in this instance), higher education expenditures are not directly 
affected. However, the bill may allow for a higher level of higher education operating 
expenditures.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 735/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
University System of Maryland – Facilities – Bonding Authority and 
Sale 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 735 
 
PREPARED BY: 
University System of Maryland 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4