START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 707 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 707 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Office of the Comptroller - Taxpayer Advocate Division 
 
  
This 
departmental 
bill 
establishes 
a 
Taxpayer 
Advocate 
Division 
in 
the 
Comptroller’s Office. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $294,700 in FY 2024. Future years 
reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
294,700 
349,600 
365,200 
381,400 
401,600 
Net Effect 
($294,700) 
($349,600) 
($365,200) 
($381,400) 
($401,600) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes a Taxpayer Advocate Division in the Comptroller’s 
Office. The head of the division is the taxpayer advocate, who must have a background in 
customer service and tax law and experience representing individual taxpayers. The 
taxpayer advocate has administrative control over the division, subject to the supervision 
of the Comptroller. The Comptroller must select the taxpayer advocate and the employees 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 707/ Page 2 
of the division, who may include employees from the Comptroller’s Office and residents 
of Maryland with knowledge of taxation. The taxpayer advocate must appoint other 
officers and employees of the division in accordance with the provisions of the State 
Personnel and Pensions Article. The division must include a minimum of six employees, 
including the taxpayer advocate, as well as appropriate support staff, one of whom must 
have experience in the field of information technology to serve as webmaster. The officers 
and employees of the division are entitled to a salary as provided in the State budget. The 
Department of Budget and Management, in coordination with the Comptroller’s Office, 
must make appropriate allocations for personnel, including the ability to reclassify 
positions. 
 
The division must:   
 
 
be subject to all confidentiality and disclosure provisions applicable to the 
Comptroller’s Office; 
 
be responsible for assisting taxpayers and their representatives to ensure that 
taxpayers and their representatives understand and utilize the policies, processes, 
and procedures available for the resolution of problems related to tax programs and 
debt collection programs administered by the Comptroller; 
 
assist taxpayers in resolving problems with the Comptroller’s Office; 
 
identify areas in which taxpayers experience problems in dealing with the 
Comptroller’s Office; 
 
provide expeditious service to taxpayers whose problems are not resolved through 
ordinary channels; 
 
collaborate with other employees of the Comptroller’s Office to resolve the most 
complex and sensitive taxpayer problems; 
 
resolve systemic problems experienced by taxpayers; 
 
report to the Comptroller if, in the opinion of the division, the Comptroller’s Office 
is administering a law improperly; 
 
participate and represent taxpayers’ interests and concerns in planning meetings, 
reviewing instructions, and formulating policies and procedures of the 
Comptroller’s Office; 
 
compile data each year on the number and type of taxpayer complaints and evaluate 
the actions taken to resolve the complaints; 
 
survey taxpayers each year to obtain their evaluation of the quality of service 
provided by the Comptroller’s Office; 
 
propose changes in the administrative practices of the Comptroller’s Office to 
mitigate issues in resolving problems and specified complaints; 
 
identify potential legislative or regulatory changes that may be appropriate to 
resolve any problems or complaints; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 707/ Page 3 
 
establish an electronic portal on the Comptroller’s website where taxpayers can 
interact with the division directly; and  
 
perform other related duties as assigned by the Comptroller. 
 
Current Law:  The Comptroller of the Treasury, elected by voters to a four-year term, 
administers general fund tax collection, State accounting systems, and State payroll. The 
Comptroller chairs the Board of Revenue Estimates and also serves as a member of the 
Board of Public Works, the Board of Revenue Estimates, the Board of Trustees of the 
Maryland State Retirement and Pension System, and the Maryland 529 Management 
Board. The Comptroller has primary responsibility for financial control and maintains the 
State’s general ledger and other official accounting records. 
 
The General Accounting Division performs compliance audits on all disbursements, 
prepares the State’s comprehensive annual financial reports, and exercises overall 
appropriation control. The Central Payroll Bureau processes approximately 107,000 
payroll checks and direct deposit transactions bi-weekly, and nearly three million employee 
wage payments annually. Mainframe computer services for several State agencies are 
managed by the Comptroller through the Annapolis Data Center, where agencies can 
access the computing resources of the center and are charged for the costs of the services 
used. 
 
The Director of the Bureau of Revenue Estimates staffs the Board of Revenue Estimates, 
which is composed of the Comptroller, the State Treasurer, and the Secretary of Budget 
and Management. The bureau examines the State’s economic and business climate for the 
potential impact on State revenues. Prior to each legislative session, the board prepares and 
presents an annual report to the Governor and General Assembly on State revenue 
projections and updates those estimates in March of each year. 
 
The Compliance Division enforces compliance with all State tax laws by conducting audits 
and collecting delinquent and unpaid taxes. The division is also responsible for the holding 
of unclaimed property and the distribution to rightful property owners.  
 
The Revenue Administration Division collects and processes State and local individual 
income taxes (including employee withholding); corporate income taxes; State sales and 
use tax, estate tax, alcohol, tobacco, and motor fuel taxes; and admissions and amusement 
taxes for local governments. The division directs these revenues to the proper statutorily 
assigned destinations such as the State’s general fund, the Transportation Trust Fund, the 
Higher Education Investment Fund, or to local governments. 
 
Enforcement of tax laws through auditing, testing, inspection, and compliance activities is 
also carried out under the direction of the Field Enforcement Division, the regulatory and 
enforcement arm of the Comptroller’s Office. The division’s agents and inspectors are 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 707/ Page 4 
responsible for the enforcement of the revenue laws relating to motor fuel, motor carrier, 
sales and use, and certain income taxes. Tasks include conducting investigations, arresting 
violators, and performing compliance inspections for proper licenses. The division also 
includes the State License Bureau, which is responsible for the monitoring, updating, and 
enforcement of the use of approximately 85,000 business licenses and coordinates license 
issues with the clerk of the courts in all counties. The Motor Fuel Testing Laboratory is 
responsible for testing motor fuel to ensure proper quality fuel is sold to consumers across 
the State.  
 
Background:  The bill is a result of one of several recommendations of the Comptroller’s 
Transition Report on ways to modernize the Comptroller’s Office. The report 
recommended the following:   
 
Transform the Ombudsman Office into a Taxpayer Advocate Office. The 
Comptroller’s Office was one of the first state departments of revenue to 
create an office dedicated to addressing taxpayer concerns. That office – the 
Office of the Ombudsman – serves as the agency’s liaison directly with 
taxpayers. The Office of the Ombudsman originally had one dedicated staff 
person and was later expanded to a three-member team (one of whom is 
Spanish-speaking, a best practice since adopted by other states). Considering 
the Office of the Ombudsman’s call and email volume and stakeholder 
feedback, the Comptroller should increase the number of staff in this area to 
enable the office to more quickly respond to taxpayer inquiries and address 
the needs of Maryland’s three million taxpayers.  
 
Additionally, the Ombudsman’s Office should be transformed into a 
Taxpayer Advocate Office, a model adopted by many private entities and the 
IRS. Under this model, dedicated Taxpayer Advocate Officers regularly 
engage with taxpayers and help to resolve their questions and concerns 
quickly and completely.  
 
Finally, to execute the Comptroller’s goals of transparency and efficiency in 
state government, the Comptroller’s Office should designate the leader of the 
Taxpayer Advocate Office as a member of the Comptroller’s Executive 
Team and develop metrics for assessing and reporting on the agency’s 
effectiveness in resolving taxpayer concerns in a timely and accurate way 
while identifying trending systemic issues requiring remediation with the 
goal of preventing others from coming to fruition. 
 
State Expenditures:  To comply with the staffing requirements of the bill, general fund 
expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by $294,700 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. The estimate reflects the cost of hiring four assistant 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 707/ Page 5 
taxpayer advocates to staff the division, as required by the bill. The remaining two positions 
required by the bill will be transferred from existing divisions within the 
Comptroller’s Office into the new taxpayer advocate division. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$265,094 
Operating Expenses 
    29,636 
Total FY 2024 Comptroller Expenditures 
$294,730 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 660 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Office of the 
Comptroller) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 707/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Office of the Comptroller – Taxpayer Advocate Division 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB707 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs, COM 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill creates the Taxpayer Advocate Division in the Office of the Comptroller to assist 
taxpayers and their representatives in resolving certain taxpayer problems and complaints. There 
is no discernible impact to small business.  
 

END OF PAGE 6