START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 785 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 785 
(Delegate S. Johnson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Step Therapy or Fail-First Protocol and Prior Authorization - 
Revisions 
 
 
This bill requires an insurer, nonprofit health service plan, and health maintenance 
organization (collectively known as carriers), including those that provide prescription 
drug coverage through a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM), to establish a process for 
requesting an exception to “a step therapy or fail-first protocol” that is clearly described, 
easily accessible to the prescriber, and posted on the carrier’s or PBM’s website. A “step 
therapy exception request” must be granted under specified circumstances, and an insured 
or enrollee may appeal the denial of a “step therapy exception request.” A carrier or PBM 
may use an existing step therapy exception process that satisfies the requirements of the 
bill. A private review agent must make a determination regarding a step therapy exception 
or prior authorization request submitted electronically within a specified timeframe. A 
carrier or PBM may not require more than one prior authorization of the same prescription 
drug (except for certain opioids) under specified circumstances. The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2024, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, 
delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2024 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of form 
filings can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Indeterminate but potentially 
significant impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 785/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Step therapy exception request” means a request to override a step 
therapy or fail-first protocol. “Step therapy or fail-first protocol” includes a protocol that 
meets the statutory definition, regardless of the name, label, or terminology used by the 
carrier to identify the protocol. 
 
Approval of Step Therapy Exception Requests 
 
A step therapy exception request must be granted if, based on the professional judgment of 
the prescriber and any required information and documentation required to be submitted 
with the request to be considered a complete request, (1) the step therapy drug is 
contraindicated or will likely cause an adverse reaction to the insured or enrollee; (2) the 
step therapy drug is expected to be ineffective based on the known clinical characteristics 
of the insured or enrollee and the known characteristics of the prescription drug regimen; 
(3) the insured or enrollee is stable on a prescription drug for the medical condition under 
consideration under the current or a previous source of coverage; or (4) the insured or 
enrollee, while covered by a current or previous source of coverage, has tried a prescription 
drug that is in the same pharmacologic class or uses the same mechanism of action as the 
step therapy drug and was discontinued by the prescriber due to lack of efficacy, 
diminished effect, or an adverse event. 
 
On granting a step therapy exception request, a carrier or PBM must authorize coverage 
for the prescription drug ordered by the prescriber for an insured or enrollee. 
 
Procedures for Determinations by Private Review Agents  
 
For a step therapy exception request or a prior authorization request for pharmaceutical 
services submitted electronically, a private review agent must make a determination in real 
time if (1) no additional information is needed to process the request and (2) the request 
meets the private review agent’s criteria for approval. If a request is not approved in real 
time, the private review agent must make a determination within one business day after 
receiving all information necessary to make the determination. 
 
Prohibition on Requiring Subsequent Prior Authorizations for Specified Prescriptions 
 
A carrier or PBM may not require more than one prior authorization if two or more tablets 
of different dosage strengths of the same prescription drug are (1) prescribed at the same 
time as part of an insured’s treatment plan and (2) manufactured by the same manufacturer. 
This prohibition does not apply if the prescription drug is an opioid that is not an opioid 
partial agonist. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 785/ Page 3 
Additional Provisions of the Bill 
 
The bill may not be construed to (1) prevent a carrier or PBM from requiring an insured or 
enrollee to try an AB-rated generic equivalent or interchangeable biological product before 
providing coverage for the equivalent branded prescription drug; (2) prevent a health care 
provider from prescribing a prescription drug that is determined to be medically 
appropriate; or (3) require a carrier or PBM to provide coverage for a prescription drug that 
is not covered by a policy or contract of the carrier or PBM. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Step Therapy/Fail-first Protocols 
 
“Step therapy or fail-first protocol” means a protocol established by a carrier that requires 
a prescription drug or sequence of prescription drugs to be used by an insured or enrollee 
before a prescription drug ordered by a prescriber is covered. 
 
A carrier may not impose a step therapy or fail-first protocol if the step therapy drug has 
not been approved by U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the medical condition being 
treated (i.e., off-label use) or a prescriber provides supporting medical information to the 
carrier or PBM that a prescription drug covered by the carrier or PBM (1) was ordered for 
the insured or enrollee within the past 180 days and (2) based on the professional judgment 
of the prescriber, was effective in treating the insured or enrollee. 
 
A carrier is also prohibited from imposing a step therapy or fail-first protocol if the 
prescription drug is used to treat the insured’s or enrollee’s stage four advanced metastatic 
cancer and use of the prescription drug is consistent with specified indications and 
supported by peer-reviewed medical literature. 
 
Private Review Agents 
 
A “private review agent” is a (1) nonhospital-affiliated person or entity performing 
utilization review that is either affiliated with, under contract with, or acting on behalf of a 
Maryland business entity or a third party that pays for, provides, or administers health care 
services to citizens of the State or (2) any person or entity performing utilization review 
for the purpose of making claims or payment decisions for health care services on behalf 
of the employer’s or labor union’s health insurance plan under an employee assistance 
program for employees other than the employees employed by the hospital or a business 
wholly owned by the hospital. A private review agent may not conduct utilization review 
in the State unless the Insurance Commissioner has granted the private review agent a 
certificate of registration. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 785/ Page 4 
Prior Authorizations for Prescription Drugs 
 
Chapter 549 of 2019 established requirements for prior authorization for a prescription for 
a chronic condition and requires specified entities to (1) maintain a database of information 
relating to prior authorization requests filed electronically; (2) provide a specific 
explanation when denying a prior authorization; (3) honor certain prior authorizations for 
a specified time period and under specified circumstances; and (4) provide specified notice 
of a new prior authorization requirement for a prescription drug. If a carrier requires a prior 
authorization for a prescription drug, the prior authorization request must allow a health 
care provider to indicate whether a prescription drug is to be used to treat a chronic 
condition. If a health care provider indicates as such, a carrier may not request a 
reauthorization for a repeat prescription for one year or for the standard course of treatment 
for the chronic condition, whichever is less. 
 
State Expenditures:  The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, with the exception of 
the one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), does not fall under the 
definition of carrier under the bill. However, the program provides prescription drug 
coverage through a PBM, which is subject to the bill’s requirements. The Department of 
Budget and Management advises that the bill would undermine the use of step therapy 
protocols for certain drugs classes and could result in steep cost increases. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. See HB 1359 
and SB 952 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 515 (Senator Lam) - Finance.  
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 785/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5