START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 783 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 783 
(Montgomery County Delegation and Prince George's 
County Delegation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission – Minority Business Enterprise 
Utilization Program – Revisions and Extension MC/PG 101–23 
 
 
This bill (1) renews the authorization for the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission 
(WSSC) to establish a minority business enterprise (MBE) procurement preference 
program until July 1, 2028; (2) eliminates the distinction between MBE programs 
established by WSSC for construction and goods/services; (3) establishes the legal 
justification for WSSC to operate an MBE program based on specified findings by the 
General Assembly; (4) streamlines and clarifies certification requirements for MBEs 
participating in the WSSC program; and (5) includes additional clarifying and technical 
changes to the WSSC MBE program authorization. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to WSSC. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill has no material effect on WSSC’s finances; WSSC can continue to 
operate its existing MBE program in accordance with the bill. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  For a detailed description of the State’s MBE program, on 
which the WSSC program is based, please see the Appendix – Minority Business 
Enterprise Program. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 783/ Page 2 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission 
 
Established in 1918, WSSC is among the largest water and wastewater utilities in the 
country, providing water and sewer services to 1.9 million residents in Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties. It has approximately 475,000 customer accounts, serves an area 
of approximately 1,000 square miles, and has networks of water pipelines and sewer 
pipelines each exceeding 5,500 miles. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program Authorization 
 
Under current law, WSSC must establish an MBE program for construction and 
design/build contracts, which is categorized as “mandatory,” and must establish an MBE 
program for contracts for goods and services only if specified conditions are met. Authority 
for these programs terminates June 30, 2023. The bill eliminates any distinction between 
the two programs and instead requires WSSC to establish a single MBE program, through  
July 1, 2028, if it determines that there is a strong basis in evidence that MBEs are subject 
to discrimination and that a program is necessary to remedy the effects of that 
discrimination. The bill includes the legal basis for that determination based on the results 
of a disparity study. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Definitions and Certification Requirements 
 
Current law includes a unique definition of MBEs for construction and design/build 
contracts but uses the definition of MBEs in State procurement law for goods and services 
contracts. The bill establishes a single definition of MBEs based on State procurement law. 
It also clarifies that an MBE certified by the State or by any other certification program 
that WSSC determines substantially duplicates the State’s requirements may participate in 
WSSC’s MBE program, under specified conditions. The bill also provides WSSC with 
flexibility to allow businesses that do not satisfy certification requirements to participate 
in the MBE program under specified conditions. 
 
Geographic Preference 
 
Current law requires regulations to include provisions that require an MBE’s geographic 
location and the principal place of business to be a consideration for participation in the 
WSSC MBE program for goods and services. It also establishes a 40% participation target 
each for businesses located in Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 783/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Certified minority- and women-owned businesses continue to 
benefit from the preferences provided by WSSC’s MBE program, as reconstituted by the 
bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 783/ Page 4 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. The 
Maryland Department of Transportation is the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
In August 2013, GOSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2023. GOSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total +2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 783/ Page 5 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require GOSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the 
State’s MBE program, the State conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is 
continued evidence that MBEs are underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The disparity study completed in 2017 serves as the basis for the most recent 
reauthorization of the MBE program. It found continued and ongoing disparities in the 
overall annual wages, business earnings, and rates of business formation between 
nonminority males and minorities and women in Maryland. For instance, average annual 
wages for African Americans (both men and women) were 37% lower than for comparable 
nonminority males; average annual wages for nonminority women were 33% lower than 
for comparable nonminority males. It also found continued disparities in the use of MBEs 
by the State compared to their availability in the marketplace to perform work in designated 
categories of work. For instance, African American-owned construction businesses were 
paid 5.1% of State construction contract dollars, but they made up 10.3% of the 
construction sector in the relevant State marketplace. Nonminority women-owned 
construction businesses were paid 7.5% of State construction contract dollars but made up 
13.7% of the construction sector. According to the analysis, these differences were large 
and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; Chapter 117 of 2022, which 
reauthorized the program for the ninth time since its inception, required a new disparity 
study to be completed by September 2023 to inform the subsequent reauthorization 
process. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation rates for major Executive Branch agencies 
based on contract awards made during fiscal 2021, the most recent year for which data is 
available. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 783/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2021 
 
Cabinet Agency 
% Participation 
Aging 
0.1% 
Agriculture 
5.0% 
Budget and Management 
1.0% 
Commerce 
2.2% 
Education 
4.4% 
Environment 
33.4% 
Executive Department 
2.2% 
General Services 
15.3% 
Health 
3.6% 
Higher Education Commission 
0.7% 
Housing and Community Development 
22.6% 
Human Services 
NA 
Information Technology 
6.0% 
Juvenile Services 
12.6% 
Labor 
3.3% 
Military 
1.4% 
Natural Resources 
1.2% 
Planning 
1.2% 
State Police 
8.2% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
33.3% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
21.5% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
32.8% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
28.20% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
17.8% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
24.5% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
23.9% 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.3% 
Statewide Total1 
17.2% 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
NA:  Not Available/Did Not Report 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 783/ Page 7 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A socially disadvantaged individual is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An economically disadvantaged 
individual is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2023 is $1,995,008. 
 

END OF PAGE 7