START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 700 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 700 
(Talbot County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Talbot County – Speed Monitoring Systems – Intersection of Maryland Route 
333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue 
 
   
This bill authorizes the placement of one speed monitoring system (speed camera) at the 
intersection of Maryland Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue (in 
Talbot County), subject to existing signage and placement requirements for speed cameras. 
The bill also requires a real-time display of a driver’s traveling speed. From the fines 
collected as a result of violations enforced by the speed camera, any balance remaining 
after cost recovery must be remitted to the Comptroller for distribution to the State 
Highway Administration (SHA) to be used solely to assist in covering the cost of roadway 
and pedestrian safety improvements in and around the affected area. The bill terminates 
September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues increase from FY 2024 to 2029 
to the extent the speed camera is placed as authorized. TTF expenditures increase 
correspondingly for roadway and pedestrian safety improvements in the affected area. 
General fund revenues may increase negligibly beginning in FY 2023 due to additional 
contested cases in District Court. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues increase from FY 2024 to 2029 to the extent the speed 
camera is placed as authorized, as discussed below. Expenditures increase only for 
implementation costs, with the remaining amounts remitted to the Comptroller for 
distribution to SHA.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 700/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the 
governing body of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). 
Before activating a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the 
location of the speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general 
circulation in the jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must ensure that each sign that 
designates a school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring 
systems are in use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device 
standards adopted by SHA. Additional restrictions apply in Prince George’s County. Also, 
in specified locations, each sign indicating the use of a speed camera must be near a device 
that displays a real-time posting of the driver’s speed. 
 
An authorizing ordinance or resolution adopted by the governing body of a local 
jurisdiction must establish certain procedures related to the movement or placement of 
speed monitoring systems. Specifically, if a jurisdiction moves (or places) a mobile (or 
stationary) speed monitoring system to (or at) a new location, the jurisdiction may not issue 
a citation for a violation recorded by that speed monitoring system (1) until signage is 
installed, as specified, and (2) for at least the first 15 calendar days after the signage is 
installed. 
 
From the fines (up to $40 per violation) generated by a speed monitoring system, the 
relevant jurisdiction may recover the costs of implementing the system and may, with 
limited exceptions, spend any remaining balance solely for public safety purposes, 
including for pedestrian safety programs. For certain speed camera authorizations, the 
remaining balance after cost recovery is instead distributed to SHA to assist in covering 
the costs related to roadway and pedestrian safety improvements in the area of the speed 
camera. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, the number of citations issued in Talbot County 
is expected to increase. As a result, the number of individuals opting for a trial in 
District Court is also likely to increase. Accordingly, general fund revenues may increase 
negligibly, as fine revenues paid by individuals convicted in District Court are paid into 
the general fund. The increase in District Court caseloads can be handled with existing 
resources.         
 
Local revenues increase from fiscal 2024 to 2029 to the extent that the speed camera is 
placed as authorized by the bill. This analysis assumes that the speed camera is placed by 
the Town of Oxford (rather than Talbot County). 
 
Likewise, if the authorization is used, expenditures increase over the same time period to 
procure, install, and maintain the additional camera and the real-time speed monitoring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 700/ Page 3 
device. Based on historical data and the use of speed camera systems in the State to date, 
the increase in revenues is likely to exceed the increase in expenditures. After cost 
recovery, the remaining revenues must be remitted to the Comptroller for distribution to 
SHA, which must then make the required improvements specified by the bill. 
 
Although the exact increase in revenues cannot be projected because the number of 
citations that might be issued in the area affected by the bill is unknown, for illustrative 
purposes only, revenues increase by $71,175 in fiscal 2024 (reflecting the bill’s 
October 1, 2023 effective date), by $94,900 from fiscal 2025 through 2028, and by 
$23,725 in fiscal 2029 (due to the bill’s September 30, 2028 termination date) under the 
following assumptions: 
 
 
one speed camera is placed in the area authorized by the bill; 
 
the speed camera captures an average of 10 violations per day; 
 
65% of violators prepay the fine (at $40); and 
 
35% of violators contest the citation in District Court. 
 
Also, under this scenario, a portion of the revenues would be retained for cost-recovery 
purposes, while any remaining balance would be remitted to the Comptroller for 
distribution to SHA as required by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1262 of 2022 and HB 1132 of 2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 303 (Senator Mautz) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3