START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 289

Chapter 289

(House Bill 702)

AN ACT concerning

Health Care Facilities – Nursing Homes – Acquisitions and Licensure

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Health Care Commission to provide certain
information regarding the acquisition of a nursing home to the Office of Health Care
Quality; requiring the Secretary of Health to consider the information before taking
certain action regarding licensure to operate a nursing home; and generally relating
to nursing homes.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–115 and 19–1401.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–120(k)(6)(ii) and 19–1401.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–115.

(a) In addition to the duties set forth elsewhere in this subtitle, in this Part II of
this subtitle, the Commission shall:

(1) Act as the State agency to represent the State under Title VI of the
federal Public Health Service Act; [and]

(2) Periodically participate in or perform analyses and studies that relate
to:

(i) Adequacy of services and financial resources to meet the needs of
the population;

(ii) Distribution of health care resources;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 289 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) Allocation of health care resources;

(iv) Costs of health care in relationship to available financial
resources; or

(v) Any other appropriate matter; AND

(3) WHEN EVALUATING A NOTICE OF ACQUISITION OR TRANSFER OF
INTEREST OF A NURSING HOME IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 19–120(K)(6)(II) OF THIS
TITLE, PROVIDE THE COMMISSION’S WRITTEN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
TO THE OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY, INCLUDING:

(I) QUALITY RATINGS OF FACILITIES CURRENTLY OR
PREVIOUSLY OWNED, WITHIN OR OUTSIDE THE STATE, BY THE PURCHASER OF THE
HEALTH CARE FACILITY, BASED ON THE MOST RECENT FIVE–STAR QUALITY
RATING SYSTEM ESTABLISHED BY THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID
SERVICES;

(II) FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 3–YEAR PERIOD:

1. EVIDENCE THAT FACILITIES CURRENTLY OR
PREVIOUSLY OWNED, WITHIN OR OUTSIDE THE STATE, BY THE PURCHASER OF THE
HEALTH CARE FACILITY MAINTAINED QUALITY ASSESSMENT AND ASSURANCE
COMMITTEES THAT MET AT LEAST QUARTERLY;

2. INSPECTION OF CARE REPORTS AND CORRECTIVE
ACTION PLANS OF FACILITIES CURRENTLY OR PREVIOUSLY OWNED, WITHIN OR
OUTSIDE THE STATE, BY THE PURCHASER OF THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY;

3. LICENSING AND CERTIFICATION SURVEYS AND
CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS OF FACILITIES CURRENTLY OR PREVIOUSLY OWNED,
WITHIN OR OUTSIDE THE STATE, BY THE PURCHASER OF THE HEALTH CARE
FACILITY; AND

4. LAWSUITS OR ARBITRATION FILINGS BY ANY PATIENT
OR PATIENT REPRESENTATIVE AGAINST FACILITIES CURRENTLY OR PREVIOUSLY
OWNED, WITHIN OR OUTSIDE THE STATE, BY THE PURCHASER OF THE HEALTH CARE
FACILITY;

(II) (III) THE TAX IDENTIFICATION NUMBER OF EACH
PURCHASER; AND

(III) (IV) THE PERSONAL CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID SERVICES CERTIFICATION NUMBER OF EACH PURCHASER.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 289

(B) THE FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED
TO THE OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL INCLUDE A SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS AND THE BASIS FOR THE
RECOMMENDATIONS.

[(b)] (C) In addition to the duties set forth elsewhere in this Part II of this
subtitle, the Governor shall direct, as necessary, a State officer or agency to cooperate in
carrying out the functions of the Commission.

[(c)] (D) This State recognizes the federal act and any amendment to the federal
act that does not require State legislation to be effective. However, if the federal act is
repealed or expires, this Part II of this subtitle remains in effect.

19–120.

(k) (6) This subsection does not apply to:

(ii) Acquisition of a health care facility if, at least 30 days before
making the contractual arrangement to acquire the facility, written notice of the intent to
make the arrangement is filed with the Commission and the Commission does not find,
within 30 days after the Commission receives notice, that the health services or bed
capacity of the facility will be changed, provided that, for a merger with or acquisition of an
existing general hospice, the purchaser of the general hospice may only acquire the
authority to provide home–based hospice services in jurisdictions in which the seller of the
general hospice is licensed to provide home–based hospice services;

19–1401.1.

(a) (1) In addition to the requirements for licensure of a related institution as
provided in this title, an applicant for licensure of a nursing home shall include in the
application the identity of:

(i) Any person with an ownership interest in the nursing home; and

(ii) Any management company, landlord, or other business entity
that will operate or contract with the applicant to manage the nursing home.

(2) (i) The person acquiring a nursing home shall provide the
Department with written notice of the acquisition or change in operator at the same time
as the notice required under § 19–120(k)(6)(ii) of this title is filed with the Maryland Health
Care Commission.

(ii) For other changes to the information required under paragraph
(1) of this subsection, the nursing home shall notify the Department within 30 days after
the effective date of the change.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 289 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) An applicant for licensure shall submit to the Secretary or the Secretary’s
designee evidence:

(1) That affirmatively demonstrates the ability of the applicant to comply
with minimum standards of:

(i) Medical care;

(ii) Nursing care;

(iii) Financial condition; and

(iv) Other applicable State or federal laws and regulations; and

(2) Regarding the regulatory compliance history and financial condition of
any health care facility owned or operated by the applicant in other jurisdictions.

19–1401.2.

(A) On review of the information required under § 19–1401.1 of this subtitle and
any other information that is relevant to the ability of the applicant to operate a nursing
home, the Secretary may:

(1) Approve an application for a license;

(2) Deny an application for a license;

(3) Approve an application for a license subject to conditions; or

(4) Revoke a license.

(B) BEFORE TAKING ACTION ON A LICENSE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE SECRETARY SHALL CONSIDER ANY FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE COMMISSION PROVIDED TO
THE OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY UNDER § 19–115 OF THIS TITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Health Care Commission, in consultation with stakeholders,
including the Medicaid Administration, the Office of Health Care Quality, nursing home
owners, consumer representatives, and representatives of organized labor, shall study and
make recommendations regarding the expansion of the certificate of need program over
acquisitions of nursing homes.

(b) The study required under subsection (a) of this section shall:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 289

(1) assess the elimination of patient rooms with more than two beds; and

(2) address any other issues related to acquisitions of nursing homes.

(c) On or before December 1, 2023, the Maryland Health Care Commission shall
report the findings and recommendations to the Senate Finance Committee and the House
Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
take effect October 1, 2023.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
3 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5