START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 726 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 726 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Autism Waiver - Military Families 
 
 
This bill requires that a child on the registry for the Waiver for Children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (Autism Waiver) remain on the registry if the child’s family relocates 
out of the State for military service. A child may be removed from the registry at the 
family’s request. If a child on the registry becomes eligible for services while the child’s 
family is out of the State for military service, the child must be eligible for services through 
the waiver if the family relocates to the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies current practice, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) administers the 
Autism Waiver. The waiver is open to children age 2 to 21 who need an Intermediate Care 
Facility for the Intellectually Disabled level of care and have an Individualized Education 
Plan for 15 hours of special education and related services. The Autism Waiver provides 
respite care, environmental accessibility adaptations, family consultation, residential 
habilitation, intensive individual support services, therapeutic integration, and adult life 
planning. In fiscal 2022, a total of 1,471 participants were served through the waiver at an 
average annual cost of $18,300. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 726/ Page 2 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) maintains and manages the waiver registry 
through a contracted vendor and performs eligibility verification. As of September 2022, 
there were 6,297 applicants on the waiver registry. On average 841 new individuals join 
the registry each year. 
 
MSDE advises that, under current practice, a child from a military family is not removed 
from the registry if the family moves out of the State due to a military transfer unless a 
parent requests that the child be removed. When the family returns to Maryland, if the child 
still meets eligibility requirements for the waiver and the family submits a request in 
writing to MSDE, the child’s name is placed at the top of the registry. MSDE tracks the 
number of military families on the registry and when they are relocated out of the State. 
Currently, 10 families are identified on the registry as a military family, 1 of which is out 
of the State. 
 
MDH advises that, although this is current practice for MSDE, a § 1115 waiver amendment 
is technically required to allow this practice. MDH further advises that it can apply for such 
an amendment using existing budgeted resources before the effective date of the bill. 
 
Chapter 464 of 2022, among other things, requires MDH, in conjunction with MSDE, to 
develop a plan to reduce the registry for the Autism Waiver that includes conducting 
eligibility determinations of individuals on the registry and, beginning in fiscal 2024, 
providing services to at least 50% of individuals determined eligible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 231 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2