START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 698

Chapter 698

(House Bill 745)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Law – False Statements – Emergency or Commission of Crime
(Antiswatting Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from making or causing to be made a false
statement, report, or complaint to a governmental emergency report recipient with
reckless disregard of causing bodily harm; providing that a person who violates this
Act is civilly liable to an individual harmed by the violation; and generally relating
to crimes involving the making of false statements.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–8A–19(d)(3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Law
Section 9–501.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 10–307
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

3–8A–19.

(d) (3) (i) A child may not be committed to the Department of Juvenile
Services for out–of–home placement if the most serious offense is:

1. Possession of cannabis under § 5–601(c)(2)(ii) of the
Criminal Law Article;

2. An offense that would be a misdemeanor if committed by
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 698 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

an adult, unless the offense involves a firearm; [or]

3. A technical violation, as defined in § 3–8A–19.6 of this
subtitle; OR

4. A FIRST–TIME VIOLATION FOR MAKING A FALSE
STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT OF AN EMERGENCY OR A CRIME UNDER §
9–501.1 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

(ii) This paragraph may not be construed to prohibit the court from
committing the child to another appropriate agency.

Article – Criminal Law

9–501.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “EMERGENCY” MEANS A CONDITION THAT:

(I) POSES AN IMMINENT THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY; AND

(II) RESULTS IN, OR IS LIKELY TO RESULT IN:

1. THE RESPONSE OF A PUBLIC OFFICIAL; OR

2. THE EVACUATION OF AN AREA, A BUILDING, A
STRUCTURE, A VEHICLE, OR ANY OTHER PLACE.

(3) “GOVERNMENTAL EMERGENCY REPORT RECIPIENT” MEANS:

(I) A PEACE OFFICER;

(II) A POLICE AGENCY OF THE STATE OR A UNIT OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT;

(III) A PERSON INVOLVED IN THE OPERATION OF A PUBLIC
SAFETY ANSWERING POINT, AS DEFINED IN § 1–301 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY
ARTICLE; OR

(IV) ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE OR CONTRACTOR
WHO IS AUTHORIZED TO RECEIVE REPORTS OF A CRIME OR AN EMERGENCY.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 698

(B) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT MAKE, OR CAUSE TO BE MADE, A STATEMENT,
REPORT, OR COMPLAINT OF AN EMERGENCY OR ALLEGING THE COMMISSION OF A
CRIME THAT THE PERSON KNOWS TO BE FALSE AS A WHOLE OR IN MATERIAL PART
TO A GOVERNMENTAL EMERGENCY REPORT RECIPIENT WITH RECKLESS DISREGARD
OF CAUSING BODILY HARM TO AN INDIVIDUAL AS A DIRECT RESULT OF A RESPONSE
TO THE STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT.

(2) A PERSON MAY NOT VIOLATE PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION BY MAKING A FALSE STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT ALLEGING
THE COMMISSION OF A CRIME IF THE RESULT OF THE STATEMENT, REPORT, OR
COMPLAINT IS A RESPONSE FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT AND SERIOUS PHYSICAL
INJURY OR SEVERE EMOTIONAL DISTRESS TO A PERSON OR THE DEATH OF A PERSON
AS A PROXIMATE RESULT OF LAWFUL CONDUCT ARISING OUT OF THE RESPONSE.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A
MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT
EXCEEDING 3 YEARS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $2,000 OR BOTH.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (B)(2) OF THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A
FELONY AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 10
YEARS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $20,000 OR BOTH.

(3) A FIRST–TIME VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION BY A MINOR IS A CIVIL
OFFENSE SUBJECT TO THE PROCEDURES AND DISPOSITIONS PROVIDED IN TITLE 3,
SUBTITLE 8A OF THE COURTS ARTICLE.

(4) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER PENALTY PROVIDED IN THIS
SUBSECTION, A COURT, IN IMPOSING A SENTENCE ON A PERSON CONVICTED OF
VIOLATING THIS SECTION, MAY ORDER THE PERSON TO REIMBURSE ANY
INDIVIDUAL WHO INCURS DAMAGES AS A PROXIMATE RESULT OF LAWFUL CONDUCT
ARISING OUT OF THE RESPONSE TO THE STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT.

(D) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION MAY BE CHARGED,
PROSECUTED, TRIED, AND CONVICTED IN:

(1) THE COUNTY WHERE THE DEFENDANT MADE THE FALSE
STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT;

(2) THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT
WAS RECEIVED BY A GOVERNMENTAL EMERGENCY REPORT RECIPIENT; OR
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 698 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE COUNTY IN WHICH A GOVERNMENTAL EMERGENCY REPORT
RECIPIENT RESPONDED TO THE STATEMENT, REPORT, OR COMPLAINT.

(E) IN ADDITION TO ANY PENALTIES UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION, A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS CIVILLY LIABLE TO ANY
INDIVIDUAL WHO IS INJURED AS A RESULT OF THE VIOLATION.

(F) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO CONFLICT WITH 47 U.S.C. §
230 OR 42 U.S.C. § 1983.

10–307.

(A) [A] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A
sentence imposed under this subtitle may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent
with a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing the violation of this subtitle.

(B) IF A PERSON IS CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF § 10–304(1)(I) OF THIS
SUBTITLE BASED ON A VIOLATION OF § 9–501.1 OF THIS ARTICLE, A SENTENCE
IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE CONCURRENT WITH A SENTENCE
IMPOSED UNDER § 9–501.1 OF THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other
application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared severable.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4