START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 462

Chapter 462

(House Bill 781)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Technology Development Corporation – Equitech Growth Fund and
Commission

FOR the purpose of establishing the Equitech Growth Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund
in the Maryland Technology Development Corporation; requiring interest earnings
of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; establishing the Equitech Growth
Commission to create a strategic plan and long–term goals for growing the State’s
innovation economy; and generally relating to the Equitech Growth Fund and
Commission.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–488
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–488.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 462 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE EQUITECH GROWTH COMMISSION.

(3) “FUND” MEANS THE EQUITECH GROWTH FUND.

(B) (1) THERE IS AN EQUITECH GROWTH FUND IN THE CORPORATION.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO SUPPORT THE ECONOMIC
COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH OF EMERGING AND ADVANCED
INDUSTRIES IN THE STATE THROUGH THE CREATION OF SUPPORTING
INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS, RESOURCES, AND DIVERSE WORKFORCE THAT BUILDS
THE STRENGTHS OF THE STATE’S ECONOMY.

(3) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(4) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND;

(II) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(III) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(6) THE FUND SHALL LEVERAGE INVESTMENT FROM THE PRIVATE
SECTOR, FUNDING FROM FEDERAL SOURCES, AND OTHER SOURCES OF FUNDING.

(C) (1) THE CORPORATION SHALL AWARD GRANTS, INVESTMENTS,
LOANS, OR OTHER FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE FUND TO PUBLIC,
NONPROFIT, OR PRIVATE ENTITIES IN THE STATE, INCLUDING INSTITUTIONS OF
HIGHER EDUCATION AND PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS.

(2) AWARDS FROM THE FUND SHALL TARGET:

(I) WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 462

(II) INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WILL ATTRACT AND RETAIN
BUSINESSES IN THE STATE.

(3) AWARDS SHALL BE CONSISTENT WITH THE 10–YEAR GOALS IN
THE STRATEGIC PLAN DEVELOPED BY THE COMMISSION.

(D) (1) (I) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN
THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $15,000,000 FOR AWARDS
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(II) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN
THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $30,000,000 FOR AWARDS
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(III) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN
THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $55,000,000 FOR AWARDS
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(IV) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2027, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN
THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $75,000,000 FOR AWARDS
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(V) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN
THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $75,000,000 FOR AWARDS
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(VI) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2029 2025 THROUGH 2033,
THE GOVERNOR MAY SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL A TOTAL AN
APPROPRIATION OF $250,000,000 $5,000,000 FOR AWARDS UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED UNDER THIS SECTION THAT IS NOT USED
BY THE END OF THE FISCAL YEAR SHALL BE DEPOSITED IN THE FUND.

(E) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH:

(1) A COMPETITIVE APPLICATION PROCESS;

(2) REVIEW CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES FOR MAKING AWARDS,
INCLUDING PRIVATE LEVERAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR AWARDS;

(3) PROCESSES AND METRICS FOR MONITORING EACH PROJECT AND
THE SUCCESS, ECONOMIC IMPACT, AND IMPACT OF THE AWARD ON THE STATE’S
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION IN THE STATE’S INNOVATION ECONOMY; AND
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 462 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) PROCESSES FOR ENSURING THAT THE PROGRAMMATIC FUNDS
AND LEVERAGED FUNDS ARE INVESTED WITHIN THE STATE.

(F) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
CORPORATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE
AND THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE ON AWARDS MADE FROM THE FUND.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE EQUITECH GROWTH FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Commission” means the Equitech Growth Commission.

(3) “HBCU” means the following historically Black colleges and
universities:

(i) Bowie State University;

(ii) Coppin State University;

(iii) Morgan State University; and

(iv) University of Maryland Eastern Shore.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 462

(b) There is an Equitech Growth Commission.

(c) The Commission consists of the following members:

(1) the Chief Executive Officer of the Maryland Technology Development
Corporation, or the Chief Executive Officer’s designee;

(2) the Executive Director of the Maryland Economic Development
Corporation, or the Executive Director’s designee;

(3) the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Secretary of Labor, or the Secretary’s designee;

(5) the State Superintendent of Schools, or the Superintendent’s designee:

(6) the President of Johns Hopkins University; or the President’s designee;

(7) the Chancellor of the University System of Maryland, or the
Chancellor’s designee;

(8) the Chair of the Maryland Life Sciences Advisory Board, or the Chair’s
designee;

(9) the following members appointed by the Governor:

(i) the president of an HBCU, or the president’s designee;

(ii) the president of a community college in the State, or the
president’s designee; ~~and~~

(iii) a representative of the Maryland Association of Counties;

(iv) a representative of the Maryland Tech Council; and

~~(iii)~~ (v) six members of the business community, of which at least:

1. three shall be women;

2. three shall be minorities;

3. two shall reside in a rural area; and

4. two shall have executive experience in an advanced
technology industry;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 462 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(10) three members of the business community appointed by the President
of the Senate, of which at least:

(i) two shall be women;

(ii) one shall be a minority;

(iii) one shall reside in a rural area; and

(iv) one shall have executive experience in an advanced technology
industry; and

(11) three members appointed by the Speaker of the House, of which at
least:

(i) two shall be women;

(ii) one shall be a minority;

(iii) one shall reside in a rural area; and

(iv) one shall have executive experience in an advanced technology
industry.

(d) The Maryland Technology Development Corporation shall staff the
Commission.

(e) (1) On or before July 1, 2025, the Commission shall develop an inclusive,
comprehensive, long–term strategic plan and 10–year goals for growing the State’s
innovation economy to be highly competitive with other states and regions relative to
growing, attracting, and retaining a skilled workforce and high–growth businesses.

(2) The Commission shall develop a strategic plan, driven through
public–private collaboration, on strategies to ensure the State meets the 10–year goals
developed by the Commission.

(3) The strategic plan shall include mechanisms to increase the
participation of communities in the innovation economy, to create pathways for
high–paying jobs, and to increase and to expand wealth in minority communities.

(4) On or before July 1, 2025, the Commission shall report the
Commission’s strategic plan to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 462

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of
June 30, 2025, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7