START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 701 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 701 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Community Health Resources Commission and Offices of the 
Comptroller, Treasurer, and Attorney General - Compensation and Pay Scales of 
Employees 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission (MCHRC), 
in consultation with the Secretary of Health, the Comptroller, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Budget and Management, the Treasurer, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Budget and Management, and the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Budget and Management, to each set the compensation or pay scale of specified employees. 
The Secretary of Budget and Management must consult with MCHRC and each agency to 
determine which positions the bill affects. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for MCHRC increase as early as FY 2024 based 
on the determinations made by the Secretary of Budget and Management, Secretary of 
Health, and MCHRC, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for the 
Comptroller’s Office, Treasurer’s Office, and Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
increase as early as FY 2024 based on the determinations made by the Secretary of Budget 
and Management and the head of each affected agency, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MCHRC may set the compensation of an employee in a position that (1) is 
unique to the commission; (2) requires specific skills or experience to perform the duties 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 701/ Page 2 
of the position; and (3) does not require the employee to perform functions that are 
comparable to functions performed in other units of the Executive Branch of State 
government. 
 
The Comptroller, Treasurer, and Attorney General may set the pay scale of an employee 
in a position that (1) is unique to the agency and (2) requires specific skills or experience 
to perform the duties of the position. 
 
Current Law:  Except for units of State government with independent personnel systems, 
the Secretary of Budget and Management must establish position classes, assign a rate of 
pay to each class, and ensure that positions in each class are generally similar in their duties, 
responsibilities, and qualifications. The State Personnel Management System managed by 
the Department of Budget and Management applies to most employees in the 
Executive Branch, but some agencies have independent personnel systems, most notably 
the Maryland Department of Transportation and the University System of Maryland. 
 
MCHRC is an independent commission that operates within the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH). The commission is composed of 11 members appointed by the Governor 
with the advice and consent of the Senate, and its purpose is to increase access to health 
care through community health resources. 
 
Additionally, Chapter 36 of 2021, The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future established the 
Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports within MCHRC. The 
consortium must complete certain tasks related to the development of coordinated 
community supports partnerships to meet student behavioral health needs and other related 
challenges, including developing a statewide framework for the creation of coordinated 
community supports partnerships, implementing a related grant program, evaluating a 
payment reimbursement program for providers, and developing a program for uninsured 
students. 
 
The other two independent commissions within MDH, the Maryland Health Care 
Commission and the Health Services Cost Review Commission, each currently have the 
same salary-setting authority granted to MCHRC under the bill. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill authorizes additional compensation to be paid to the 
MCHRC, Comptroller, Treasurer, and Attorney General employees determined by the 
Secretary of Budget and Management (in consultation with MCHRC and each affected 
agency) and in the amounts determined by MCHRC and each affected agency (in 
consultation with the Secretary of Health or Secretary of Budget and Management). 
Special fund expenditures for MCHRC and general fund expenditures for the Comptroller, 
Treasurer, and Attorney General increase to provide those employees with additional 
compensation; however, any such increase depends on the determinations made by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 701/ Page 3 
MCHRC, the three agencies, and the two secretaries, and a reliable estimate cannot be 
developed at this time. 
 
Since MCHRC only has nine budgeted staff in fiscal 2023 (with a tenth position authorized 
in the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced), the total special fund impact is unlikely to be 
significant. However, the general fund increase could be more pronounced since the 
Comptroller’s Office has more than 1,100 employees, the Treasurer’s Office has 
60 employees, and OAG has 294 employees (with an additional 57 positions authorized in 
the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 556 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3