START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 10

Chapter 10

(House Bill 777)

AN ACT concerning

Cigarettes – Wholesalers – Disclosure of Information

FOR the purpose of requiring each licensed cigarette wholesaler to submit complete and
accurate information in the form and manner the Comptroller requires to facilitate
compliance with certain provisions of law relating to cigarettes; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~
~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~to~~ ~~impose~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~civil~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~violation;~~ and generally
relating to licensed wholesalers and the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 16–506(a) and (b)(1) ~~and~~ ~~16–507(a)~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 16–507(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

16–506.

(a) (1) Not later than 21 days after the end of each calendar quarter, and more
frequently if so directed by the Comptroller, each licensed wholesaler shall submit
COMPLETE AND ACCURATE information in the form and manner the Comptroller requires
to facilitate compliance with this [subtitle] TITLE, including a list by brand family of the
total number of cigarettes, or in the case of roll–your–own cigarettes, the equivalent stick
count for which the licensed wholesaler affixed stamps during the previous calendar
quarter or otherwise paid the tax due for the cigarettes.

(2) The licensed wholesaler shall maintain and make available to the
Comptroller for a period of 5 years all invoices and documentation of sales of all
nonparticipating manufacturer cigarettes and any other information relied on in reporting
to the Comptroller.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 10 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) The Comptroller may disclose to the Attorney General and the
Executive Director any information received under this subtitle and requested by the
Attorney General or the Executive Director for purposes of determining compliance with
and enforcement of the provisions of this [subtitle] TITLE.

16–507.

(a) (1) In addition to or instead of any other civil or criminal remedy provided
by law, on a determination that a licensed wholesaler has violated § 16–504(c) or §
16–506(a) of this subtitle or any regulation adopted under this subtitle, the Executive
Director may revoke or suspend the license of any licensed wholesaler in the manner
provided under §§ 16–211 and 16–212 of this title.

~~(2)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~stamp~~ ~~affixed~~ ~~and~~ ~~each~~ ~~offer~~ ~~to~~ ~~sell~~ ~~cigarettes~~ ~~in~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~§~~
~~16–504(c)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~shall~~ ~~constitute~~ ~~a~~ ~~separate~~ ~~violation.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~ ~~may~~ ~~also~~ ~~impose~~ ~~a~~ ~~civil~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~amount~~
~~not~~ ~~to~~ ~~exceed~~ ~~the~~ ~~greater~~ ~~of~~ ~~500%~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~retail~~ ~~value~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~cigarettes~~ ~~sold~~ ~~or~~ ~~$5,000~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~
~~determination~~ ~~of~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~§~~ ~~16–504(c)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~or~~ ~~any~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~adopted~~ ~~under~~
~~that~~ ~~section.~~

(4) (I) IN ADDITION TO OR INSTEAD OF ANY OTHER CIVIL OR
CRIMINAL REMEDY PROVIDED BY LAW, ON A DETERMINATION THAT A LICENSED
WHOLESALER HAS VIOLATED § 16–506(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, ON BEHALF OF THE COMPTROLLER OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MAY
IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 FOR EACH VIOLATION.

(II) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS PARAGRAPH, EACH INCOMPLETE
OR INACCURATE SUBMISSION IN VIOLATION OF § 16–506(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE
SHALL CONSTITUTE A SEPARATE VIOLATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2