START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 592

Chapter 592

(House Bill 710)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Speed Monitoring Systems – Residential Districts

FOR the purpose of establishing that certain provisions of law authorizing the use of speed
monitoring systems in certain residential districts apply in Anne Arundel County;
and generally relating to speed monitoring systems in Anne Arundel County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–101(a) and (s) and 21–809(a)(1) and (8) and (b)(1)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–809(b)(1)(vi)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–101.

(a) In this title and Title 25 of this article the following words have the meanings
indicated.

(s) “Residential district” means an area that:

(1) Is not a business district; and

(2) Adjoins and includes a highway where the property along the highway,
for a distance of at least 300 feet, is improved mainly with residences or residences and
buildings used for business.

21–809.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 592 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(8) “Speed monitoring system” means a device with one or more motor
vehicle sensors producing recorded images of motor vehicles traveling at speeds at least 12
miles per hour above the posted speed limit.

(b) (1) (i) A speed monitoring system may not be used in a local jurisdiction
under this section unless its use is authorized by the governing body of the local jurisdiction
by local law enacted after reasonable notice and a public hearing.

(vi) This section applies to a violation of this subtitle recorded by a
speed monitoring system that meets the requirements of this subsection and has been
placed:

1. In ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, Montgomery County, or
Prince George’s County, on a highway in a residential district, as defined in § 21–101 of
this title, with a maximum posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour, which speed limit was
established using generally accepted traffic engineering practices;

2. In a school zone with a posted speed limit of at least 20
miles per hour;

3. In Prince George’s County:

A. Subject to subparagraph (vii)1 of this paragraph, on
Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head Highway); or

B. On that part of a highway located within the grounds of
an institution of higher education as defined in § 10–101(h) of the Education Article, or
within one–half mile of the grounds of a building or property used by the institution of
higher education where generally accepted traffic and engineering practices indicate that
motor vehicle, pedestrian, or bicycle traffic is substantially generated or influenced by the
institution of higher education;

4. Subject to subparagraph (vii)2 of this paragraph, on
Interstate 83 in Baltimore City; or

5. In Anne Arundel County, on Maryland Route 175 (Jessup
Road) between the Maryland Route 175/295 interchange and the Anne Arundel
County–Howard County line.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2