START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 710 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 710 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Anne Arundel County - Speed Monitoring Systems - Residential Districts 
 
 
This bill authorizes the placement of speed monitoring systems (speed cameras) in 
Anne Arundel County on highways in residential districts with a maximum posted 
speed limit of 35 miles per hour. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2024 due 
to additional contested cases in District Court. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in FY 2024 to 
the extent that additional speed cameras are placed as authorized. Expenditures increase 
for installation and maintenance, with the remaining amounts reserved for public safety 
purposes. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the 
governing body of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). 
Before activating a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the 
location of the speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general 
circulation in the jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign 
that designates a school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring 
systems are in use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device 
standards adopted by the State Highway Administration. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 710/ Page 2 
From the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction may 
recover the costs of implementing the system and may spend any remaining balance solely 
for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. However, if the 
balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 10% of the 
jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. 
 
In Montgomery and Prince George’s counties only, speed monitoring systems may be used 
on a highway in a residential district with a maximum posted speed limit of 35 miles per 
hour. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, the number of citations issued in Anne Arundel County 
(and in municipalities within the county) is expected to increase. As a result, the number 
of individuals opting for a trial in District Court is also likely to increase. Accordingly, 
general fund revenues likely increase minimally, as fine revenues paid by individuals 
convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. The increase in District Court 
caseloads can likely be handled with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in 
fiscal 2024 to the extent that Anne Arundel County (and municipalities within the county) 
authorize additional speed cameras as a result of the bill. Expenditures also increase for 
those jurisdictions beginning in fiscal 2024 to procure, install, and maintain additional 
speed cameras. Based on historical data and the use of speed camera systems in the State 
to date, the increase in revenues is likely to exceed the increase in expenditures. After cost 
recovery, the remaining revenues may only be expended for public safety purposes. Thus, 
expenditures also increase for public safety purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 679 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 710/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3