START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 792 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 792 
(Delegates Buckel and Hinebaugh) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System – Frostburg City Police Department 
 
 
This bill requires, if the Frostburg City Police Department becomes a participating 
governmental unit (PGU) in the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pensions System (LEOPS), 
that membership in LEOPS be mandatory for all current law enforcement officers 
employed by the Frostburg City Police Department. It further entitles current City of 
Frostburg law enforcement officers to eligibility and creditable service in LEOPS for their 
prior service in the Frostburg City Police Department. The bill also specifies the provisions 
in current law that govern the transfer of credit from the Employees’ Pension System (EPS) 
to LEOPS for affected members. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only the City of Frostburg. 
  
Local Effect:  Contingent on the City of Frostburg electing to participate in LEOPS as a 
PGU, total employer contributions increase by $130,300 as of the city’s decision to join 
LEOPS. No material effect on pension liabilities or employer contributions for other 
LEOPS PGUs. No effect on local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  LEOPS was established on July 1, 1990, with participation 
a condition of employment for specified public safety officers. Members of LEOPS earn 
2.0% of their average final compensation (AFC) for each year of creditable service. 
Vested members qualify for a normal service retirement benefit at age 50 or with at least 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 792/ Page 2 
25 years of creditable service. However, the normal service allowance is capped at 65% of 
AFC, meaning that members stop accruing benefits after 32.5 years of service 
(2% x 32.5 = 65%). Chapter 784 of 2018 increased the cap on LEOPS normal service 
retirement from 60% to 65% of AFC. The member contribution is 7% of earnable 
compensation. 
 
Counties and municipal corporations in the State are eligible to participate in LEOPS as 
PGUs. If 60% of the law enforcement officers in an eligible governmental unit petition to 
become members of LEOPS, the legislative body of the eligible local government may 
approve their participation. 
 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs the conditions under which 
members of one State or local pension system can transfer service credit to another State 
or local pension system. Under Title 37, a “new system” means the system into which the 
member is transferring service credit, and “previous system” means the system from which 
the individual is transferring. Members transferring creditable service from EPS to another 
system must pay the difference in the member contribution rates in effect for the period of 
service covered by the transferred service credit, plus interest. They are also refunded any 
accumulated contributions in the previous system that are in excess of the member 
contributions required by the new system. As the City of Frostburg participates in the 
contributory benefit within EPS, participating members have contributed 2% of their 
compensation for their time in EPS. Under Title 37, they would have to make payments 
equivalent to 5% of their compensation for every year of past service (the difference 
between 2% under EPS and 7% under LEOPS), plus interest. 
 
However, the bill exempts the transfer of service for the City of Frostburg’s law 
enforcement officers from Title 37, so the individuals who are transferring credit do not 
have to make up the difference between employee contributions for their past service. 
Instead, the Frostburg City Police Department is responsible for making up the difference 
through annual liability payments to LEOPS. The Department of Legislative Services notes 
that normally a PGU does not require authorizing legislation to join LEOPS; however, the 
City of Frostburg requires State legislation in order to exempt its members from Title 37. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The City of Frostburg currently participates as a PGU in the 
contributory EPS benefit for its employees, including law enforcement officers. If the city 
elects to allow the Frostburg City Police Department to become a LEOPS PGU, the State 
Retirement Agency advises that 12 law enforcement officers with a covered payroll of 
$576,008 from the Frostburg City Police Department are eligible for the transfer of 
membership and service credit under the bill. The employer contribution rate increases 
from 8.89% of pay in EPS to 36.91% in LEOPS. Therefore, the City of Frostburg’s annual 
employer contribution initially increases by $161,397 each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 792/ Page 3 
However, the withdrawal of 12 officers from EPS results in an actuarial credit for the 
City of Frostburg. This credit is determined by comparing the unfunded accrued liability 
of the withdrawing officers from EPS with the value of that unfunded accrued liability in 
LEOPS after accounting for a transfer of assets between the two plans. The system’s 
actuary advises that this calculation results in a new entrant credit of $381,852. That credit 
is amortized over 25 years, resulting in an annual new entrant credit of $31,138, which is 
subtracted from the annual employer contribution discussed above. Therefore, the city’s 
total employer contribution increases by approximately $130,259 annually. Any increase 
in employer contributions would begin upon the election to join LEOPS and increase 
thereafter according to actuarial assumptions. 
 
Based on the actuarial analysis conducted by the system’s actuary, total employer liabilities 
within the municipal LEOPS pool are affected only marginally, resulting in no discernible 
change in employer contributions for other PGUs already in LEOPS. 
 
Additional Comments:  If the Frostburg City Police Department becomes a LEOPS PGU, 
participating members will contribute 7% of their compensation annually, compared with 
2% for the contributory EPS benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 276 (Senator McKay) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3