START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 791 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 791 
(Delegate Hornberger, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Law Enforcement Officers' Pension System - Membership - Emergency Medical 
Technicians 
 
 
This bill allows emergency medical technicians (EMTs) employed by a participating 
governmental unit (PGU) to participate in the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System 
(LEOPS) if their employer elects to join LEOPS. The bill applies only to paid EMTs, not 
volunteer EMTs. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill applies only to PGUs. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature, allowing PGUs that elect to participate in 
LEOPS to include paid EMTs as members. Any costs associated with a decision to 
participate in LEOPS are borne by a PGU that elects to participate. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  LEOPS was established on July 1, 1990, with participation a condition of 
employment for specified public safety officers. Members of LEOPS earn 2% of their 
average final compensation (AFC) for each year of creditable service. Vested members 
qualify for a normal service retirement benefit at age 50 or with at least 25 years of 
creditable service. However, the normal service allowance is capped at 65% of AFC, 
meaning that members stop accruing benefits after 32.5 years of service 
(2% x 32.5 = 65%). Chapter 784 of 2018 increased the cap on LEOPS normal service 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 791/ Page 2 
retirement from 60% to 65% of AFC. The member contribution is 7% of earnable 
compensation. 
 
Counties and municipal corporations in the State are eligible to participate in LEOPS as 
PGUs. If 60% of the law enforcement officers or paid firefighters (including paid 
paramedics) in an eligible governmental unit petition to become members of LEOPS, the 
legislative body of the eligible local government may approve their participation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 368 (Senator Jackson, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Caroline and Prince George’s counties; 
City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; State Retirement Agency; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2