START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 784 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 784 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B and Class C Beer, Wine, 
and Liquor Licenses, Inspections, Penalties, and Workgroup  
PG 302-23 
 
 
This bill establishes a framework for inspections of licensed premises performed by or on 
behalf of the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners, as specified. The 
bill establishes a Workgroup to Study Best Practices for Safe Event Promotion and the 
Leveraging of Alcoholic Beverages Licenses in Prince George’s County. The bill also 
requires the board to establish a standard fine structure for violations of alcoholic beverages 
laws, as specified, and clarifies a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license holder, a Class C 
(fraternal/sororal/service organization) beer, wine, and liquor license holder, and a Class C 
(veterans’ organization or club) beer, wine, and liquor license holder may serve beer, wine, 
and liquor by the glass or by the bottle for on-premises consumption. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. The provisions pertaining to the workgroup terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Prince George’s County 
revenues. Prince George’s County can likely handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 784/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Inspections of Licensed Premises 
 
Under current law, a local licensing board, an authorized agent of the licensing board, or a 
peace officer may inspect and search a building, vehicle, or premises where alcoholic 
beverages are authorized to be kept, transported, manufactured, or sold under a license or 
permit, as specified. 
 
Under the bill, the board or person on behalf of the board may conduct an inspection of a 
licensed premises with or without prior notification to (1) aid the board in any matter 
pertaining to alcoholic beverages; (2) conduct background investigations and criminal 
history records checks on license applicants; (3) make routine inspections of licensed 
establishments in the county to ensure that they comply with all appropriate State laws, 
restrictions, and board rules and regulations; (4) coordinate information with other 
appropriate agencies; (5) take appropriate action on any written report of violations 
forwarded by a uniformed officer of a municipal or county police department, the 
Maryland-National Capital Park Police, or the State police; (6) investigate complaints 
made against a licensed establishment; and (7) initiate covert inspections and investigations 
of licensed establishments that may be necessary to ensure compliance or to prove or 
disprove alleged violations. 
 
The inspector must provide the license holder and the board with an inspection report 
within five days of an inspection. Covert inspections and investigations of licensed 
establishments are exempt from this requirement. 
 
By December 31 each year, the board must publish on the board’s website a list of the total 
inspections conducted of each licensed premises by the board during the prior 
calendar year.  
 
Unless an inspection is performed on the board’s behalf and does not relate to health and 
safety, the above does not apply to inspections conducted by a police department, a fire 
department or fire inspector, or a health department. 
 
Fine Structure 
 
Under the bill, the board must establish a standard fine structure for violations of the 
Alcoholic Beverages Article that gives the board flexibility to consider aggravating or 
mitigating factors when determining the amount of a fine.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 784/ Page 3 
The board must publish monthly and maintain on its website (1) a list of penalties for 
violations and (2) the standard fine structure, as specified. 
 
Workgroup to Study Best Practices for Safe Event Promotion and the Leveraging of 
Alcoholic Beverages Licenses in Prince George’s County 
 
The workgroup is comprised of several members, including the Chair of the  
Prince George’s County Senate Delegation, the Chair of the Prince George’s County House 
Delegation, the Chair of the Prince George’s County Council, the Prince George’s County 
State’s Attorney, the Chair and the Director of the Prince George’s County Board of 
License Commissioners, and specified local members as appointed by the Chair of the 
Prince George’s County House Delegation or the Prince George’s County Executive. 
Members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses 
under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The workgroup must (1) identify any current barriers to safe event promotion in the county, 
(2) identify available options for safe event promotion activities and restrictions; (3) review 
current and previous practices of event promotion; (4) make recommendations on best 
practices for safe event promotion and the feasibility of permitting event promoters in the 
county; and (5) examine how other counties leverage alcoholic beverages licenses to 
generate revenue. 
 
By December 1, 2024, the workgroup must submit a report with recommendations to the 
Chair of the Prince George’s County Council, the Prince George’s County Executive, the 
Chair of the Prince George’s County Senate Delegation and the Chair of the 
Prince George’s County House Delegation. The workgroup may establish a 
sub-workgroup to assist in performing the workgroup’s duties, including conducting 
research and producing reports. The sub-workgroup may include an individual who is not 
a member of the workgroup, such as a representative of a relevant expert. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 784/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4