START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 751 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 751 
(Delegate Bridges) 
Appropriations 
Judicial Proceedings and Budget and Taxation 
 
Public Safety – Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant Fund, a special 
fund administered by the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services (GOCPYVS), to provide grants to “local law enforcement agencies” for Mental 
Health First Aid for Public Safety (MHFAPS) training and Critical Incident Stress 
Management (CISM) peer support training. For fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter, 
the Governor may include in the annual budget bill an appropriation for the fund. The bill 
establishes related reporting requirements. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $27,800 in FY 2024 for 
administrative costs, and, under one set of assumptions, by more than $1.0 million annually 
thereafter to capitalize and administer the fund. Special fund revenues increase by 
$1.0 million annually beginning in FY 2025, reflecting receipt of the capitalization 
funding; special fund expenditures increase correspondingly for grant awards. Grant 
revenues and expenditures increase beginning as early as FY 2025 for any State law 
enforcement agencies that receive grants from the fund (not reflected below). 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
GF Expenditure 
$27,800 
$1,083,000 
$1,086,600 
$1,090,500 
$1,095,300 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
Net Effect 
($27,800) 
($1,083,000) 
($1,086,600) 
($1,090,500) 
($1,095,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government grant revenues and expenditures likely increase 
beginning as early as FY 2025. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 751/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund 
and money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Money disbursed 
from the fund must be used solely to supplement, and not supplant, funds otherwise 
available to local law enforcement agencies. 
 
Within 90 days after the end of a grant cycle, an eligible local law enforcement agency that 
received a grant must submit to the executive director the following information:  (1) proof 
of the expenditure of the grant funds; (2) the total number of grants awarded and amount 
per police officer; (3) the total number of grants awarded separated by training program; 
and (4) any related outcome-based performance measures. By December 31, 2023, and by 
each December 31 thereafter, the executive director must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the information provided by local law enforcement agencies under 
these provisions. 
 
“Local law enforcement agency” means a governmental police force, sheriff’s office, or 
security force or law enforcement organization of the State or a county or a municipality 
of the State that by statute, ordinance, or common law is authorized to enforce the general 
criminal laws of the State.   
 
Current Law:  GOCPYVS plans, promotes, and funds efforts with government entities, 
private organizations, and the community to advance public policy, enhance public safety, 
reduce crime and juvenile delinquency, and serve victims. As a result of Chapter 59 of 
2021 (The Maryland Police Accountability Act of 2021), GOCPYVS established the Police 
Accountability, Community, and Transparency (PACT) Grant Program to ensure law 
enforcement departments are in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 59. Among 
other things, the PACT Grant Program covers mental health-related and CISM peer support 
training courses. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes $8.0 million in general 
funds for the grant program.  
 
In addition, the State Aid for Police Protection (SAPP) Fund is a formula-driven funding 
program used to supplement resources for police protection in local communities. State 
funds are generally distributed on a per capita basis with jurisdictions with higher 
population density receiving greater per capita grants. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced 
includes $121.7 million in general funds for SAPP. 
 
The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) State CISM 
team assists emergency medical services, fire, law enforcement, dispatch centers, and other 
responders in mitigating and responding to the normal emotional and psychological effects 
experienced following stressful responses and critical incidents. This is accomplished 
through education and training in advance of events and in individual and group 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 751/ Page 3 
discussions following critical incidents. The team is made up of volunteer peer support and 
licensed mental health personnel who have been trained to assist responders in dealing with 
normal reactions to abnormal events. Communications with the team are voluntary and 
confidential. MIEMSS has also chaired symposiums with all CISMs and peer support 
groups across the State.         
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant Fund – Capitalization of the Fund 
Beginning in Fiscal 2025 
 
Although the bill does not establish a mandated appropriation to the fund and does not 
otherwise indicate an intended level of funding for the grant program, this analysis assumes 
that $1.0 million annually is needed to operate a viable grant program. Thus, general fund 
expenditures increase by $1.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to capitalize the 
Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant Fund. Special fund revenues to and 
expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly, reflecting receipt of the capitalization 
funding and the disbursement of grants to local law enforcement agencies for MHFAPS 
training and CISM peer support training. As funding for the grant program is discretionary, 
the actual amount appropriated to the fund in any given year may vary from this estimate. 
 
Administrative Expenditures Beginning in Fiscal 2024 
 
General fund expenditures for GOCPYVS increase by $27,813 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for a nine-month start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date. 
Although the assumed capitalization of the fund does not begin until fiscal 2025, staffing 
is necessary in late fiscal 2024 to develop policies and procedures for the grant program 
and to initiate the grantmaking process prior to grant funding being available. Therefore, 
this estimate reflects the cost of hiring one grants manager in April 2024 to develop and 
oversee the grant program. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$20,934 
Operating Expenses 
6,879 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$27,813 
 
Future year administrative expenditures – which range from $82,963 in fiscal 2025 to 
$95,308 in fiscal 2028 – reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Because the bill does not explicitly authorize the new special fund to be used for 
administrative costs, this analysis assumes that additional general funds – beyond the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 751/ Page 4 
capitalization funding discussed above – are needed to cover the administrative costs 
incurred by GOCPYVS each year.  
 
State Law Enforcement Agencies as Grant Recipients 
 
State law enforcement agencies likely benefit from grant awards beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025; however, the distribution of grant awards across all eligible law enforcement 
agencies cannot be predicted. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local grant revenues and expenditures likely increase beginning as 
early as fiscal 2025 for MHFAPS training and CISM peer support training. However, the 
distribution of grant awards across all eligible law enforcement agencies cannot be 
predicted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 580 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings and Budget 
and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, 
and Victim Services; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4