START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 437

Chapter 437

(House Bill 706)

AN ACT concerning

~~Economic~~ Community Development – Sustainable Communities – Business
Facade Improvement Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Business Facade Improvement Program in the
Department of ~~Commerce~~ Housing and Community Development to assist certain
qualified businesses located in sustainable communities with improving the outside
appearance of the qualified businesses’ buildings or facilities; and generally relating
to the Business Facade Improvement Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – ~~Economic~~ ~~Development~~ Housing and Community Development
Section ~~1–101(a),~~ ~~(b),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(c)~~ 1–101(a), (c), (d), and (i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
~~(2018~~ (2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – ~~Economic~~ ~~Development~~ Housing and Community Development
Section ~~5–2301~~ ~~through~~ ~~5–2303~~ 6–1101 through 6–1103 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle ~~23.~~ 11. Business Facade Improvement Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
~~(2018~~ (2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Economic~~ ~~Development~~

~~1–101.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~division~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~“County”~~ ~~means~~ ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~or~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~“Department”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Commerce.~~

Article – Housing and Community Development

1–101.

(a) In this Division I of this article the following words have the meanings
indicated.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 437 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) “County” means a county of the State or Baltimore City.

(d) “Department” means the Department of Housing and Community
Development.

(i) “Political subdivision” means a county or municipal corporation of the State.

SUBTITLE ~~23.~~ 11. BUSINESS FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.

~~5–2301.~~ 6–1101.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE BUSINESS FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.

(C) “QUALIFIED BUSINESS” MEANS A BUSINESS THAT:

(1) IS LOCATED IN A SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY; AND

(2) PLANS TO IMPROVE THE OUTSIDE APPEARANCE OF THE
BUSINESS’S BUILDING OR FACILITY.

(D) “SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY” MEANS AN AREA DESIGNATED AS A
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY UNDER § 6–205 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE THIS TITLE.

~~5–2302.~~ 6–1102.

(A) THERE IS A BUSINESS FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST QUALIFIED BUSINESSES
WITH IMPROVING THE OUTSIDE APPEARANCE OF THE BUSINESSES’ BUILDINGS AND
FACILITIES.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DISTRIBUTE FUNDS FROM THE
PROGRAM TO COUNTIES POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS THAT:

(I) HAVE AT LEAST ONE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY; AND

(II) APPLY FOR THE FUNDS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 437

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP:

(I) AN APPLICATION PROCESS FOR COUNTIES POLITICAL
SUBDIVISIONS SEEKING TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM; AND

(II) CRITERIA FOR:

1. RATING COUNTIES POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS THAT
APPLY FOR FUNDS; AND

2. AWARDING FUNDS TO COUNTIES POLITICAL
SUBDIVISIONS.

(D) (1) EACH COUNTY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT RECEIVES FUNDS
UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION SHALL DISTRIBUTE GRANTS TO
QUALIFIED BUSINESSES THAT APPLY FOR A GRANT.

(2) EACH COUNTY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION SHALL DEVELOP:

(I) A GRANT APPLICATION PROCESS FOR QUALIFIED
BUSINESSES SEEKING TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM; AND

(II) CRITERIA FOR:

1. RATING QUALIFIED BUSINESSES THAT APPLY FOR
GRANTS; AND

2. AWARDING GRANTS TO QUALIFIED BUSINESSES.

(E) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$5,000,000 TO THE PROGRAM.

~~5–2303.~~ 6–1103.

THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3