START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 768 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 768 
(Delegate Buckel) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Economic Development - Western Maryland Economic Future Investment Board 
and Senator George C. Edwards Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the Western Maryland Economic Future Investment program by (1) making 
changes to the membership of the Western Maryland Economic Future Investment Board 
and its related powers and duties and (2) creating an executive director position, subject to 
specified requirements and salary. The executive director must manage the administrative 
and technical affairs of the board and may assist in the administration of the related  
Senator George C. Edwards Fund. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall State expenditures are not materially affected. The FY 2024 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $10.0 million for the Western Maryland 
Economic Future Investment Program, which is already authorized to pay for related 
administrative expenses through the Senator George C. Edwards Fund. Any additional 
expense reimbursements for board members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
The Tri-County Council for Western Maryland is already required to staff the  
Western Maryland 
Economic Future Investment 
Board and administer the  
Senator George C. Edwards Fund, and receives assistance with staffing the board and, 
potentially, administering the fund, from the newly created executive director position 
under the bill. Any additional staffing costs are assumed to be minimal and absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 768/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The membership of the Western Maryland Economic Future Investment 
Board is altered, mostly to add nonvoting members. The bill also specifies that the voting 
members 
have 
final 
approval 
authority 
on 
disbursements 
from 
the  
Senator George C. Edwards Fund and projects selected under the Western Maryland 
Economic Future Investment Program.  
 
The board must appoint an executive director, who must manage the administrative affairs 
and technical activities of the board, in accordance with policies and procedures established 
by the board, and has other specified responsibilities. The executive director may also assist 
in administering the Senator George C. Edwards Fund. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 62 and 63 of 2022 established the Western Maryland Economic 
Future Investment program and board and the Senator George C. Edwards Fund. The 
Tri-County Council for Western Maryland must staff the board and administer the fund. 
The purpose of the fund is to provide grants and loans for capital infrastructure projects 
and business development projects that improve economic conditions in the region; it may 
only be used for that purpose and administrative expenses. A (council) member county or 
local entity within a member county may apply for funding, as specified. From fiscal 2024 
through 2026, the Governor must annually appropriate at least $10.0 million to the fund in 
the State operating or capital budget. The fiscal 2023 budget includes $20.0 million for the 
program. 
 
A member county or local entity within a member county may submit a proposal for 
funding under the program. To qualify, a project must be:   
 
 
a capital infrastructure project that (1) is linked to economic development in the 
region, as approved by the board and (2) receives 20% matching funds from the 
member county where the project is located, another local entity, a private business, 
or a combination thereof; 
 
a business development project that (1) encourages and promotes downtown 
neighborhood revitalization, small business tourism, or other areas as approved by 
the board and (2) receives 10% matching funds from the member county where the 
project is located, another local entity, a private business, or a combination thereof; 
or 
 
any other project that the board determines is appropriate to promote economic 
development in the region. 
 
The board must develop criteria to review, evaluate, and rate project proposals for funding 
under the program and must distribute funding in accordance with those criteria; however, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 768/ Page 3 
the criteria must ensure that the project creates or retains jobs, creates or retains businesses, 
increases wages, or creates new State or local tax revenue. 
 
The board must monitor and track the progress of each project that receives funding. If the 
board determines that sufficient progress is not being made toward achieving program 
requirements, the board may reclaim the awarded funds. The funding provided under the 
program must be used to supplement, and not supplant, any funds that would otherwise be 
provided to the board or the member counties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 865 (Senators Corderman and McKay) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Garrett and Washington counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3