START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 92

Chapter 92

(House Bill 764)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County Housing Opportunities Commission – Collective
Bargaining Agreement Implementation – Impasse Arbitration

MC 10–23

FOR the purpose of altering the terms and conditions of a certain final offer that the
Executive Director of the Housing Opportunities Commission of Montgomery County
is required to submit to the Montgomery Commission; authorizing the parties to a
collective bargaining agreement for employees of the ~~Housing~~ ~~Opportunities~~
~~Commission~~ ~~of~~ ~~Montgomery~~ ~~County~~ Montgomery Commission to request the services
of a mediator–arbitrator during a term of a collective bargaining agreement under
certain circumstances; establishing the process for mediation–arbitration; requiring
the parties to share equally the costs of the mediator–arbitrator’s services; and
generally relating to collective bargaining for employees of the Housing
Opportunities Commission of Montgomery County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–310
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–310.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

16–310.

(a) (1) If the parties have not reached an agreement on or before December 1
on a collective bargaining agreement that would become effective the following July 1, the
parties shall jointly appoint a mediator–arbitrator panel.

(2) If the parties are unable to agree on a jointly appointed
mediator–arbitrator as required under § 16–311 of this subtitle, the labor relations
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 92 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

administrator shall name the jointly appointed mediator–arbitrator on or before December
7.

(3) Notwithstanding appointment of the mediator–arbitrator panel, this
subsection does not require beginning mediation–arbitration before the date set forth in
subsection (b)(2) of this section.

(b) (1) During the collective bargaining:

(i) either party may declare an impasse and request the services of
the mediator–arbitrator panel; or

(ii) the parties may jointly request the services of a
mediator–arbitrator panel before an impasse is declared.

(2) If the mediator–arbitrator panel finds in the discretion of the panel that
the parties are at a bona fide impasse, or on February 1, if they still have not agreed on a
contract, whichever happens first, the mediator–arbitrator panel shall require the parties
to submit:

(i) a joint memorandum listing all items to which the parties have
previously agreed; and

(ii) a separate memorandum of the party’s last final offer presented
in negotiations on all items to which the parties have not previously agreed.

(c) (1) On or before February 10, if the parties have not agreed on a contract,
the mediator–arbitrator panel shall hold a nonpublic hearing on the parties’ proposals at a
time, date, and place chosen by the mediator–arbitrator panel.

(2) Each party shall submit evidence or make oral and written argument
in support of the party’s last final offer.

(3) The mediator–arbitrator panel may not open the hearing to a person
who is not a party to the mediation–arbitration.

(d) (1) On or before February 15, the mediator–arbitrator panel shall issue a
report choosing the final offer that the mediator–arbitrator panel determines to be more
reasonable when viewed as a whole.

(2) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, in determining the more
reasonable offer, the mediator–arbitrator panel may consider only:

(i) past collective bargaining contracts between the parties,
including the bargaining history that led to the agreement or the precollective bargaining
history of employee wages, hours, benefits, and other working conditions;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 92

(ii) a comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of
employment of similar employees of other public employers in the Washington
Metropolitan Area and in the State;

(iii) a comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of
employment of similar employees of private employers in Montgomery County;

(iv) the public interest and welfare;

(v) the ability of the employer to finance any economic adjustments
required under the proposed agreement;

(vi) the effects of any economic adjustments on the standard of public
services normally provided by the employer; and

(vii) the annual increase or decrease in consumer prices for all items
as shown in the most recent Consumer Price Index – Wage Earners and Clerical Workers
(“CPI–W”) for the Washington Metropolitan Area.

(3) In considering the terms and conditions of the final offer regarding
wages, the mediator–arbitrator panel shall first consider and give the highest priority to
the ability of the Montgomery Commission to pay for additional short–term and long–term
expenses by considering:

(i) the limits on the ability of the Montgomery Commission to raise
revenue;

(ii) the added burden raising revenue would have on customers of
the Montgomery Commission; and

(iii) the ability of the Montgomery Commission to continue providing
the current level of service to its customers.

(4) In determining the more reasonable offer, the mediator–arbitrator
panel shall consider that all items on which the parties agreed before the
mediation–arbitration are integrated with each offer.

(5) The mediator–arbitrator panel may not receive or consider the history
of collective bargaining relating to the immediate dispute, including any offers of
settlement not contained in the offer submitted to the mediator–arbitrator panel.

(e) The mediator–arbitrator panel may not compromise or alter the final offer
that the mediator–arbitrator panel chooses.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 92 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (5) of this subsection and without
ratification by the parties, the offer that the mediator–arbitrator panel chooses as
integrated with the items on which the parties previously agreed is the final agreement
between the Montgomery Commission and the exclusive representative.

(2) The economic provisions of the final agreement are subject to funding
by the Montgomery Commission.

(3) Except as provided in paragraph (5) of this subsection, the Montgomery
Commission shall appropriate money in the Montgomery Commission’s final budget for all
economic provisions of the final agreement.

(4) The parties shall execute an agreement that incorporates the final
agreement, including arbitration awards and all issues agreed to under this section.

(5) (i) On or before April 1 or a later date determined by mutual
agreement of the parties due to extenuating circumstances, the Executive Director of the
Montgomery Commission shall submit to the Montgomery Commission any term or
condition of the final offer [regarding wages] that requires:

1. an appropriation of funds OR THAT MAY RESULT IN A
PRESENT OR FUTURE FISCAL IMPACT ON THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION OR ITS
CUSTOMERS; or

[2. the adoption of a regulation that may result in a present
or future fiscal impact on the Montgomery Commission or its customers.]

2. ACTION BY THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION TO
IMPLEMENT THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT.

(ii) The Montgomery Commission may accept or reject all or part of
any term or condition that the Executive Director is required to submit under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

(g) The Montgomery Commission and the employee organization shall share the
costs of the mediator–arbitrator panel’s services equally.

16–310.1.

(A) DURING THE TERM OF A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT:

(1) EITHER PARTY MAY DECLARE AN IMPASSE AND REQUEST THE
SERVICES OF A MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 92

(2) THE PARTIES JOINTLY MAY REQUEST THE SERVICES OF A
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR AT ANY TIME WITHOUT DECLARING AN IMPASSE.

(B) (1) IF THE SERVICES OF A MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR ARE REQUESTED,
THE PARTIES JOINTLY SHALL APPOINT A MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR.

(2) IF THE PARTIES ARE UNABLE TO AGREE ON A JOINTLY APPOINTED
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR AS REQUIRED UNDER § 16–311 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
LABOR RELATIONS ADMINISTRATOR SHALL NAME THE JOINTLY APPOINTED
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR WITHIN 7 DAYS AFTER THE SERVICES OF A
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR WERE REQUESTED.

(C) IF THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR FINDS IN THE DISCRETION OF THE
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR THAT THE PARTIES ARE IN A BONA FIDE IMPASSE, THE
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR SHALL REQUIRE EACH PARTY TO SUBMIT A SEPARATE
MEMORANDUM OF THE PARTY’S LAST FINAL OFFER PRESENTED IN NEGOTIATIONS
ON ITEMS WITH REGARD TO WHICH THE PARTIES ARE IN DISPUTE.

(D) (1) WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER THE SUBMISSION OF THE MEMORANDUM
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR
SHALL HOLD A NONPUBLIC HEARING ON THE PARTIES’ OFFERS AT A TIME, DATE,
AND PLACE CHOSEN BY THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR.

(2) EACH PARTY SHALL SUBMIT EVIDENCE OR MAKE ORAL AND
WRITTEN ARGUMENT IN SUPPORT OF THE PARTY’S LAST FINAL OFFER.

(3) THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR MAY NOT OPEN THE HEARING TO A
PERSON WHO IS NOT A PARTY TO THE MEDIATION–ARBITRATION.

(E) (1) WITHIN 5 DAYS AFTER THE HEARING REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (D)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR SHALL ISSUE A
REPORT CHOOSING THE FINAL OFFER THAT THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR
DETERMINES TO BE MORE REASONABLE WHEN VIEWED AS A WHOLE.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IN
DETERMINING THE MORE REASONABLE OFFER, THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR MAY
CONSIDER ONLY:

(I) PAST COLLECTIVE BARGAINING CONTRACTS BETWEEN THE
PARTIES, INCLUDING THE BARGAINING HISTORY THAT LED TO THE AGREEMENT OR
THE PRECOLLECTIVE BARGAINING HISTORY OF EMPLOYEE WAGES, HOURS,
BENEFITS, AND OTHER WORKING CONDITIONS;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 92 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A COMPARISON OF WAGES, HOURS, BENEFITS, AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT OF SIMILAR EMPLOYEES OF OTHER PUBLIC
EMPLOYERS IN THE WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA AND IN THE STATE;

(III) A COMPARISON OF WAGES, HOURS, BENEFITS, AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT OF SIMILAR EMPLOYEES OF PRIVATE EMPLOYERS IN
MONTGOMERY COUNTY;

(IV) THE PUBLIC INTEREST AND WELFARE;

(V) THE ABILITY OF THE EMPLOYER TO FINANCE ANY
ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED UNDER THE PROPOSED AGREEMENT;

(VI) THE EFFECTS OF ANY ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENTS ON THE
STANDARD OF PUBLIC SERVICES NORMALLY PROVIDED BY THE EMPLOYER; AND

(VII) THE ANNUAL INCREASE OR DECREASE IN CONSUMER
PRICES FOR ALL ITEMS AS SHOWN IN THE MOST RECENT
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – WAGE EARNERS AND CLERICAL WORKERS (“CPI–W”)
FOR THE WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA.

(3) IN CONSIDERING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE FINAL
OFFER, THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR SHALL FIRST CONSIDER AND GIVE THE
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE ABILITY OF THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION TO PAY
FOR ADDITIONAL SHORT–TERM AND LONG–TERM EXPENSES BY CONSIDERING:

(I) THE LIMITS ON THE ABILITY OF THE MONTGOMERY
COMMISSION TO RAISE REVENUE;

(II) THE ADDED BURDEN RAISING REVENUE WOULD HAVE ON
CUSTOMERS OF THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION; AND

(III) THE ABILITY OF THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION TO
CONTINUE PROVIDING THE CURRENT LEVEL OF SERVICE TO ITS CUSTOMERS.

(4) IN DETERMINING THE MORE REASONABLE OFFER, THE
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR SHALL CONSIDER THAT ALL ITEMS ON WHICH THE PARTIES
AGREED BEFORE THE MEDIATION–ARBITRATION ARE INTEGRATED WITH EACH
OFFER.

(5) THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR MAY NOT RECEIVE OR CONSIDER
THE HISTORY OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING RELATING TO THE IMMEDIATE DISPUTE,

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 92

INCLUDING ANY OFFERS OF SETTLEMENT NOT CONTAINED IN THE OFFER
SUBMITTED TO THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR.

(F) THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR MAY NOT COMPROMISE OR ALTER THE
FINAL OFFER THAT THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR CHOOSES.

(G) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND
WITHOUT RATIFICATION BY THE PARTIES, THE OFFER THAT THE
MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR CHOOSES AS INTEGRATED WITH THE ITEMS ON WHICH THE
PARTIES PREVIOUSLY AGREED IS THE FINAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
MONTGOMERY COMMISSION AND THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE.

(2) THE ECONOMIC PROVISIONS OF THE FINAL AGREEMENT ARE
SUBJECT TO FUNDING BY THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION.

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION SHALL APPROPRIATE MONEY IN THE
MONTGOMERY COMMISSION’S FINAL BUDGET FOR ALL ECONOMIC PROVISIONS OF
THE FINAL AGREEMENT.

(4) THE PARTIES SHALL EXECUTE AN AGREEMENT THAT
INCORPORATES THE FINAL AGREEMENT, INCLUDING ARBITRATION AWARDS AND
ALL ISSUES AGREED TO UNDER THIS SECTION.

(5) (I) ON OR BEFORE APRIL 1 OR WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE
EXECUTION OF AN AGREEMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION OR ON
A LATER DATE DETERMINED BY MUTUAL AGREEMENT OF THE PARTIES DUE TO
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MONTGOMERY
COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT TO THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION ANY TERM OR
CONDITION OF THE FINAL OFFER REGARDING WAGES THAT REQUIRES:

1. AN APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS OR THAT MAY RESULT
IN A PRESENT OR FUTURE FISCAL IMPACT ON THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION OR
ITS CUSTOMERS; OR

2. THE ADOPTION OF A REGULATION THAT MAY RESULT
IN A PRESENT OR FUTURE FISCAL IMPACT ON THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION OR
ITS CUSTOMERS ACTION BY THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION TO IMPLEMENT THE
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT.

(II) THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION MAY ACCEPT OR REJECT
ALL OR PART OF ANY TERM OR CONDITION THAT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR IS
REQUIRED TO SUBMIT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 92 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) THE MONTGOMERY COMMISSION AND THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
SHALL SHARE EQUALLY THE COSTS OF THE MEDIATOR–ARBITRATOR’S SERVICES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8