START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

Chapter 122

(House Bill 848)

AN ACT concerning

Drinking Water – ~~Innovative~~ Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program –
Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the ~~Innovative~~ Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program in
the Department of the Environment for the purpose of authorizing the regulated use
of reclaimed water as a source for certain drinking water facilities; providing for the
issuance of potable reuse permits under the Pilot Program; applying certain public
participation requirements to potable reuse permits; authorizing the Department to
renew a potable reuse permit on or after a certain date under certain circumstances;
and generally relating to the establishment of the ~~Innovative~~ Indirect Potable Reuse
Pilot Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 1–601(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 9–301(a) and (f) and 9–401(l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 9–303.2 and 9–303.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

1–601.

(a) Permits issued by the Department under the following sections shall be issued
in accordance with this subtitle:

(1) Air quality control permits to construct subject to § 2–404 of this article;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 122 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Permits to install, materially alter, or materially extend landfill
systems, incinerators for public use, or rubble landfills subject to § 9–209 of this article;

(3) Permits to discharge pollutants to waters of the State issued pursuant
to § 9–323 of this article;

(4) Permits to install, materially alter, or materially extend a structure
used for storage or distribution of any type of sewage sludge issued, renewed, or amended
pursuant to § 9–234.1 or § 9–238 of this article;

(5) Permits to own, operate, establish, or maintain a controlled hazardous
substance facility issued pursuant to § 7–232 of this article;

(6) Permits to own, operate, or maintain a hazardous material facility
issued pursuant to § 7–103 of this article; [and]

(7) Permits to own, operate, establish, or maintain a low–level nuclear
waste facility issued pursuant to § 7–233 of this article; AND

(8) POTABLE REUSE PERMITS ISSUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
9–303.2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

9–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(f) “Reclaimed water” means sewage that:

(1) Has been treated to a high quality suitable for various reuses; and

(2) Has a concentration of less than:

(i) 3 fecal coliform colonies per 100 milliliters;

(ii) 10 milligrams per liter of 5–day biological oxygen demand; and

(iii) 10 milligrams per liter of total suspended solids.

9–303.2.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(2) “DRINKING WATER TREATMENT FACILITY” MEANS A FACILITY
THAT IS USED TO TREAT WATER IN A PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.

(3) “ENVIRONMENTAL BUFFER” MEANS A RESERVOIR, BASIN,
CONFINED AQUIFER, OR SIMILAR AREA ABOVE GROUND, THE PURPOSE OF WHICH IS
TO STORE OR IMPOUND SOURCE WATER FOR A DRINKING WATER TREATMENT
FACILITY.

(4) “PFAS” MEANS PER– AND POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES.

(5) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE INNOVATIVE INDIRECT POTABLE
REUSE PILOT PROGRAM.

(6) “POTABLE REUSE PERMIT” MEANS A PERMIT ISSUED BY THE
DEPARTMENT TO AUTHORIZE AND REGULATE A PROCESS TO USE RECLAIMED
WATER AS A SOURCE FOR A DRINKING WATER TREATMENT FACILITY.

(7) “PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–401
OF THIS TITLE.

(B) THERE IS AN INNOVATIVE INDIRECT POTABLE REUSE PILOT PROGRAM
IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO AUTHORIZE THE
REGULATED USE OF RECLAIMED WATER AS A SOURCE FOR DRINKING WATER
TREATMENT FACILITIES.

(D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REVIEW, PERMIT, AND REGULATE A
PROCESS TO USE RECLAIMED WATER AS A SOURCE FOR A DRINKING WATER
TREATMENT FACILITY THROUGH A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT IF:

(1) (I) THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT THE PROCESS WILL
MEET OR SURPASS SAFE DRINKING WATER STANDARDS BEFORE WATER ENTERS THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM;

(2) (II) THE RECLAIMED WATER IS STORED IN AN ENVIRONMENTAL
BUFFER FOR A RESIDENCE TIME OF UP TO 90 AT LEAST 180 DAYS, AS DETERMINED
BY THE DEPARTMENT, BEFORE INTAKE INTO A DRINKING WATER TREATMENT
FACILITY;

(3) (III) THE RECLAIMED WATER MEETS THE FOLLOWING
REQUIREMENTS:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 122 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) 1. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT
LEVELS ESTABLISHED BY THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY UNDER
40 C.F.R. §§ 141 AND 143 AND BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER COMAR 26.04.01
BEFORE ENTERING THE ENVIRONMENTAL BUFFER AND BEFORE ENTERING THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM;

(II) 2. TREATMENT FOR REMOVAL OF PATHOGENS AT THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT STAGE AND THE DRINKING WATER TREATMENT STAGE
THAT MEETS OR EXCEEDS:

1. A. 12 LOG FOR ENTERIC VIRUS REDUCTION;

2. B. 10 LOG FOR GIARDIA CYST REDUCTION; AND

3. C. 10 LOG CRYPTOSPORIDIUM OOCYST REDUCTION; AND

(III) 3. MAXIMUM CONTROLS FOR MAXIMUM
CONCENTRATIONS OF PFAS CHEMICALS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT,
NOTWITHSTANDING § 9–406(C) OR § 9–407(B) OF THIS TITLE, BUT NOT TO EXCEED
ANY ~~MAXIMUM~~ ~~CONTAMINANT~~ ~~LEVELS~~ PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS
ESTABLISHED BY THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY IN A FINAL
RULEMAKING UNDER THE FEDERAL SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT;

(4) (IV) THE RECLAIMED WATER UNDERGOES TESTING AND
REPORTING TO VERIFY THAT THE REQUIREMENTS OF ITEM (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION
ITEM (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH ARE MET;

(5) (V) THE PROCESS INCLUDES:

(I) 1. REVERSE OSMOSIS; AND

(II) 2. ULTRAVIOLET (UV) DISINFECTION AT THE DRINKING
WATER TREATMENT FACILITY;

(6) (VI) EMERGENCY PROCEDURES ARE IN PLACE TO PROTECT AND
ENSURE THE AVAILABILITY OF THE POTABLE WATER SUPPLY IF THERE IS ANY
FAILURE TO MEET THE DEPARTMENT’S REQUIREMENTS;

(7) (VII) THE APPLICANT GIVES THE DEPARTMENT THE RIGHT OF
ENTRY ON THE PERMIT SITE AT ANY REASONABLE TIME TO INSPECT OR
INVESTIGATE FOR A VIOLATION OR ANY POTENTIAL VIOLATION OF THE POTABLE
REUSE PERMIT;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(VIII) THE APPLICANT DEMONSTRATES TO THE SATISFACTION OF
THE DEPARTMENT THAT, AT ALL TIMES AND UNDER ALL OPERATING CONDITIONS,
THE VOLUME OF RECLAIMED WATER ENTERING THE DRINKING WATER TREATMENT
FACILITY CONTAINS NOT MORE THAN 10% BY VOLUME OF RECLAIMED WATER THAT
WAS DELIVERED TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL BUFFER DURING ANY 24–HOUR PERIOD;

(8) (IX) THE PROCESS INCLUDES APPROPRIATE RECORD–KEEPING
REQUIREMENTS; AND

(9) (X) THE PROCESS COMPLIES WITH ALL OTHER APPLICABLE
STATUTORY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS.

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (D)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION, AN
APPLICANT MAY REQUEST THAT RECLAIMED WATER BE STORED IN AN
ENVIRONMENTAL BUFFER FOR LESS THAN 180 DAYS, BUT NOT LESS THAN 60 DAYS,
BEFORE INTAKE INTO A DRINKING WATER TREATMENT FACILITY IF:

(I) THE PROCESS RELIABLY AND CONSISTENTLY MEETS THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THE POTABLE REUSE PERMIT UNDER VARYING OPERATING
CONDITIONS TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(II) THE APPLICANT DEMONSTRATES TO THE SATISFACTION OF
THE DEPARTMENT THAT A LOWER RESIDENCE TIME SUFFICIENTLY PROTECTS
PUBLIC HEALTH.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT MAY INCLUDE IN A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT ANY
TERM, CONDITION, OR REQUIREMENT THAT THE DEPARTMENT DEEMS
APPROPRIATE TO PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH OR THE ENVIRONMENT.

(F) THE REQUIREMENTS OF A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT ARE
SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND DO NOT OVERRIDE ANY OTHER STATUTE, REGULATION,
PERMIT, ORDER, OR DECREE.

(G) THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 6 OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL
GOVERN THIS ISSUANCE OF POTABLE REUSE PERMITS.

(H) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ACCEPT APPLICATIONS FOR POTABLE REUSE
PERMITS FROM JULY 1, 2023, THROUGH JUNE 30, 2024, INCLUSIVE.

(I) A SUCCESSFUL APPLICATION FOR A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT SHALL:

(1) DEMONSTRATE TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE DEPARTMENT:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 122 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE ABILITY TO COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF
THIS SECTION;

(II) THE AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS TO CONSTRUCT AND OPERATE
ANY NECESSARY IMPROVEMENTS;

(III) THE TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE CAPACITY TO
PERFORM THE PROCESS COVERED UNDER THE PERMIT; AND

(IV) THAT ALL NECESSARY PLANNING AND ENGINEERING
DESIGN IS COMPLETE; AND

(2) INCLUDE:

(I) A COMPLETED FEASIBILITY STUDY; AND

(II) ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUESTED BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

(J) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REFUSE TO ISSUE A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT IF:

(1) THE APPLICANT FAILS TO PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION
REQUESTED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

(2) THE APPLICANT FAILS OR REFUSES TO ALLOW THE DEPARTMENT
TO INSPECT THE PERMIT SITE;

(3) THE DEPARTMENT FINDS THAT ISSUANCE OF THE PERMIT WOULD
VIOLATE ANY STATE OR FEDERAL LAW OR ANY REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER ANY
STATE OR FEDERAL LAW;

(4) THE SOURCE OF THE RECLAIMED WATER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH
ANY STATE OR FEDERAL LAW, ANY REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER ANY STATE OR
FEDERAL LAW, OR ANY PERMIT; OR

(5) THE APPLICANT FAILS TO DEMONSTRATE COMPLIANCE WITH
THIS SECTION TO THE DEPARTMENT’S SATISFACTION.

(K) A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT SHALL BE EFFECTIVE FOR 5 YEARS FROM
THE DATE OF ISSUANCE OR UNTIL TERMINATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM,
WHICHEVER OCCURS FIRST.

(L) BEFORE A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT EXPIRES, THE DEPARTMENT MAY
RENEW THE POTABLE REUSE PERMIT:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(1) AFTER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REGULATIONS THAT THE DEPARTMENT ADOPTS; AND

(2) IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 6 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(M) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REVOKE A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER THIS SECTION IF THE DEPARTMENT FINDS THAT:

(1) THE APPLICATION INCLUDED FALSE OR INACCURATE
INFORMATION;

(2) CONDITIONS OR REQUIREMENTS OF THE POTABLE REUSE PERMIT
HAVE BEEN OR ARE ABOUT TO BE VIOLATED;

(3) SUBSTANTIAL DEVIATION FROM PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS, OR
REQUIREMENTS HAS OCCURRED OR IS ABOUT TO OCCUR;

(4) THE DEPARTMENT IS REFUSED ENTRY TO ANY PREMISES FOR
THE PURPOSE OF INSPECTING THE PROCESS TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
POTABLE REUSE PERMIT;

(5) A CHANGE IN CONDITIONS EXISTS THAT REQUIRES THE
TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT REDUCTION OR ELIMINATION OF THE USE OF
RECLAIMED WATER;

(6) THERE IS ANY NONCOMPLIANCE WITH A DISCHARGE PERMIT OR A
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT THAT MAY AFFECT THE RECLAIMED WATER IN ANY
MANNER;

(7) ANY STATE OR FEDERAL WATER QUALITY STANDARD OR
EFFLUENT LIMITATION HAS BEEN OR IS THREATENED TO BE VIOLATED;

(8) ANY STATE OR FEDERAL REQUIREMENT ESTABLISHED UNDER
THE FEDERAL SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT, SUBTITLE 4 OF THIS TITLE, OR TITLE
12 OF THIS ARTICLE HAS BEEN OR IS THREATENED TO BE VIOLATED; OR

(9) THE RECLAIMED WATER MAY THREATEN PUBLIC HEALTH,
SAFETY, COMFORT, OR THE ENVIRONMENT.

(N) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, A PUBLIC WATER
SYSTEM OPERATING UNDER A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT SHALL BE SUBJECT TO
REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS THAT USE SURFACE WATER UNDER
COMAR 26.04.01.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 122 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(N) (O) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) THE STATUS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM;

(2) WHETHER THE PILOT PROGRAM SHOULD BE EXTENDED OR MADE
PERMANENT; AND

(3) ANY STATUTORY OR REGULATORY CHANGES THAT THE
DEPARTMENT RECOMMENDS TO PERMANENTLY AUTHORIZE THE REGULATED USE
OF RECLAIMED WATER AS A SOURCE FOR DRINKING WATER TREATMENT FACILITIES,
IF APPROPRIATE.

(O) (P) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT
THIS SECTION.

9–401.

(l) (1) “Public water system” means a system that:

(i) Provides to the public water for human consumption through
pipes or other constructed conveyances; and

(ii) 1. Has at least 15 service connections; or

2. Regularly serves at least 25 individuals.

(2) “Public water system” includes:

(i) Any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facility that is
under the control of the operator of the system and is used primarily in connection with the
system; and

(ii) Any collection or pretreatment storage facility that is not under
the control of the operator of the system and is used primarily in connection with the
system.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Environment

9–303.3.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(A) ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT MAY RENEW A POTABLE
REUSE PERMIT IF:

(1) THE RENEWAL OCCURS BEFORE THE POTABLE REUSE PERMIT
EXPIRES; AND

(2) THE DEPARTMENT ISSUED THE ORIGINAL POTABLE REUSE
PERMIT ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30, 2028.

(B) IF THE DEPARTMENT RENEWS A POTABLE REUSE PERMIT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
RENEW THE PERMIT:

(1) AFTER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REGULATIONS THAT THE DEPARTMENT ADOPTS; AND

(2) IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 6 OF THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted. ~~It~~ Section 1 of this Act shall remain effective through June 30, 2028, and, at the
end of June 30, 2028, Section 1 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9