START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 827 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 827 
(Delegate Ivey) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Prince George's Gateway Development Authority - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority in Prince 
George’s County to support the development and approval of a comprehensive 
neighborhood revitalization plan in the “target area” in the county. The authority consists 
primarily of State and local government officials, or their designees. Authority members 
may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The 
authority may manage appropriated funds from municipalities in the target area, Prince 
George’s County, and the State. By October 31, 2025, the authority must report its 
comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy to the Governor, the Senate Budget 
and Taxation Committee, and the House Appropriations Committee. The bill terminates 
September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No direct effect. It is assumed that members of the authority can likely 
provide staff and expense reimbursements with existing resources. Although the bill allows 
the authority to manage funds appropriated by the State, it does not require any such funds 
to be appropriated. Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County and participating local authority members can 
likely provide staff for the authority with existing resources. If not, local expenditures may 
increase minimally. Although the bill allows the authority to manage funds appropriated 
by Prince George’s County and municipalities in the target area, it does not require any 
such funds to be appropriated. No direct effect on local revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. Small businesses are not directly affected by the 
establishment of the authority but could be affected by the implementation of the 
neighborhood revitalization plan developed pursuant to the bill. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 827/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Target area” means the City of Mount Rainier, the Town of Brentwood, 
the Town of Cottage City, the City of Bladensburg, the Town of Colmar Manor, and the 
Town of North Brentwood in Prince George’s County. 
 
The authority may receive donated services from accountants, lawyers, or other consultants 
as necessary to carry out the bill and may supervise, manage, and terminate staff and 
consultants as necessary. 
 
The authority must support the development and approval of a comprehensive 
neighborhood revitalization plan in the target area to benefit (1) the residents; (2) housing; 
(3) neighborhoods; (4) economic development; and (5) transportation, including motor 
vehicles and pedestrians. 
 
Members of the authority may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement 
for expenses. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 80 and 81 of 2021 established the West North Avenue 
Development Authority to support a revitalization plan in a target area and buffer zone in 
Baltimore City. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not explicitly allow the authority to finance 
neighborhood improvements and economic development initiatives that are typical for 
development authorities. However, to the extent that it receives funds from 
Prince George’s County, municipalities, and/or the State for those purposes, the authority 
may initiate those types of projects. As any such projects are contingent on funding that is 
not required by the bill, this analysis does not reflect any fiscal effects, such as increased 
debt service payments, or property tax revenues, that may result from implementing the 
neighborhood revitalization strategy that is developed in accordance with the bill. 
 
However, there may be a future expectation of funding. As a recent example, the 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $11.4 million for the West 
North Avenue Development Authority, which was established in 2021 for a similar 
purpose, with similar responsibilities, and also without a funding mandate, primarily to hire 
staff and fund/initiate development projects along West North Avenue in Baltimore City. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 827/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 696 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 5, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3