START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 806 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 806 
(Delegate Qi) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws – Autonomous Vehicle Converters – Sale of Autonomous Vehicles 
 
   
This bill authorizes an “autonomous vehicle converter” to sell, transfer, lease, offer for 
sale, or resell a “converted autonomous vehicle” or a motor vehicle purchased by an 
autonomous vehicle converter with the intent to convert the motor vehicle into a converted 
autonomous vehicle. The bill applies only to motor vehicles intended for commercial or 
industrial use. An autonomous vehicle converter may not be licensed as a manufacturer, 
distributor, or factory branch or as a dealer. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Converted autonomous vehicle” means a motor vehicle that (1) is 
equipped with an aftermarket automated driving system capable of operating in accordance 
with some or all of the automated driving standards established by the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE), as specified; (2) meets or exceeds weight or capacity 
thresholds established under federal law; and (3) is capable of operating in accordance with 
applicable State and federal law.  
 
“Autonomous vehicle converter” means a person that (1) alters or modifies a new or used 
motor vehicle by addition, substitution, or removal of components, other than readily 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 806/ Page 2 
attachable components, in compliance with all applicable motor vehicle safety 
requirements established under federal law and (2) assembles, installs, and affixes an 
automated driving system to a new or used motor vehicle in such a manner that converts 
the vehicle into a converted autonomous vehicle.  
 
Current Law:  Autonomous vehicles are governed and regulated primarily at the federal 
level through plans and guidance developed by the U.S. Department of Transportation. The 
current Automated Vehicles – Comprehensive Plan includes the three major goals of 
promoting collaboration and transparency, modernizing the regulatory environment, and 
preparing the transportation system for autonomous vehicles. Among other things, it 
includes safety and operational standards developed by SAE.  
 
The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is responsible for regulating businesses that 
manufacture, distribute, sell, lease, deliver, and title motor vehicles in the State. Generally, 
to operate one of these businesses, a person must first obtain a license from MVA and pay 
any applicable license fee. State law includes other requirements for persons and 
individuals working in the motor vehicle industry; for example, manufacturers, 
distributors, and factory branches must always act in good faith (i.e., maintaining honesty 
in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade) 
when doing business.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill essentially simplifies the process for a business (including 
a small business) to carry out autonomous vehicle conversions without direct oversight or 
regulation by MVA. Under the bill, these businesses may experience increased sales and 
revenues that could be significant.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 685 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; U.S. Department of 
Transportation; Society of Automotive Engineers; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 806/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3