START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 804 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 804 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Amortization of Unfunded Liabilities and 
Surpluses 
 
 
This bill alters the statutory policy for amortizing unfunded accrued liabilities or surpluses 
for the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS). It authorizes the SRPS Board of 
Trustees, on the recommendation of the system’s actuary, to adjust the period of 
amortization under the new policy for the purpose of mitigating tail volatility in the annual 
contribution rate. The SRPS board may not certify contribution rates that are below the 
normal cost, as determined by the system’s actuary. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increases in State pension liabilities beginning in 
FY 2024, but any such increases are not expected to have a discernible effect on State 
pension contributions. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill affects amortization of only State pension liabilities and 
surpluses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Any existing unfunded liabilities or surpluses as of June 30, 2023, remain 
amortized over a closed period that ends June 30, 2039. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 804/ Page 2 
Beginning July 1, 2023, any new unfunded liabilities or surpluses that accrued during the 
preceding fiscal year are amortized over closed periods according to the following 
guidelines:   
 
 
over 15 years for experience gains and losses; 
 
over 25 years for gains or losses stemming from changes to actuarial assumptions 
or methods; 
 
over a period ranging from no less than 10 and no more than 15 years for gains or 
losses stemming from new legislation (except early retirement incentives); and  
 
over 5 years for any accrued liability stemming from legislation providing 
incentives for the early retirement of State employees. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 475 and 476 of 2013 established the amortization policy for 
SRPS that is currently in effect. Specifically, the Acts required that all unfunded liabilities 
or surpluses accrued as of June 30, 2013, be amortized over a closed 25-year period (ending 
on June 30, 2039, which includes a one-year implementation delay). They further required 
that any new unfunded liabilities or surpluses (including those due to experience, changes 
in actuarial assumptions and methods, and legislation) in each succeeding year be 
amortized within the number of years remaining in the closed period until June 30, 2039. 
 
State Expenditures:  The purpose of the bill is to reduce the likelihood of contribution 
rate volatility as the 25-year amortization period established by Chapters 475 and 476 nears 
its conclusion in 2039. As new liabilities (or surpluses) are added to the existing unfunded 
liabilities each year, they are amortized over an increasingly smaller number of years. This 
increases the risk that a fiscal shock to the system (such as a severe downturn in financial 
markets) in the latter years of the current amortization period would significantly increase 
unfunded liabilities that would have to be amortized over just a small number of years, 
resulting in significant increases in State pension contributions. 
 
Creating new “tiers” of unfunded liabilities or surpluses each year ensures that any such 
shocks to the system are spread out over many years, and it enhances transparency 
regarding the sources of the system’s unfunded liabilities. This approach also allows the 
SRPS board, on the advice of the actuary as established by bill, to make adjustments to 
those tiers to minimize the potential for future volatility in contribution rates. Such 
adjustments are consistent with the model amortization policy developed by the national 
Conference of Consulting Actuaries. 
 
The General Assembly’s consulting actuary notes that unrecognized investment gains and 
losses from recent years, due to the system’s five-year “smoothing” policy, will be assigned 
to each annual tier rather than to the larger closed pool of unfunded liabilities. This may 
have a minimal effect on total accrued liabilities; however, projections by the system’s 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 804/ Page 3 
actuary that have also been reviewed by the General Assembly’s consulting actuary 
indicate that, overall, the changes in unfunded liabilities over the first several years of the 
new policy are generally minimal. The bill’s requirement that contribution rates never fall 
below the normal cost ensures that the State always pays at least the cost of pension benefits 
accrued in a given year, even if the system maintains an actuarial surplus. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 466 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3