START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 196

Chapter 196

(House Bill 804)

AN ACT concerning

State Retirement and Pension System – Amortization of Unfunded Liabilities
and Surpluses

FOR the purpose of altering the amortization periods to be used for certain unfunded
liabilities or surpluses of the State Retirement and Pension System; and generally
relating to the funding of the State Retirement and Pension System.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–304(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–304(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

21–304.

(d) (1) Beginning July 1, [2013] 2023, each year the Board of Trustees shall
set contribution rates for each State system that shall amortize:

[(1)] (I) all unfunded liabilities or surpluses accrued as of June 30, [2013]
2023, over [25 years] THE TIME REMAINING UNTIL JUNE 30, 2038 2039; and

[(2)] (II) any new unfunded liabilities or surpluses that have accrued from
July 1 of the preceding fiscal year over CLOSED PERIODS OF [the time remaining until
June 30, 2038, to reflect]:

[(i)] 1. 15 YEARS FOR experience gains and losses;

[(ii)] 2. 25 YEARS FOR the effect of changes in actuarial
assumptions and methods; [and]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 196 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(iii)] 3. AT LEAST 10 BUT NOT EXCEEDING 15 YEARS FOR the
effect of ANY NEW legislation [effective on or after July 1, 2013]; AND

4. 5 YEARS FOR ACCRUED LIABILITY RESULTING FROM
LEGISLATION PROVIDING INCENTIVES FOR THE EARLY RETIREMENT OF STATE
EMPLOYEES.

(2) ON RECOMMENDATION OF THE SYSTEM’S ACTUARY, FOR THE
PURPOSE OF MITIGATING TAIL VOLATILITY IN THE ANNUAL CONTRIBUTION RATE,
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES MAY ADJUST THE PERIOD OF AMORTIZATION UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION FOR LIABILITIES OR SURPLUSES ACCRUED
IN ANY FISCAL YEAR.

(E) THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES MAY NOT CERTIFY CONTRIBUTION RATES
UNDER THIS SECTION THAT WOULD RESULT IN A CONTRIBUTION RATE BELOW THE
NORMAL COST, AS DETERMINED BY THE SYSTEM’S ACTUARY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2