START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 700

Chapter 700

(House Bill 802)

AN ACT concerning

Institutions of Higher Education – Sports Wagering Contracts – Prohibition

FOR the purpose of prohibiting institutions of higher education from entering into a
contract with a certain regulated gaming entity or a certain agent of a regulated
gaming entity if the institution of higher education receives certain compensation for
student participation in certain sports wagering; prohibiting institutions of higher
education from entering into a contract with a sports marketing entity if the sports
marketing entity or the institution of higher education receives certain compensation
for student participation in certain sports wagering; providing that a certain contract
formed by a public institution of higher education is subject to public inspection in
accordance with the Maryland Public Information Act; and generally relating to
institutions of higher education and sports wagering.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 10–101(a) and (h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 26–801 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 8. Sports Wagering Contracts”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–1E–01(a), (e), (f), (g), (j), and (m)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

10–101.

(a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 700 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(h) (1) “Institution of higher education” means an institution of postsecondary
education that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools, and awards
degrees at either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level.

(2) “Institution of higher education” includes public, private nonprofit, and
for–profit institutions of higher education.

SUBTITLE 8. SPORTS WAGERING CONTRACTS.

26–801.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “AGENT OF A REGULATED GAMING ENTITY” INCLUDES A
MARKETING FIRM OR OTHER SIMILAR ENTITY CONTRACTED TO PERFORM
GAMING–RELATED SERVICES FOR A REGULATED GAMING ENTITY.

(3) “INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 10–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(4) “MOBILE SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 9–1E–01 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(5) “ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
9–1E–01 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(6) “ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 9–1E–01 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(7) “REGULATED GAMING ENTITY” MEANS:

(I) A MOBILE SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE;

(II) AN ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR; OR

(III) A SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE.

(8) “SPORTS WAGERING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–1E–01 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(9) “SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
9–1E–01 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 700

(B) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION MAY NOT ENTER INTO A
CONTRACT WITH A REGULATED GAMING ENTITY OR AN AGENT OF A REGULATED
GAMING ENTITY IF, UNDER THE TERMS OF THE CONTRACT, THE INSTITUTION OF
HIGHER EDUCATION RECEIVES A COMMISSION, A BONUS, OR ANY OTHER INCENTIVE
PAYMENT BASED ON THE SUCCESS OF SECURING STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN
SPORTS WAGERING OR ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING.

(C) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION MAY NOT ENTER INTO A
CONTRACT WITH A SPORTS MARKETING ENTITY THAT ENTERS INTO A CONTRACT
WITH A REGULATED GAMING ENTITY OR AN AGENT OF A REGULATED GAMING
ENTITY IF, UNDER THE TERMS OF THE CONTRACT, EITHER THE SPORTS MARKETING
ENTITY OR THE INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION RECEIVES A COMMISSION,
BONUS, OR ANY OTHER INCENTIVE PAYMENT BASED ON THE SUCCESS OF SECURING
STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN SPORTS WAGERING OR ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING.

(C) (D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) SUBSECTIONS (B)
AND (C) OF THIS SECTION, THIS SECTION DOES NOT PRECLUDE CONTRACT
FORMATION BETWEEN AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND A REGULATED
GAMING ENTITY OR, AN AGENT OF A REGULATED GAMING ENTITY, OR A SPORTS
MARKETING ENTITY.

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A CONTRACT
FORMED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION BY A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF
HIGHER EDUCATION IS SUBJECT TO PUBLIC INSPECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
MARYLAND PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT.

Article – State Government

9–1E–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Mobile sports wagering licensee” means a sports wagering licensee who is
authorized to conduct and operate online sports wagering.

(f) “Online sports wagering” means sports wagering through an online gaming
system:

(1) on a computer, a mobile device, or any other interactive device; and

(2) that is accepted by a sports wagering licensee or an online sports
wagering operator.

(g) “Online sports wagering operator” means an entity registered with a state to
do business within a jurisdiction of the United States that holds a license issued by the
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 700 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Commission under this subtitle to operate online sports wagering on behalf of a sports
wagering licensee.

(j) “Sports wagering” means the business of accepting wagers on any sporting
event by any system or method of wagering, including single–game bets, teaser bets,
parlays, over–under, moneyline, pools, exchange wagering, in–game wagering, in–play
bets, proposition bets, and straight bets.

(m) “Sports wagering licensee” means the holder of a sports wagering license.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That a presently existing obligation
or contract right may not be impaired in any way by this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4