START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 325

Chapter 325

(House Bill 811)

AN ACT concerning

Hospitals – ~~Overdoses~~ ~~–~~ Testing for Fentanyl
(The Josh Siems Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring ~~the~~ ~~emergency~~ ~~department~~ ~~of~~ a hospital to ~~conduct~~ ~~a~~ ~~rapid~~
include testing for fentanyl as part of a urine drug ~~test~~ ~~for~~ ~~fentanyl~~ ~~in~~ ~~patients~~ ~~with~~
~~a~~ ~~known~~ ~~or~~ ~~suspected~~ ~~drug~~ ~~overdose~~ ~~if~~ ~~a~~ ~~toxicology~~ ~~report~~ ~~is~~ ~~requested~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~treating~~
~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~provider~~ screening; and generally relating to fentanyl testing for hospital
patients ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~known~~ ~~or~~ ~~suspected~~ ~~overdose.~~

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 19–308.9
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–308.9.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION, AN
~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~HOSPITAL~~ ~~TREATING~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~KNOWN~~
~~OR~~ ~~SUSPECTED~~ ~~DRUG~~ ~~OVERDOSE~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~A~~ ~~RAPID~~
~~URINE~~ ~~DRUG~~ ~~TEST~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRESENCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FENTANYL~~ ~~IF~~ ~~A~~ ~~TREATING~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~
~~PROVIDER~~ ~~REQUESTS~~ ~~A~~ ~~TOXICOLOGY~~ ~~SCREEN~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ IF AN INDIVIDUAL
IS TREATED AT A HOSPITAL AND THE HOSPITAL CONDUCTS A URINE DRUG
SCREENING TO ASSIST IN DIAGNOSING THE INDIVIDUAL’S CONDITION, THE
HOSPITAL SHALL INCLUDE TESTING FOR FENTANYL IN THE INDIVIDUAL’S URINE
DRUG SCREENING.

(B) IF THE URINE DRUG SCREENING CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION DETECTS FENTANYL, THE HOSPITAL SHALL
REPORT THE TEST RESULTS, WHICH SHALL BE DEIDENTIFIED, TO THE DEPARTMENT
THROUGH THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 325 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) (C) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A HOSPITAL THAT DOES NOT
HAVE ~~THE~~ ~~EQUIPMENT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~A~~ ~~RAPID~~ ~~URINE~~ ~~DRUG~~ ~~TEST~~ CHEMICAL
ANALYZER EQUIPMENT.

(C) (D) THIS SECTION DOES NOT AFFECT ANY STATE LAW PROVIDING
CIVIL OR CRIMINAL IMMUNITY TO AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS IN NEED OF MEDICAL
ASSISTANCE AFTER INGESTING OR USING ALCOHOL OR DRUGS, OR TO AN
INDIVIDUAL WHO IN GOOD FAITH ASSISTS ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL WHO IS IN NEED OF
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE AFTER INGESTING OR USING ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2