START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 844 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 844 
(Delegates Pasteur and Holmes) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Common Ownership Community 
Website 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
establish and maintain a website that provides information on the current rights and 
responsibilities of individuals living in a common ownership community (COC). 
DHCD must make publicly available on the website (1) a hyperlink to the website of each 
local COC program in the State and (2) information on statewide legislation enacted in the 
prior legislative session regarding the rights and responsibilities of individuals living in a 
COC, including, for each bill enacted, specified information and a hyperlink to the bill 
information on the General Assembly’s website; that information must be posted on 
DHCD’s COC website by June 1 each year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $90,000 in FY 2024 to develop the 
website, and by an indeterminate amount in future years to update and maintain the 
website, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
90,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($90,000) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 844/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Common Ownership Communities 
 
The governance of each cooperative housing corporation, condominium, or 
homeowners association (commonly known as a COC) is determined by its applicable 
governing documents. Since registration of the various COCs in the State is not required, 
the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. For more information on those 
entities, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
DHCD does not administer programs for or provide oversight of COCs. 
 
Among other responsibilities, DHCD provides financing for the economic development 
and maintenance of affordable housing and communities in Maryland. DHCD also 
provides funding for community revitalization projects. As introduced, the fiscal 2024 
capital budget includes a mixture of general funds, special funds, and federal funds for the 
following DHCD programs that provide assistance to homebuyers and those facilitating 
community revitalization in Maryland:   
 
 
Strategic Demolition Fund ($25.0 million); 
 
Neighborhood Business Development Program ($22.2 million); 
 
Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative ($12.0 million); 
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program ($7.0 million); 
 
Community Development Block Grant Program ($12.0 million); 
 
Seed Community Development Anchor Institution Fund ($10.0 million); 
 
Special Loan Programs ($10.4 million); 
 
Community Legacy Program ($6.0 million); 
 
Homeownership Programs ($21.0 million); and 
 
Housing and Building Energy Program ($15.8 million). 
 
State Expenditures:  DHCD advises that it must gather the necessary COC information, 
develop the website, include specified legislative information, and annually update the 
website. DHCD anticipates utilizing contractual services to develop the website at an initial 
cost of approximately $90,000 in fiscal 2024. DHCD anticipates additional costs in 
future years to update and maintain the website but is unable to estimate those ongoing 
costs without first completing the website. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 844/ Page 3 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $90,000 in fiscal 2024 for DHCD to 
develop the website and publish the specified COC information. General fund expenditures 
increase in future years by an indeterminate amount (likely less than $90,000 annually) to 
update and maintain the website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 844/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; rather, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for unpaid 
fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Since registration of the various COCs is not required statewide, the exact number of COCs 
in Maryland is unknown. However, public offering statements for condominium regimes 
are required by law to be registered with the Secretary of State (SOS). SOS registration 
records show that, as of December 2022, 2,788 condominium regimes have been registered 
with the State. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation, which maintains 
assessment records based on class of property, reports that there are more than 
227,000 condominium units in the State as of July 2022. The Foundation for Community 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 844/ Page 5 
Association Research estimated that there were 6,910 community associations with an 
estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2021, the most recent 
information available. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the education and 
training needs of COC boards and prospective buyers, availability of alternative dispute 
resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of assessments, and 
resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held five public hearings, and 
submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings and recommendations 
have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces of legislation intended 
to improve the operation of COCs. For example, legislation enacted from 2007 through 
2022: 
 
 
authorized a group of three or more unit or lot owners in a condominium or HOA 
to petition a circuit court to appoint a receiver in specified situations frequently 
found in aging communities (Chapter 321 of 2007);  
 
gave the Consumer Protection Division within the Office of the Attorney General 
increased authority over violations of the Maryland Homeowners Association Act 
(Chapter 593 of 2007);  
 
eased restrictions on the ability of condominiums and HOAs to amend their 
governing documents (Chapters 144 and 145 of 2008 and Chapter 480 of 2017); 
 
strengthened the transition process from developer to the governing body of a 
condominium or HOA by allowing the governing body to terminate specified 
contracts and requiring the developer to provide specified documents (Chapters 95 
and 96 of 2009);  
 
required the governing body of a COC to purchase fidelity insurance or a fidelity bond 
covering various acts of malfeasance by COC officers, directors, and other specified 
employees and agents (Chapters 77 and 78 of 2009 and Chapter 615 of 2010); 
 
granted priority to a specified portion of a lien of a condominium or HOA over the 
claim of a holder of a first mortgage or first deed of trust in the event of a foreclosure 
on a unit or lot (Chapter 387 of 2011); 
 
limited the amount of damages for which the governing body of a condominium or 
HOA may foreclose on a lien against a unit owner or lot owner (Chapters 448 and 
449 of 2013); 
 
expanded the purposes for which a condominium’s board of directors may hold a 
closed meeting, similar to the law for an HOA, by allowing a meeting to be closed 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 844/ Page 6 
to consider terms or conditions of a business transaction in the negotiation stage if 
disclosure could adversely affect the economic interests of the council of unit 
owners (Chapter 110 of 2013);  
 
established meeting standards and standards for late charges for delinquent 
payments, eviction restrictions, an auditing process for books and records, and a 
dispute settlement mechanism for cooperatives under specified circumstances 
(Chapter 567 of 2014);  
 
altered the contents of a required disclosure for the resale of a condominium unit, 
authorized the assessment of specified fees by a condominium council of unit 
owners or an HOA for providing specified information, and required the 
Department of Housing and Community Development to adjust the maximum 
authorized fees every two years (Chapter 735 of 2016 and Chapter 817 of 2017);  
 
increased to $10,000 the maximum amount of the council of unit owners’ property 
insurance deductible for which a specific unit owner is responsible if the cause of 
any damage to or destruction of the common elements or units of a condominium 
originates from an event inside that owner’s unit (Chapters 56 and 57 of 2020); and 
 
established that specified COCs in the State must conduct a reserve study satisfying 
specified requirements every five years to determine the amount and necessity of 
reserves for anticipated capital replacements, repairs, and improvements. COCs 
must also adequately fund the recommended reserves, as specified (Chapter 138 
of 2020; Chapter 433 of 2021; and Chapter 664 of 2022).  
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6