START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 825 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 825 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Town of Forest Heights (Prince George's County) - Urban Renewal Authority for 
Blight Clearance  
PG 410-23 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Town of Forest Heights in Prince George’s County to undertake 
urban renewal projects for blight clearance by exercising the power of eminent domain to 
acquire properties in blighted areas that are zoned for commercial purposes. The town may 
not initiate an urban renewal project unless its legislative body adopts a resolution that 
defines the area and finds that rehabilitation or redevelopment is necessary and in the 
public’s interest. Condemnation of land or property under the bill must be in accordance 
with the procedure set forth in State law. Further, the bill sets forth procedures for taking 
the property, funds that may be used to do so, and disposition of the property, including 
authorization to dispose of it to private persons. Property may not be taken without just 
compensation, either as agreed upon by the parties or awarded by a jury. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No direct effect; however, the bill could result in a minimal increase in State 
tax revenues, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  If the bill’s authority is used, the Town of Forest Heights expenditures may 
increase to acquire land and conduct urban renewal projects, and town revenues may 
increase from the sale of land and properties acquired. While not a direct effect, the bill 
could result in a minimal increase in tax revenues for the Town of Forest Heights and 
Prince George’s County. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful if a property targeted 
for urban renewal is a small business or if any urban renewal projects lead to additional 
economic activity for small businesses in the town. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 825/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Eminent Domain 
 
The power to take, or condemn, private property for public use is one of the inherent powers 
of state government and, through the state, its political subdivisions. Courts have long held 
that this power, known as “eminent domain,” is derived from the sovereignty of the state. 
Both the federal and State constitutions limit the condemnation authority. Both 
constitutions establish two requirements for taking property through the power of eminent 
domain:  (1) the property taken must be for a “public use”; and (2) the party whose property 
is taken must receive “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair market value 
of the real property. In either event, the party whose property is being taken is generally 
entitled to a judicial proceeding prior to the taking of the property. However, the 
Maryland Constitution 
does 
authorize 
“quick-take” 
condemnations 
in 
limited 
circumstances prior to a court proceeding. 
 
Other entities have been given express statutory authority by the State to exercise 
condemnation powers under specified circumstances, including the major subdivisions of 
the State, municipalities, and specified utilities such as gas, oil pipeline, railroad, telephone 
and telegraph, and water companies. 
 
Public Use 
 
There is no clear cut rule to determine whether a particular use of property taken through 
eminent domain is a “public use,” and Maryland courts have broadly interpreted the term. 
The Court of Appeals has recognized takings that encompass a “public benefit” or a “public 
purpose.” Maryland courts have given great deference to a legislative determination as to 
whether property should be taken for a particular public purpose. 
 
The courts have stated that government may not simply transfer property from one private 
party to another. For example, in Van Witsen v. Gutman, 79 Md. 405 (1894), the 
Court of Appeals invalidated a condemnation by Baltimore City in which the court found 
the transfer would have benefited one private citizen at the cost of others. However, 
transferring property from one private party to another is not necessarily forbidden. In 
Prince George’s County v. Collington, 275 Md. 171 (1975), the Court of Appeals 
authorized the county to use its eminent domain authority to take private property to be 
used for economic development purposes, even though the property was not blighted. The 
Collington court enunciated the following rule:  “projects reasonably designed to benefit 
the general public, by significantly enhancing the economic growth of the State or its 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 825/ Page 3 
subdivisions, are public uses, at least where the exercise of the power of condemnation 
provides an impetus which private enterprise cannot provide.” Id. At 191. 
 
U.S. Supreme Court Ruling 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Kelo v. City of New London, 125 S. Ct. 2655 (2005) that 
New London, Connecticut’s use of its condemnation authority under a state law to require 
several homeowners in an economically depressed area to vacate their properties to make 
way for mixed use development did not violate the U.S. Constitution. In essence, the 
Kelo decision left the determination to state law as to whether eminent domain may be used 
for economic development purposes. An earlier decision, Berman v. Parker, 
75 S. Ct. 98 (1954), had already found that taking a nonblighted property in a blighted area 
as part of an overall economic development scheme does not violate the U.S. Constitution. 
 
Urban Renewal Authority 
 
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution grants municipalities broad power to amend 
their existing charters or local laws and to adopt a new charter without the approval of the 
General Assembly. In addition, Article XI-E generally prohibits the General Assembly 
from enacting local laws for particular municipalities. However, this general prohibition is 
expressly qualified by Article III, Section 61 of the Constitution (the Urban Renewal 
Amendment). This amendment provides that the General Assembly’s power to enact local 
laws regarding local urban renewal projects for slum clearance prevails over the restrictions 
contained in Article XI-E. The General Assembly has enacted more than 60 separate public 
local laws authorizing individual municipalities to carry out urban renewal projects for the 
rehabilitation of slum or blighted areas. Chapter 519 of 1995 amended the home rule 
powers of municipalities as expressed in Article 23A of the Code by adding the power to 
acquire land or property for development or redevelopment and to sell or otherwise dispose 
of the land or property to any private, public, or quasi-public entity. The law, however, 
specifies that this power may be exercised only by a municipality that has urban renewal 
authority for slum clearance under Article III, Section 61 of the Maryland Constitution. 
 
The Town of Forest Heights does not have the power to use eminent domain for blight 
clearance. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  If a blighted area in the Town of Forest Heights that is zoned for 
commercial purposes is rehabilitated and the real property assessable base increases, 
property tax revenues increase. Similarly, if an area is revitalized and additional businesses 
move to these areas, income tax and sales tax revenues could increase. It is noted that any 
tax revenue that might derive from economic development depends on the success of a 
particular project. As of July 1, 2021, the population of the Town of Forest Heights was 
2,620. Given the population of the town, it is assumed that any such impact is minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 825/ Page 4 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal impact of the bill depends on whether the  
Town of Forest Heights exercises eminent domain authority, how many times this authority 
is used, and the value of any property taken, none of which can be quantified at this time. 
If the town undertakes urban renewal projects, expenditures related to legal fees and land 
and property acquisition also increase. However, the town could recoup some or all of these 
expenditures if a property taken is sold to a developer. 
 
In addition to the direct fiscal effect of the bill, there is an indirect effect that urban renewal 
could have on local tax revenues. If a blighted area in the town is rehabilitated and the real 
property assessable base increases, property tax revenues increase. Similarly, if an area is 
revitalized and additional businesses move to these areas, income tax and sales tax 
revenues could increase. It is noted that any tax revenue that might derive from economic 
development depends on the success of a particular project. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 506 (Senator Muse) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4