START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 834 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 834 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo, et al.) 
Economic Matters and Environment and 
Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure - Requirements (Electric Vehicle 
Charging Reliability Act) 
 
 
This bill requires an electric company that installs or maintains electric vehicle (EV) 
charging stations for public use or that participates in the EV Pilot Program to maintain 
uptime standards for each EV charging station in accordance with specified federal or State 
standards and requirements. The Public Service Commission (PSC) may impose a civil 
penalty, in accordance with § 13-201 of the Public Utilities Article, or take additional 
remedial action against an electric company that fails to satisfy the uptime requirements. 
An electric company participating in the EV Pilot Program must maintain an adequate 
number of staff to monitor, assess, and when necessary, repair the EV charging stations 
operated by the electric company. The bill also requires PSC to expand the EV Pilot 
Program to allow participating electric companies to install EV charging stations in new 
and 
existing 
multifamily 
dwellings 
in 
underserved 
communities 
through 
December 31, 2025, subject to reasonable cost limitations balanced with the public 
interest. Related reporting requirements are established and various terms are defined. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. The effect on electricity rates 
is discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. The effect on electricity rates is discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 834/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An electric company that operates an EV charging station for public use 
is subject to the same reporting requirements as an electric company that receives federal 
funding related to EV charging infrastructure. An electric company that operates an 
EV charging network or EV charging station must submit specified related information to 
PSC on a quarterly basis, including the location of each charging station along with various 
operational and cost metrics. 
 
PSC must, by order or regulation, and subject to reasonable cost limitations balanced with 
the public interest, expand the EV Pilot Program established by PSC Order No. 88997 to 
allow participating electric companies to install EV charging stations in new and existing 
multifamily dwellings in underserved communities, as defined. PSC must terminate the 
EV Pilot Program expansion on December 31, 2025. 
 
The required termination may not be construed to (1) terminate an electric company’s 
authority to operate EV charging stations under a program approved on or before 
March 1, 2023; (2) limit an electric company’s efforts to operate and maintain EV charging 
stations installed under the EV Pilot Program; or (3) impact the cost recovery by an 
investor-owned electric company for the lifetime of an EV charging station installed under 
the EV Pilot Program. 
 
Current Law:  PSC established a five-year EV Pilot Program for the State’s 
four investor-owned utilities in January 2019 in Order No. 88997. The order was a result 
of a request from the leader of the Public Conference 44 Electric Vehicle Work Group, 
along with the investor-owned utilities and various environmental stakeholders. Generally, 
the utilities offer charger rebates and other related incentives to residential and 
nonresidential customers. The utilities were also authorized to create programs to install, 
own, and operate public chargers within their territories. The order authorized about 
900 public chargers and required their installation on property leased, owned, or occupied 
by a unit of State, county, or municipal government. 
 
Federal regulations require an average annual uptime for certain publicly accessible 
federally funded EV chargers of more than 97%. 
 
Pursuant to § 13-201 of the Public Utilities Article, in addition to any other authorized 
penalty, PSC may impose a civil penalty of up to $25,000 against a person who violates 
specified provisions or an outstanding direction, order, rule, or regulation of PSC. Each day 
or part of a day the violation continues is a separate offense. Civil penalties collected by 
PSC under this authority are paid into various special funds, depending on the nature of the 
violation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 834/ Page 3 
Additional Comments (Electricity Rates):  PSC advises that electricity rates may 
increase due to the bill but did not provide additional information as to the potential 
magnitude of the increase. Ultimately, allowable costs will be recovered by the electric 
companies through electricity rates paid by all electric customers, including the State and 
local governments and small businesses. Based on the requirements in the bill, and that 
PSC will determine cost recovery, the Department of Legislative Services believes the 
effect to be generally limited. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; FederalRegister.gov; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 26, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3