START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 843 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 843 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Baltimore Regional Water Governance Task Force 
 
   
This emergency bill establishes the Baltimore Regional Water Governance Task Force to 
review specified findings, assess alternative governance structures for the Baltimore 
region’s water and wastewater utility, analyze the fiscal implications and efficiencies of 
each alternative governance structure, and make a recommendation regarding the 
governance model best suited for water and wastewater systems in the Baltimore region 
and the legislation and funding necessary to establish the recommended model. The Mayor 
of Baltimore City and the Baltimore County Executive must jointly provide staff for the 
task force. The task force must report its findings and recommendations to the Mayor of 
Baltimore City, the Baltimore County Executive, the Governor, and the General Assembly 
by January 30, 2024. In developing its recommendations and report, the task force must 
consult with the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and the Maryland 
Environmental Service (MES). The bill terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE and MES both advise that they can consult with the task force as 
necessary with existing budgeted resources. State revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County advises that any expense reimbursements for task force 
members and staffing costs for the county are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within 
existing budgeted resources. Although Baltimore City did not respond to a request for 
information regarding the fiscal effect of this bill, it is assumed that any costs are also 
minimal and absorbable within existing resources. Local revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 843/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must (1) review the findings of two specified tasks of the 
Water/Sewer Services Comprehensive Business Process Review for Baltimore City and 
Baltimore County as finalized in July 2021 and other existing regional water and 
wastewater governance models to assess how different regional approaches may improve 
specified metrics; (2) assess alternative governance structures for the Baltimore region’s 
water and wastewater utility, including specified frameworks; (3) analyze the fiscal 
implications and efficiencies of each alternative governance structure, including estimated 
short- and long-term costs, 10-year historical costs that both jurisdictions have paid to the 
utility, and cost-savings associated with specified items and activities; and (4) recommend 
the governance model best suited for water and wastewater systems in the Baltimore region 
and the necessary legislation and funding to establish the recommended model. 
 
Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore County Metropolitan District, established by the 
General Assembly pursuant to Chapter 539 of 1924, is the geographic boundary within 
which a property may be eligible to receive public water and sewer service. Eligibility for 
service also requires the correct designation in the Water and Sewer Master Plan. 
 
The rates to be charged by Baltimore City for furnishing water to consumers in the county 
must be established by agreement between Baltimore City and the county, subject to 
approval by the Public Service Commission. The Mayor and City Council of 
Baltimore City must furnish water to the metropolitan district of the county at cost and 
entirely without profit or loss. The county and the city must, from time to time, determine 
by agreement, if possible, the cost to Baltimore City of furnishing water to consumers in 
the metropolitan district of the county, as specified. 
 
Based on information provided in the July 2021 Water/Sewer Services Comprehensive 
Business Process Review, under the current governance framework, Baltimore City is 
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the water distribution system and related 
assets (pumps, storage, etc.) for both Baltimore City and the metropolitan district, all water 
filtration facilities, the wastewater conveyance systems within the city, and all wastewater 
treatment plants. The city is also responsible for billing and customer service for all water 
customers in the city and the county. Water and wastewater rates, fees and charges for city 
customers are set by the city. Baltimore County is responsible for the planning, design, and 
construction of new water facilities that solely benefit county customers and the operation 
and maintenance of the county’s wastewater conveyance system, including sewage 
pumping stations. The county is responsible for billing and customer service related to 
wastewater service for county residents. Water and wastewater rates, fees, and charges for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 843/ Page 3 
county customers are set by the Baltimore County Executive. A July 2022 executive order 
issued by the Baltimore County Executive altered the annual water distribution charges 
and sewer service charges for properties in the county. 
 
Each county (including Baltimore City) must have an individual or group (with adjoining 
counties) plan that is approved by MDE that has a 10-year forecasted water and sewerage 
plan to demonstrate how safe and adequate water and sewerage facilities will be provided 
to support planned redevelopment and new growth that is outlined in their comprehensive 
land use plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 880 (Senators Sydnor and Carter) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, and Howard counties; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Environmental Service; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
Enrolled - April 10, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3