START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 848 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 848 
(Delegate Rose) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Drinking Water - Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program - Establishment 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes the Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program within the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). The purpose of the pilot program is to 
authorize the regulated use of reclaimed water as a source for “drinking water treatment 
facilities.” The bill authorizes MDE to review, permit, and regulate a process to use 
reclaimed water as a source for a drinking water treatment facility through a potable reuse 
permit under certain circumstances. The bill establishes provisions governing permit 
applications, the issuance and terms of permits, grounds for permit denial and revocation, 
and the renewal of permits. MDE must accept permit applications between July 1, 2023, 
and June 30, 2024. The bill establishes a related reporting requirement for MDE and 
authorizes MDE to adopt regulations. Except for specified provisions relating to the 
renewal of permits, the bill terminates June 30, 2028. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $25,000 in FY 2023; out-years reflect 
annualization and ongoing costs. General fund expenditures may increase further, as 
discussed below. State revenues are not affected; there is no permit fee. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
25,000 
139,900 
145,900 
152,300 
158,900 
Net Effect 
($25,000) 
($139,900) 
($145,900) 
($152,300) 
($158,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Although any participation is voluntary, the bill creates a potential novel 
source of drinking water for local governments. To the extent that a local government 
participates, local expenditures likely increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for certain small 
businesses, as discussed below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 848/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Key Definitions 
 
A “drinking water treatment facility” is a facility that is used to treat water in a public water 
system. “Environmental buffer” means a reservoir, basin, or similar area above ground, the 
purpose of which is to store or impound source water for a drinking water treatment facility. 
 
Authorized Review, Permitting, and Regulation 
 
MDE may review, permit, and regulate a process to use reclaimed water as a source for a 
drinking water treatment facility through a potable reuse permit if (1) MDE determines that 
the process will meet or surpass safe drinking water standards before entering the 
distribution system; (2) the reclaimed water is stored in an “environmental buffer” for at 
least 180 days before intake into a drinking water treatment facility; (3) the reclaimed water 
meets specified requirements relating to contaminant levels, treatment for removal of 
pathogens that meets or exceeds specified levels, and controls for maximum concentrations 
of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) chemicals established by MDE, as 
specified; (4) the reclaimed water undergoes testing and reporting to verify that those 
requirements are met; (5) the process includes reverse osmosis and ultraviolet disinfection; 
(6) emergency procedures are in place to protect and ensure the availability of the potable 
water supply, as specified; (7) the applicant gives MDE the right of entry on the permit site 
(at any reasonable time) to inspect or investigate any existing or potential violations of the 
potable refuse permit; (8) the applicant demonstrates to MDE’s satisfaction that, at all times 
and under all operating conditions, the volume of reclaimed water entering the drinking 
water treatment facility contains no more than 10% by volume of reclaimed water that was 
delivered to the environmental buffer during any 24-hour period; (9) the process includes 
appropriate recordkeeping requirements; and (10) the process complies with all other 
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements. 
 
An applicant may request that reclaimed water be stored in an environmental buffer for 
less than 180 days (but not less than 60 days) before intake into a drinking water treatment 
facility if (1) the process reliably and consistently meets the requirements of the potable 
reuse permit under varying operating conditions to MDE’s satisfaction and (2) the 
applicant demonstrates to MDE’s satisfaction that a lower residence time sufficiently 
protects public health. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 848/ Page 3 
Permit Applications and Issuances 
 
MDE must accept applications for potable reuse permits between July 1, 2023, and 
June 30, 2024, inclusive. A successful application for a potable reuse permit must 
(1) demonstrate the ability to meet specified requirements to MDE’s satisfaction and 
(2) include, among other things, a completed feasibility study. 
 
Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article, which governs public participation in the 
permitting process, governs the issuance of potable reuse permits. 
 
MDE may refuse to issue a potable refuse permit under specified conditions. Among other 
things, MDE may refuse to issue a permit if the applicant fails to provide any requested 
information or fails to demonstrate compliance with the bill to MDE’s satisfaction. 
 
Permit Terms, Renewal, and Revocation 
 
MDE may include in a potable reuse permit any term, condition, or requirement that it 
deems appropriate to protect the public health or the environment. The permit requirements 
are supplemental to, and do not override, any other statute, regulation, permit, order, or 
decree. 
 
A potable refuse permit is effective for five years. Before a permit expires, MDE may 
renew a permit after administrative review in accordance with regulations that MDE adopts 
and in accordance with Title 1 Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article. 
 
MDE may revoke a potable reuse permit under specified conditions. Among other things, 
MDE may revoke a permit if it finds that the application included false or inaccurate 
information, the conditions or requirements of the permit have been or are about to be 
violated, or the reclaimed water may threaten public health, safety, comfort, or the 
environment. 
 
Except as otherwise provided in the bill, a public water system operating under a potable 
reuse permit is subject to requirements for public water systems that use surface water 
under the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 26.04.01, which, broadly speaking, 
governs the quality of drinking water in the State. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
By December 31, 2024, MDE must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
(1) the status of the pilot program; (2) whether the pilot program should be extended or 
made permanent; and (3) any recommended statutory or regulatory changes that MDE 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 848/ Page 4 
recommends to permanently authorize the regulated use of reclaimed water as a source for 
drinking water treatment facilities, if appropriate. 
 
Permit Renewal Provisions That Do Not Terminate 
 
Beginning July 1, 2028, MDE is authorized to renew a potable reuse permit if (1) the 
renewal occurs before the previous permit expires and (2) the original potable reuse permit 
was issued by June 30, 2028. If MDE renews a permit in accordance with this provision, 
MDE must renew the permit (1) after administrative review in accordance with regulations 
adopted by MDE and (2) in accordance with Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article. 
Unlike all the other provisions of the bill, these provisions do not terminate. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Water Systems and the Maryland Water Supply Program 
 
Federal and State laws and regulations govern the activities of MDE’s Water Supply 
Program, water utilities, and water users. The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), originally 
passed in 1974 (40 Code of Federal Regulations §§ 141 and 143), is the main federal law 
that ensures the quality of drinking water in the United States. Under SDWA, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) sets standards for drinking water quality and 
oversees the states, localities, and water suppliers who implement those standards. SDWA 
was amended in 1986 and 1996 and requires several actions to protect drinking water and 
its sources (rivers, lakes, reservoirs, springs, and ground water wells). These standards 
generally do not apply to private drinking water wells. Rather, private well owners are 
responsible for the safety of their own wells after initial construction and certification is 
completed. MDE is responsible for primary enforcement of SDWA in the State. 
 
Specific requirements for public water systems are included under COMAR 26.04.01. 
Among other things, before constructing a new public water system, or increasing the 
capacity or significantly modifying an existing public water system, a construction permit 
must be obtained from the approving authority. There are also several treatment 
requirements and maximum contaminant level standards. 
 
Public water systems are systems that provide the public water for human consumption 
through pipes or other constructed conveyances and have at least 15 service connections 
or regularly serve at least 25 individuals. 
 
Federal Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 848/ Page 5 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, EPA delegates authority to issue NPDES permits to MDE. 
MDE’s Water and Science Administration and Land and Materials Administration issue 
discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by controlling industrial and 
municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are regulated through 
combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater discharges are regulated 
through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
 
Reclaimed Water  
 
It is the policy of the State to promote and encourage the use of “reclaimed water” in order 
to conserve water supplies and to meet other stated goals. MDE is statutorily required to 
encourage the use of reclaimed water for irrigation. “Reclaimed water” is defined as 
sewage that has been treated to a high quality suitable for various reuses and meets water 
quality standards for certain contaminants. Reclaimed water is authorized for irrigation of 
farmland, golf courses, athletic fields, turf, landscaping, and any other use that MDE 
considers appropriate. 
 
Graywater  
 
Pursuant to Chapter 705 of 2018, the use of graywater is authorized for residential 
purposes, under specified conditions, and if the use is permitted under regulations 
established by MDE. However, as of the writing of this fiscal and policy note, MDE has 
not yet promulgated regulations authorizing the use of graywater. Pursuant to Chapter 705, 
“graywater” is defined as used, untreated water generated by the use of and collected from 
a shower, a bathtub, or a lavatory sink; the term does not include water from a toilet, a 
kitchen sink, or a dishwashing machine. 
 
The use of graywater is currently regulated as sewage. A person may only dispose of 
sewage in accordance with an approved septic system permit or other method of disposal 
approved by the Secretary of the Environment (or designee). State law also prohibits a 
discharge of any wastewater, regardless of volume, into the waters of the State, without a 
permit from MDE. 
 
Public Notice for Certain Permit Applications 
 
Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article establishes the general public participation 
requirements for a number of permits issued by MDE, including permits to discharge 
pollutants into waters of the State. When applying for a permit listed under § 1-601(a) of 
the Environment Article, the applicant must generally include, as part of the permit 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 848/ Page 6 
application, the environmental justice (EJ) Score from the Maryland EJ tool for the census 
tract where the applicant is seeking a permit. 
 
Pursuant to § 1-602 of the Environment Article, whenever MDE is required to publish 
notice, the notice must be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a 
daily or weekly generally circulated newspaper in the geographic area where the proposed 
facility is located. Applicants bear all costs incurred by MDE in providing notice. 
Additionally, whenever MDE is required to publish notice of an application for a permit, 
MDE must (1) electronically post notice of the permit application on its website and 
(2) provide a method for interested persons to electronically request any additional related 
notices. The notice must include (1) the applicant’s name and address; (2) a description of 
the location and nature of the proposed permitted activity; (3) a reference to applicable 
statutes or regulations; (4) the time and place of any scheduled information meeting or 
public hearing, or a description where that information and any other permit application 
information can be found; (5) the EJ Score for the census tract where the applicant is 
seeking a permit, the address for the MDE website to access the EJ score review, and a 
description of the EJ indicators contributing to the EJ Score for the census tract where the 
applicant is seeking a permit; and (6) any other information that MDE determines is 
necessary. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $25,022 in fiscal 2023, and by $139,858 in 
fiscal 2024, which assumes an implementation date of June 1, 2023. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring two contractual regulatory and compliance engineers to (1) establish the 
Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program; (2) develop drinking water standards and a process 
to evaluate potable reuse permit applications to ensure safe regulation of the use of 
reclaimed water as a source for a drinking water treatment facility; (3) accept and review 
permit applications; and (4) monitor operations and implementation for any facilities that 
are granted a potable reuse permit. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
MDE receives two permit applications and approves both applications; and 
 
this is a new type of permit for potable water and there are no applicable federal 
templates for similar programs, so MDE needs to develop program standards and 
review criteria, which is a time-consuming process. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 848/ Page 7 
 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Contractual Positions (New) 
2.0 
0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$11,624 
137,717 
Operating Expenses 
  13,398 
    2,141 
Total MDE Expenditures 
$25,022 
$139,858 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses through the termination of the 
pilot program on June 30, 2028. MDE anticipates that, based on estimated levels of 
participation, it can renew any qualifying potable reuse permits beginning July 1, 2028 
using existing staff. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
The Maryland Department of Health’s (MDH) Laboratories Administration provides 
analytical support services for State agencies and program offices throughout the State and 
is the primary laboratory in the State that conducts water testing for MDE and local health 
departments. The Laboratories Administration advises that it is the only laboratory in the 
State that has the ability to perform PFAS testing, and that current staff trained to test for 
PFAS are oversubscribed. Thus, the Laboratories Administration anticipates that if it must 
process water tests for PFAS for even a handful of permits, additional full-time staff must 
be hired. The Laboratories Administration further notes that training an analyst to test for 
PFAS takes between six months to one year. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) acknowledges that the Laboratories 
Administration is oversubscribed and likely does not have the capacity to absorb any 
meaningful increase in workload. DLS also acknowledges that PFAS testing is complex 
and requires significant training. However, with only two anticipated program participants, 
the increase in testing generated by the bill is likely minimal. Also, there are out-of-state 
laboratories that might be able to handle the additional testing generated by the bill. 
Accordingly, while the Laboratories Administration appears to be understaffed, it is 
unclear that this bill alone justifies the need for additional staff. Nevertheless, if MDH must 
hire staff to be able to accommodate the additional testing generated by the bill, general 
fund expenditures increase (beginning as early as fiscal 2023) to hire staff. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Although any participation in the pilot program is voluntary, local 
governments may benefit from the flexibility to use reclaimed water as a potential source 
for drinking water. However, to the extent that a local government applies for a potable 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 848/ Page 8 
reuse permit, local expenditures likely increase, potentially significantly, to adequately 
treat reclaimed water. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may provide new business and employment opportunities 
for small businesses involved in the treatment and use of reclaimed water as a source for a 
drinking water treatment facility. There could be opportunities for small businesses that 
create plans for using reclaimed water, that sell parts or equipment, and potentially, for 
those that provide installation or maintenance services. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 407 (Senators Ready and Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Maryland 
Environmental 
Service; 
Baltimore 
City; 
Montgomery County; cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - May 15, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8