START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 501

Chapter 501

(House Bill 806)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Autonomous Vehicle Converters – Sale of Autonomous Vehicles

FOR the purpose of authorizing an autonomous vehicle converter to sell, transfer, lease,
offer for sale, or resell a converted autonomous vehicle or a motor vehicle purchased
with the intent to convert the motor vehicle into a converted autonomous vehicle;
establishing that certain portions of this Act apply only to motor vehicles intended
for commercial or industrial use; prohibiting an autonomous vehicle converter from
holding certain occupational vehicle licenses issued under the Maryland Vehicle
Law; and generally relating to autonomous vehicle converters.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 15–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 15–101(c)(3) and 15–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 15–901 through 15–903 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Autonomous
Vehicle Converters”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

15–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) (3) “Dealer” does not include:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 501 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) A public official who sells or disposes of vehicles in the
performance of his official duties;

(ii) An insurance company, finance company, bank, or other lending
institution licensed or otherwise authorized to do business in this State that, to save it from
loss, sells or disposes of vehicles under a contractual right and in the regular course of its
business;

(iii) A licensed auctioneer acting on behalf of a seller, secured party
or owner and where title does not pass to the auctioneer and the auction is not for the
purpose of avoiding the provisions of this title;

(iv) A receiver, trustee, personal representative, or other person
appointed by or acting under the authority of any court;

(v) Either a manufacturer or distributor who sells or distributes
vehicles to licensed dealers or a person employed by a manufacturer or distributor to
promote the sale of the vehicles of the manufacturer or distributor, if that manufacturer,
distributor, or person does not sell vehicles to retail buyers;

(vi) A person who sells or disposes of vehicles acquired and used for
personal or business use and not for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this title, if
that person is not engaged in buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles as a business;

(vii) An automotive dismantler and recycler who during the normal
course of business acquires a salvage vehicle and transfers the vehicle on a salvage
certificate. However, if the automotive dismantler and recycler rebuilds and sells more than
5 vehicles during a 12–month period to a person other than another automotive dismantler
and recycler or licensed dealer, the automotive dismantler and recycler must be licensed as
a dealer under § 15–302 of this title;

(viii) A person engaged in the leasing of motor vehicles under leases
not intended as security; [or]

(ix) A religious, charitable, or volunteer organization exempt from
taxation under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, the Department of Human Services,
or a local department of social services transferring a vehicle under § 13–810 of this article;
OR

(X) AN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE CONVERTER AS DEFINED IN §
15–901 OF THIS TITLE.

15–201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 501

(b) (1) “Distributor” means a distributor who is authorized by the
manufacturer or the manufacturer’s authorized importer to enter into franchise
agreements with dealers of:

[(1)] (I) New motor vehicles constructed or assembled outside of the
United States; or

[(2)] (II) New two–stage vehicles completed outside of the United States
by a second–stage manufacturer.

(2) “DISTRIBUTOR” DOES NOT INCLUDE AN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE
CONVERTER AS DEFINED IN § 15–901 OF THIS TITLE.

(c) (1) “Factory branch” means a branch office of a manufacturer from which
the manufacturer:

[(1)] (I) Sells or promotes the sale to dealers in this State of a particular
brand or make of new motor vehicles, or new completed two–stage vehicles;

[(2)] (II) Directs and supervises its representatives in this State; or

[(3)] (III) Supervises or contacts its dealers or prospective dealers in this
State.

(2) “FACTORY BRANCH” DOES NOT INCLUDE AN AUTONOMOUS
VEHICLE CONVERTER AS DEFINED IN § 15–901 OF THIS TITLE.

(d) “License” means a manufacturer’s, distributor’s, or factory branch’s license
issued by the Administration under this subtitle.

(e) (1) “Manufacturer” means:

[(1)] (I) A manufacturer of new motor vehicles constructed or assembled
in the United States;

[(2)] (II) A second–stage manufacturer of new two–stage vehicles
completed in the United States; and

[(3)] (III) In the case of trucks, a person engaged in the business of
manufacturing truck component parts.

(2) “MANUFACTURER” DOES NOT INCLUDE AN AUTONOMOUS
VEHICLE CONVERTER AS DEFINED IN § 15–901 OF THIS TITLE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 501 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) “Second–stage manufacturer” has the meaning stated in § 13–113.2 of this
article.

SUBTITLE 9. AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE CONVERTERS.

15–901.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “AUTOMATED DRIVING STANDARDS” MEANS THE SIX LEVELS OF
DRIVING AUTOMATION ESTABLISHED UNDER THE SAE INTERNATIONAL J3016
STANDARD.

(C) “AUTOMATED DRIVING SYSTEM” MEANS THE HARDWARE AND
SOFTWARE THAT ARE COLLECTIVELY CAPABLE OF PERFORMING PART OR ALL OF
THE DYNAMIC DRIVING TASK ON A SUSTAINED BASIS, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER
THE DRIVING TASK IS LIMITED TO A SPECIFIC OPERATIONAL DESIGN DOMAIN.

(D) “AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE CONVERTER” MEANS A PERSON THAT:

(1) ALTERS OR MODIFIES A NEW OR USED MOTOR VEHICLE BY
ADDITION, SUBSTITUTION, OR REMOVAL OF COMPONENTS, OTHER THAN READILY
ATTACHABLE COMPONENTS, IN COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE MOTOR
VEHICLE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER FEDERAL LAW; AND

(2) ASSEMBLES, INSTALLS, AND AFFIXES AN AUTOMATED DRIVING
SYSTEM TO A NEW OR USED MOTOR VEHICLE IN SUCH A MANNER THAT CONVERTS
THE VEHICLE INTO A CONVERTED AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE.

(E) “CONVERTED AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE” MEANS A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT:

(1) IS EQUIPPED WITH AN AFTERMARKET AUTOMATED DRIVING
SYSTEM CAPABLE OF OPERATING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SOME OR ALL OF THE
AUTOMATED DRIVING STANDARDS;

(2) MEETS OR EXCEEDS WEIGHT OR CAPACITY THRESHOLDS
ESTABLISHED UNDER FEDERAL LAW; AND

(3) IS CAPABLE OF OPERATING IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE
STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 501

(F) “OPERATIONAL DESIGN DOMAIN” MEANS OPERATING CONDITIONS
UNDER WHICH A GIVEN AUTOMATED DRIVING SYSTEM IS SPECIFICALLY DESIGNED
TO FUNCTION, INCLUDING CONDITIONS SUBJECT TO:

(1) ENVIRONMENTAL RESTRICTIONS;

(2) GEOGRAPHIC RESTRICTIONS;

(3) TIME–OF–DAY RESTRICTIONS; OR

(4) THE REQUIRED PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF CERTAIN TRAFFIC OR
ROADWAY CHARACTERISTICS.

15–902.

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES ONLY TO MOTOR VEHICLES INTENDED FOR
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USE.

15–903.

(A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE, AN
AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE CONVERTER MAY SELL, TRANSFER, LEASE, OFFER FOR
SALE, OR RESELL:

(1) A CONVERTED AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE; OR

(2) A MOTOR VEHICLE PURCHASED BY AN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE
CONVERTER WITH THE INTENT TO CONVERT THE MOTOR VEHICLE INTO A
CONVERTED AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE.

(B) AN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE CONVERTER MAY NOT BE LICENSED UNDER
THIS TITLE AS A MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY BRANCH OR AS A
DEALER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5