START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 213

Chapter 213

(House Bill 816)

AN ACT concerning

Procurement – Minority Business Enterprises and Veteran–Owned Small
Business Enterprises – Participation Goal Scorecard

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women
Business Affairs to develop a scorecard to evaluate units of State government on the
units’ performance toward meeting certain participation goals under the Minority
Business Enterprise Program and the Veteran–Owned Small Business Enterprise
Program; establishing a certain grading scale for the scorecard; requiring grades
achieved by each unit to be ~~included~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office’s~~ ~~annual~~ ~~report~~ published each
year on the Office’s website; and generally relating to minority business enterprise
and veteran–owned small business enterprise procurement participation.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 9–307
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

9–307.

(A) THE OFFICE SHALL DEVELOP A SCORECARD TO EVALUATE UNITS OF
STATE GOVERNMENT ON THE UNITS’ PERFORMANCE TOWARD MEETING:

(1) THE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION GOAL
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE; AND

(2) ANY MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE SUBGOALS ESTABLISHED
UNDER § 14–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE; AND

(3) (2) THE VETERAN–OWNED SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE GOAL
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–602 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE.

(B) THE SCORECARD SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING GRADING SCALE:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 213 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) “A” GRADE FOR A UNIT THAT ACHIEVES 90% OR MORE OF THE
APPLICABLE GOAL;

(2) “B” GRADE FOR A UNIT THAT ACHIEVES BETWEEN 80% AND 89%
OF THE APPLICABLE GOAL;

(3) “C” GRADE FOR A UNIT THAT ACHIEVES BETWEEN 70% AND 79%
OF THE APPLICABLE GOAL; AND

(4) “FAILING” GRADE FOR A UNIT THAT ACHIEVES BELOW 70% OF
THE APPLICABLE GOAL A GRADING SCALE DEVELOPED BY THE OFFICE AS A
WEIGHTED SYSTEM THAT INCLUDES EACH UNIT’S CONTRIBUTION TOWARD MEETING
THE STATEWIDE:

(1) MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION GOAL; AND

(2) VETERAN–OWNED SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE GOAL.

(C) (1) THE OFFICE SHALL INCLUDE PUBLISH THE GRADES ACHIEVED BY
EACH UNIT UNDER THIS SECTION IN THE ANNUAL REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER §
9–306 OF THIS SUBTITLE. UNDER THIS SECTION EACH YEAR ON THE OFFICE’S
WEBSITE.

(2) WITHIN 30 DAYS OF PUBLISHING INFORMATION ON ITS WEBSITE
IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE OFFICE SHALL
SUBMIT THE INFORMATION PUBLISHED ON ITS WEBSITE TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE
THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2