START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 690

Chapter 690

(House Bill 874)

AN ACT concerning

Office of the Attorney General – ~~Environment~~ Environmental and Natural
Resources ~~Monitoring~~ Crimes Unit – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the ~~Environment~~ Environmental and Natural Resources
~~Monitoring~~ Crimes Unit of the Office of the Attorney General to investigate and
prosecute cases against persons that violate State criminal environmental and
natural resources laws ~~and~~ ~~to~~ ~~assist~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environment~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Natural~~ ~~Resources~~ ~~in~~ ~~investigating~~ ~~or~~ ~~bringing~~ ~~a~~ ~~civil~~ ~~action~~
~~regarding~~ ~~a~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~civil~~ ~~environmental~~ ~~and~~ ~~natural~~ ~~resources~~ ~~laws;~~ and
generally relating to the ~~Environment~~ Environmental and Natural Resources
~~Monitoring~~ Crimes Unit.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 6–701 ~~and~~ through ~~6–702~~ 6–703 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 7.
~~Environment~~ Environmental and Natural Resources ~~Monitoring~~ Crimes Unit”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

SUBTITLE 7. ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCES
~~MONITORING~~ CRIMES UNIT.

6–701.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “DIRECTOR CHIEF COUNSEL” MEANS THE DIRECTOR CHIEF COUNSEL
OF ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCES MONITORING
CRIMES.

(C) “UNIT” MEANS THE ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL
RESOURCES MONITORING CRIMES UNIT OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 690 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

6–702.

(A) (1) THERE IS AN ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL
RESOURCES MONITORING CRIMES UNIT OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL.

(2) THE FUNCTION OF THE UNIT IS TO:

(I) INVESTIGATE AND PROSECUTE CASES AGAINST PERSONS
THAT VIOLATE STATE CRIMINAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LAWS; AND

(II) ON REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
OR THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES, ASSIST THE DEPARTMENT IN
~~INVESTIGATING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~BRINGING~~ ~~A~~ ~~CIVIL~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
CIVIL ENVIRONMENTAL OR NATURAL RESOURCES LAWS OF THE STATE
INVESTIGATE AND PROSECUTE ANY OTHER CRIMINAL OFFENSE DISCOVERED IN THE
COURSE OF AN INVESTIGATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) IN CONDUCTING AN INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTING CASES
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE UNIT MAY ACT WITH THE FULL POWERS, RIGHTS,
PRIVILEGES, AND DUTIES OF A STATE’S ATTORNEY, INCLUDING THE USE OF A
GRAND JURY IN ANY COUNTY.

(B) (1) THE UNIT SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A FULL–TIME DIRECTOR CHIEF COUNSEL OF
ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCES MONITORING
CRIMES; AND

(II) STAFF, INCLUDING ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL
~~RESOURCES~~ ~~JUSTICE~~ ~~MONITORS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ATTORNEYS~~ ~~SPECIALIZING~~ ~~IN~~
~~ENVIRONMENTAL~~ ~~AND~~ ~~NATURAL~~ ~~RESOURCES~~ ~~LAW~~ ASSISTANT ATTORNEYS
GENERAL, INVESTIGATORS, AND ADMINISTRATORS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

(2) SALARIES OF THE DIRECTOR CHIEF COUNSEL, AND STAFF, AND
~~ENVIRONMENT~~ ~~AND~~ ~~NATURAL~~ ~~RESOURCES~~ ~~JUSTICE~~ ~~MONITORS~~ AND EXPENSES FOR
RENT, TRAVEL, EQUIPMENT, SUPPLIES, AND GENERAL OPERATING EXPENSES
NECESSARY FOR THE WORK OF THE UNIT SHALL BE AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 690

(3) IN COOPERATION WITH THE SECRETARY OF BUDGET AND
MANAGEMENT, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL SET MINIMUM SALARIES,
QUALIFICATIONS, AND STANDARDS OF TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE FOR POSITIONS
WITHIN THE UNIT.

(C) THE UNIT SHALL: INVESTIGATE AND PROSECUTE THE STATE’S
CRIMINAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE LAWS.

(1) COOPERATE WITH STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS IN PROSECUTING POLLUTION CASES;

(2) PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS OF POLLUTION CRIMES AND
~~OTHER~~ ~~ENVIRONMENTAL~~ ~~CRIMES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~PROFESSIONALS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~ASSIST~~
THESE VICTIMS;

(3) PROSECUTE THE STATE’S CRIMINAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND
NATURAL RESOURCES LAWS, INCLUDING BRINGING AND DEFENDING CASES UNDER
~~WILDLIFE~~ ~~LAWS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LAWS~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MANAGEMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~LANDS~~
AND NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES IN THE STATE;

(4) ON REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT OR
THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES, ASSIST THE DEPARTMENT IN
~~INVESTIGATING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~BRINGING~~ ~~A~~ ~~CIVIL~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
CIVIL ENVIRONMENTAL OR NATURAL RESOURCES LAWS OF THE STATE;

(5) ADVISE AND ASSIST THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE SECRETARY
OF THE ENVIRONMENT, AND THE SECRETARY OF NATURAL RESOURCES ON
ENVIRONMENTAL LEGAL AND POLICY QUESTIONS; AND

(6) WORK WITH NEIGHBORING STATES AND THE FEDERAL
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES DIVISION OF THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL
AND NATURAL RESOURCES LAWS ACROSS STATE BOUNDARIES.

(D) AS APPROPRIATE, THE DIRECTOR SHALL SERVE AS THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL’S DESIGNEE ON TASK FORCES AND COMMISSIONS RELATED TO
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES POLICY.

(E) (D) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 30 EACH YEAR, THE UNIT ATTORNEY
GENERAL SHALL REPORT TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE SECRETARY OF THE
ENVIRONMENT, THE SECRETARY OF NATURAL RESOURCES, THE GOVERNOR, AND,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON ALL
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE UNIT AND ANY ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 690 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE ENVIRONMENT OR THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES IN RESPONSE
TO FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE UNIT.

6–703.

(A) (1) FOR THE LIMITED PURPOSE OF FURTHERING AN ONGOING
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR A
DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL OR AN ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL DESIGNATED
IN WRITING BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY ISSUE IN ANY COURT IN THE STATE A
SUBPOENA TO A PERSON TO PRODUCE TELEPHONE, BUSINESS, GOVERNMENT, OR
CORPORATE RECORDS OR DOCUMENTS.

(2) A SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE SERVED IN
THE SAME MANNER AS A SUBPOENA ISSUED BY A CIRCUIT COURT.

(B) (1) A PERSON MAY HAVE AN ATTORNEY PRESENT DURING ANY
CONTACT MADE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION WITH THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL OR AN AGENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

(2) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL ADVISE A PERSON OF THE
RIGHT TO COUNSEL WHEN THE SUBPOENA IS SERVED.

(C) (1) (I) IF A PERSON FAILS TO OBEY A LAWFULLY SERVED
SUBPOENA UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
MAY REPORT THE FAILURE TO OBEY THE SUBPOENA TO THE CIRCUIT COURT WITH
JURISDICTION OVER THE MATTER.

(II) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE
SUBPOENA AND PROOF OF SERVICE TO THE CIRCUIT COURT.

(2) AFTER CONDUCTING A HEARING AT WHICH THE PERSON THAT
ALLEGEDLY FAILED TO COMPLY WITH A SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION HAS HAD AN OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD AND BE REPRESENTED
BY COUNSEL, THE COURT MAY GRANT APPROPRIATE RELIEF.

(D) THIS SECTION DOES NOT ALLOW THE CONTRAVENTION, DENIAL, OR
ABROGATION OF A PRIVILEGE OR RIGHT RECOGNIZED BY LAW.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4