START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 569

Chapter 569

(House Bill 834)

AN ACT concerning

Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure – Requirements
(Electric Vehicle Charging Reliability Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Public Service Commission to expand the EV Pilot
Program to allow participating electric companies to install EV charging stations in
multifamily dwellings in underserved communities; requiring the Commission to
terminate the expansion of the EV Pilot Program on a certain date; requiring an
electric company operating an EV charging network to ensure the EV charging
stations in the EV charging network ~~have~~ maintain ~~a~~ certain ~~minimum~~ ~~annual~~
uptime standards, subject to certain exceptions; requiring an electric company
operating an EV charging network to be subject to certain reporting requirements;
requiring ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~require~~ an electric company participating in the EV
Pilot Program to maintain an adequate number of staff to monitor, assess, and repair
certain EV charging stations; ~~requiring~~ ~~an~~ ~~electric~~ ~~company~~ ~~participating~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~EV~~
~~Pilot~~ ~~Program~~ ~~that~~ ~~fails~~ ~~to~~ ~~satisfy~~ ~~certain~~ ~~uptime~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~to~~ ~~file~~ ~~a~~ ~~corrective~~
~~action~~ ~~plan~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ and generally relating
to electric vehicle charging infrastructure.

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–901 through 7–905 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Electric
Vehicle Charging Infrastructure”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

SUBTITLE 9. ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE.

7–901.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “DIRECT CURRENT FAST CHARGING” MEANS A DIRECT CURRENT
CHARGER THAT CAN PROVIDE A MINIMUM OF 50 KILOWATTS OF POWER TO AN
ELECTRIC VEHICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 569 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (B) “EV CHARGING NETWORK” MEANS THE TOTAL NUMBER OF EV
CHARGING STATIONS AN ELECTRIC COMPANY INSTALLS OR MAINTAINS FOR PUBLIC
USE.

(D) (C) “EV CHARGING STATION” MEANS A CONNECTED POINT IN AN
ELECTRICAL WIRING INSTALLATION:

(1) AT WHICH CURRENT IS TAKEN TO CHARGE A BATTERY OR ANY
OTHER ENERGY STORAGE DEVICE IN AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE; AND

(2) CAPABLE OF PROVIDING LEVEL 2 CHARGING OR DIRECT
CURRENT FAST CHARGING.

(E) (D) “EV PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE EV PILOT PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED BY PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION ORDER NO. 88997 AND
ADMINISTERED BY THE COMMISSION.

(F) (E) “LEVEL 2 CHARGING” MEANS THE ABILITY TO CHARGE A BATTERY
OR OTHER ENERGY STORAGE DEVICE IN AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE IN A MANNER THAT:

(1) IS CAPABLE OF USING AN ALTERNATING CURRENT ELECTRICAL
SERVICE WITH A MINIMUM OF 208 VOLTS; AND

(2) MEETS APPLICABLE INDUSTRY SAFETY STANDARDS.

(G) (F) “UNDERSERVED COMMUNITY” MEANS ANY CENSUS TRACT IN
WHICH, ACCORDING TO THE MOST RECENT U.S. CENSUS BUREAU SURVEY:

(1) AT LEAST 25% OF THE RESIDENTS QUALIFY AS LOW–INCOME;

(2) AT LEAST 50% OF THE RESIDENTS IDENTIFY AS NONWHITE; OR

(3) AT LEAST 15% OF THE RESIDENTS HAVE LIMITED ENGLISH
PROFICIENCY.

(H) (G) “UPTIME” MEANS THE AVAILABILITY AND CONSISTENCY OF AN
EV CHARGING STATION IN AN EV CHARGING NETWORK TO SUCCESSFULLY
DISPENSE ELECTRICITY AS DESIGNED, MEASURED AS A PERCENTAGE OF BOTH
HOURS AND DAYS OF A CALENDAR YEAR.

7–902.

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES TO AN ELECTRIC COMPANY THAT:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 569

(1) INSTALLS OR MAINTAINS AN EV CHARGING STATION FOR PUBLIC
USE; OR

(2) PARTICIPATES IN THE EV PILOT PROGRAM.

7–903.

(A) THE SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION
SHALL, BY ORDER OR REGULATION AND SUBJECT TO REASONABLE COST
LIMITATIONS BALANCED WITH THE PUBLIC INTEREST,:

(1) EXPAND THE EV PILOT PROGRAM TO ALLOW PARTICIPATING
ELECTRIC COMPANIES TO INSTALL EV CHARGING STATIONS IN NEW AND EXISTING
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS IN UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES; AND

(2) TERMINATE THE EV PILOT PROGRAM EXPANSION REQUIRED
UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SECTION ON DECEMBER 31, 2025.

(B) THE TERMINATION OF THE EV PILOT PROGRAM EXPANSION REQUIRED
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO:

(1) TERMINATE AN ELECTRIC COMPANY’S AUTHORITY TO OPERATE
EV CHARGING STATIONS UNDER A PROGRAM APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION ON OR
BEFORE MARCH 1, 2023;

(2) LIMIT AN ELECTRIC COMPANY’S EFFORTS TO OPERATE AND
MAINTAIN EV CHARGING STATIONS INSTALLED UNDER THE EV PILOT PROGRAM; OR

(3) IMPACT THE COST RECOVERY BY AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANY FOR THE LIFETIME OF AN EV CHARGING STATION INSTALLED UNDER THE
EV PILOT PROGRAM.

7–904.

(A) (1) AN EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN ELECTRIC COMPANY OPERATING AN EV CHARGING NETWORK
SHALL ENSURE THAT EV CHARGING STATIONS IN THE EV CHARGING NETWORK
HAVE AN AVERAGE ANNUAL MAINTAIN UPTIME OF 97% OR GREATER STANDARDS
FOR EACH EV CHARGING STATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH:

(I) FEDERAL NATIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 569 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) ALTERNATIVE UPTIME STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION.

(2) THE UPTIME REQUIREMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY TIME IN WHICH AN EV CHARGING STATION IS
UNAVAILABLE DUE TO:

(I) FORCE MAJEURE, AS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION;
OR

(II) VANDALISM.

(B) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL CALCULATE EV CHARGING STATION
UPTIME ON A QUARTERLY BASIS FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12 MONTHS.

(C) (1) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY THAT OPERATES AN EV CHARGING
STATION FOR PUBLIC USE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE SAME REPORTING
REQUIREMENTS AS AN ELECTRIC COMPANY THAT RECEIVES FEDERAL FUNDING
RELATED TO ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE.

(2) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY THAT OPERATES AN EV CHARGING
NETWORK OR EV CHARGING STATION SHALL SUBMIT THE FOLLOWING EV
CHARGING STATION DATA TO THE COMMISSION ON A QUARTERLY BASIS:

(I) THE LOCATION OF THE EV CHARGING STATION; AND

(II) FOR EACH EV CHARGING STATION:

1. CHARGING SESSION START AND END TIMES AND RATE
OF SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION;

2. THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY, IN
KILOWATT–HOURS, DISPENSED TO AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE FOR EACH CHARGING
SESSION;

3. THE PEAK AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY, IN KILOWATTS,
DISPENSED TO AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE FOR EACH CHARGING SESSION;

4. UPTIME FOR EACH OF THE PREVIOUS 3 MONTHS;

5. THE COST OF ELECTRICITY NEEDED TO OPERATE
EACH EV CHARGING STATION FOR EACH OF THE PREVIOUS 3 MONTHS;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 569

6. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR COSTS FOR EACH OF THE
PREVIOUS 3 MONTHS;

7. THE COST OF ACQUIRING REAL PROPERTY FOR USE AS
AN EV CHARGING STATION;

8. THE COST OF ACQUIRING AND INSTALLING ELECTRIC
VEHICLE CHARGING EQUIPMENT;

9. THE COST OF ACQUIRING AND INSTALLING
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES;

10. THE COST TO THE ELECTRIC COMPANY OF
CONNECTING TO THE ELECTRIC GRID AND ANY APPLICABLE CONNECTION
UPGRADES; AND

11. THE CAPACITY, IN KILOWATTS OR KILOWATT–HOURS
AS APPROPRIATE, OF EACH TYPE OF DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCE USED BY AN
EV CHARGING STATION;

12. THE NUMBER OF EV CHARGING STATIONS THAT
FAILED TO MEET THE UPTIME REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION;

13. WHEN APPLICABLE, THE REASON AN EV CHARGING
STATION FAILED TO MEET THE UPTIME REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION; AND

14. WHEN APPLICABLE, THE DATE AN EV CHARGING
STATION WAS REPAIRED.

7–905.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION, BY
ORDER OR REGULATION, SHALL REQUIRE AN AN ELECTRIC COMPANY
PARTICIPATING IN THE EV PILOT PROGRAM TO SHALL MAINTAIN AN ADEQUATE
NUMBER OF STAFF TO MONITOR, ASSESS, AND, WHEN NECESSARY, REPAIR THE EV
CHARGING STATIONS OPERATED BY THE ELECTRIC COMPANY.

(B) THE COMMISSION SHALL DETERMINE:

(1) THE NUMBER OF STAFF REQUIRED TO ACHIEVE THE UPTIME
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 569 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE METHODS AN ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY USE TO RECOVER THE
~~COSTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MAINTAINING~~ ~~ADEQUATE~~ ~~STAFF~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ACHIEVE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UPTIME~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~
OF THIS SUBTITLE AN ELECTRIC COMPANY PARTICIPATING IN THE EV PILOT
PROGRAM THAT, ACCORDING TO THE DATA SUBMITTED BY THE ELECTRIC COMPANY
TO THE COMMISSION UNDER § 7–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE, FAILS TO SATISFY THE
UPTIME REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 7–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL FILE WITH THE
COMMISSION A CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN ON OR BEFORE FEBRUARY 1 OF THE
~~CALENDAR~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~ ~~FOLLOWING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FAILURE~~
~~OCCURRED.~~

(C) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE THE
COMMISSION MAY, AS APPROPRIATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 13–201 OF THIS
ARTICLE, IMPOSE A PENALTY ON OR TAKE ADDITIONAL REMEDIAL ACTION AGAINST
AN ELECTRIC COMPANY THAT FAILS TO SATISFY THE UPTIME REQUIREMENTS
UNDER § 7–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6