START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 887 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 887 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
St. Mary’s County – Metropolitan Commission – New Facilities 
 
 
This bill updates the Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County to require the 
St. Mary’s County Metropolitan Commission (MetCom) to obtain approval from the 
St. Mary’s County Commissioners of any loan application where MetCom seeks to incur 
debt on the full faith and credit of the county prior to the submission of the loan application 
to a lender, as specified. The bill defines “new facility” and updates the definition of 
“service area” in the county. The bill also codifies existing practices of MetCom and makes 
conforming and technical changes.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect St. Mary’s County operations or finances, 
as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill defines “new facility” or “new facilities” as each 
water or sewerage system that is either a new system or an expansion or extension of an 
existing system, which provides new water or sewerage service to properties not previously 
served by public water or sewer.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 887/ Page 2 
Under current law, “service area” is defined as any area of St. Mary’s County identified as 
a growth area in the St. Mary’s County Comprehensive Land Use Plan. The bill redefines 
“service area” as any water service area and sewerage service area in the county identified 
in the St. Mary’s County Comprehensive Water and Sewerage Plan. 
 
Under current law, the county commissioners must review and approve any loan 
application before MetCom submits the loan application to a lender. The bill requires that 
except for refunding, refinancing and similar transactions where no additional debt liability 
would be incurred, MetCom must submit for review and approval from the county 
commissioners, any loan application where MetCom seeks to incur debt on the full faith 
and credit of the county, before MetCom submits the loan application to a lender. 
 
Under current law, the costs associated with any changes to adjust, accommodate, or 
remove any structures or obstructions, as specified, that block or impede the construction 
and establishment of MetCom’s water supply or sewerage systems must be borne and paid 
for by MetCom. The bill requires that the costs of such changes may be borne and paid for 
in full or in part by MetCom subject to a prior rights determination by MetCom. 
 
Local Expenditures:  MetCom advises that the bill’s changes are procedural in nature and 
represent a streamlining of existing practice. All debts incurred by MetCom are paid for by 
MetCom. St. Mary’s County only provides full faith and credit on the debt incurred by 
MetCom; thus, the bill will not materially affect St. Mary’s County operations or finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; St. Mary’s County; 
St. Mary’s County Metropolitan Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2