START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 390

Chapter 390

(House Bill 885)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – Related Event Promoter’s Permit

FOR the purpose of clarifying that the defined term “related event” as it applies to a related
event promoter’s permit in Baltimore City includes events for which tickets are sold
in advance or at the door or cover charges are imposed; reducing the number of days
within which a person must apply for the permit, the Board of License
Commissioners for Baltimore City must take certain actions relating to the permit,
and alterations may be made to the permit; altering the standards for determining
the permit fee; and generally relating to related event promoter’s permits in
Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 12–1102.2 and 12–2802
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 764 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2019
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–1102.2.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 390 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “CIAA Basketball Tournament” means the annual basketball
tournament of the Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association.

(3) (i) “Related event” means an event in which:

1. a license holder participates in a coordinated promotion
with a third–party promoter to sell or provide alcoholic beverages during a specified time;
and

2. at least 75 individuals are reasonably anticipated to
participate.

(ii) “Related event” includes an event for which tickets are sold to
the public, EITHER IN ADVANCE OR AT THE DOOR, OR A COVER CHARGE IS IMPOSED,
including a concert, an entertainment event, a happy hour, or a party.

(4) “Related event promoter” means an individual, a for–profit
organization, or a nonprofit organization that promotes a social event related to the CIAA
Basketball Tournament around the same time and location as the CIAA Basketball
Tournament.

(b) There is a related event promoter’s permit.

(c) (1) A related event promoter or a participating license holder on behalf of
a related event promoter shall apply for a permit from the Board before the related event
promoter may publicize, sell tickets for, organize, operate, produce, or stage a related event.

(2) A holder of a State caterer’s license shall obtain a Class C per diem beer,
beer and wine, or beer, wine, and liquor license from the Board before the holder may act
as a participating license holder at a related event.

(d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Board may
grant the permit to an applicant who submits an application to the Board as provided under
Title 4 of this article at least [90] 30 days before the date of the related event.

(2) Before being granted the permit, an applicant shall:

(i) obtain written consent from a designee of Visit Baltimore;

(ii) if required based on the type of premises to be used:

1. obtain a special event permit from the Baltimore City
Department of Transportation; and

2. provide a copy of the special event permit to the Board;
and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 390

(iii) provide a completed application that:

1. is dated and notarized, and signed by each license holder
that will participate in the related event;

2. lists each premises for which the related event will be held;
and

3. is accompanied by any other document that the Board
requires.

(3) An individual who applies for and is issued the permit is not required
to be a resident of or a registered voter in Baltimore City.

(4) Within [14] 7 days after receiving an application, the Board shall grant
or deny the permit or request more information from the applicant.

(5) A permit may not be altered within [30] 14 days before the related
event is scheduled to take place.

(e) The permit authorizes the related event promoter and participating license
holder to conduct a related event.

(f) The permit for each related event may be in effect for the time stated on the
special event permit required under subsection (d)(2) of this section.

(g) The Board may adopt regulations establishing the requirements for:

(1) conducting a related event, including health and safety standards to be
met by the related event promoter and participating license holder; and

(2) providing public notice of a related event at the premises of
participating license holders by the related event promoter or participating license holders.

(h) (1) The application fee is $50, payable on the submission of the application.

(2) The permit fee, payable when the permit is granted, is:

(i) $500, if [75 to 299 individuals are reasonably anticipated to
participate] THE BALTIMORE CITY FIRE MARSHAL HAS DETERMINED THE MAXIMUM
CAPACITY FOR THE PROPOSED LOCATION IS LESS THAN 300 PERSONS; or

(ii) $1,500, if [300 or more individuals are reasonably anticipated to
participate] THE BALTIMORE CITY FIRE MARSHAL HAS DETERMINED THE MAXIMUM
CAPACITY FOR THE PROPOSED LOCATION IS 300 OR MORE PERSONS.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 390 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

12–2802.

(a) For a violation that is cause for suspension of a license, the Board may:

(1) except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, for a first
offense, impose a fine not exceeding $500 or suspend the license or both; or

(2) except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, for each subsequent
offense, impose a fine not exceeding $3,000 or suspend the license or both.

(b) For a first offense of selling alcoholic beverages to an individual under the age
of 21 years, the Board may impose a fine not exceeding $1,000 or suspend the license or
both.

(c) (1) For the offense of publicizing, selling tickets for, organizing, operating,
producing, facilitating, or staging a pub crawl with the knowledge or a reason to know that
a pub crawl promoter’s permit required under § 12–1101.1 of this title has not been
obtained, the Board shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $3,000
or suspend the license or both.

(2) A person who violates § 12–1101.1 of this title may not be granted a
promoter’s permit for at least 1 year.

(d) (1) For the offense of publicizing, selling tickets OR IMPOSING A COVER
CHARGE for, organizing, operating, producing, facilitating, or staging a related event with
the knowledge or a reason to know that a related event promoter’s permit required under
§ 12–1102.2 of this title has not been obtained, the Board shall impose a fine of not less
than $1,000 and not more than $3,000 or suspend the license or both.

(2) A person who violates § 12–1102.2 of this title may not be granted a
related event promoter’s permit for at least 1 year.

(e) For the offense by a holder of a State caterer’s license of participating in a
CIAA Basketball Tournament related event without first obtaining a Class C per diem beer,
beer and wine, or beer, wine, and liquor license required under § 12–1102.2 of this title, the
Comptroller EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000 and not
more than $3,000 or suspend the State caterer’s license or both.

Chapter 764 of the Acts of 2019

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2019. It shall remain effective for a period of [4] 6 years and, at the end of June 30,
[2023] 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 390

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5