START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 466

Chapter 466

(House Bill 827)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s ~~County~~ ~~–~~ Gateway ~~Arts~~ Development Authority – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the Prince George’s Gateway ~~Arts~~ Development Authority
in Prince George’s County to support and develop a certain neighborhood
revitalization plan in coordination with certain residents; and generally relating to
the Prince George’s Gateway ~~Arts~~ Development Authority.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–901 through 12–906 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Prince
George’s ~~County~~ ~~–~~ Gateway ~~Arts~~ Development Authority”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

SUBTITLE 9. PRINCE GEORGE’S ~~COUNTY~~ ~~–~~ GATEWAY ~~ARTS~~ DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY.

12–901.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “TARGET AREA” MEANS THE CITY OF MOUNT RAINIER,
THE TOWN OF BRENTWOOD, THE TOWN OF COTTAGE CITY, THE CITY OF
BLADENSBURG, THE TOWN OF COLMAR MANOR, AND THE TOWN OF NORTH
BRENTWOOD IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

12–902.

THERE IS A PRINCE GEORGE’S GATEWAY ARTS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

12–903.

THE AUTHORITY CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 466 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND WHO REPRESENTS
THE TARGET AREA, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES WHO REPRESENTS
THE TARGET AREA, APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(3) (1) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(4) (2) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(5) (3) THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF MOUNT RAINIER, OR THE
MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(6) (4) THE MAYOR OF THE TOWN OF BRENTWOOD, OR THE
MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(7) (5) THE CHAIR OF THE COTTAGE CITY COMMISSION, OR THE
CHAIR’S DESIGNEE;

(8) (6) THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF BLADENSBURG, OR THE
MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(9) (7) THE MAYOR OF THE TOWN OF COLMAR MANOR, OR THE
MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(10) (8) THE MAYOR OF THE TOWN OF NORTH BRENTWOOD, OR THE
MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(11) (9) THE DIRECTOR OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT FOR THE CITY OF MOUNT RAINIER; AND

(12) (10) TWO MEMBERS WHO ARE RESIDENTS OF COMMUNITIES
IMPACTED BY THE TARGET AREA SELECTED BY THE MAJORITY VOTE OF THE
LEADERSHIP OF THE TARGET AREA MUNICIPALITIES.

12–904.

(A) THE AUTHORITY MAY MANAGE APPROPRIATED FUNDS FROM
MUNICIPALITIES IN THE TARGET AREA, PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, AND THE
STATE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 466

(B) THE AUTHORITY MAY RECEIVE DONATED SERVICES FROM
ACCOUNTANTS, LAWYERS, OR OTHER CONSULTANTS AS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT
THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE AUTHORITY MAY SUPERVISE, MANAGE, AND TERMINATE STAFF
AND CONSULTANTS AS NECESSARY.

12–905.

A MEMBER OF THE AUTHORITY:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
AUTHORITY; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

12–906.

(A) THE AUTHORITY SHALL SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL
OF A COMPREHENSIVE NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION PLAN IN THE TARGET
AREA TO BENEFIT:

(1) THE RESIDENTS;

(2) HOUSING;

(3) NEIGHBORHOODS;

(4) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT; AND

(5) TRANSPORTATION, INCLUDING MOTOR VEHICLES AND
PEDESTRIANS.

(B) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 31, 2025, THE AUTHORITY SHALL REPORT ITS
COMPREHENSIVE NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION STRATEGY TO THE GOVERNOR
AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO
THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE
APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of September
30, 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 466 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4