START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 802 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 802 
(Delegate Wilkins, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Institutions of Higher Education – Sports Wagering Contracts – Prohibition 
 
   
This bill prohibits an institution of higher education from entering into a contract with a 
regulated gaming entity, or an agent thereof, if, under the terms of the contract, the 
institution of higher education receives a commission, a bonus, or any other incentive 
payment based on the success of securing student participation in sports wagering or online 
sports wagering. Further, an institution of higher education may not enter into a contract 
with a sports marketing entity that enters into a contract with a regulated gaming entity, or 
an agent thereof, if any of the entities involved receives a commission, a bonus, or any 
other incentive payments under the conditions described above. However, an existing 
obligation or contract right may not be impaired in any way by the bill. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is not expected to impact gaming revenues or expenditures 
in the State and does not affect State funding of institutions of higher education.    
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Allowable contracts between an institution of higher education and a 
regulated gaming entity (or agent) or a sports marketing entity are subject to public 
inspection in accordance with the Maryland Public Information Act (PIA). “Regulated 
gaming entity” means a mobile sports wagering licensee, an online sports wagering 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 802/ Page 2 
operator, or a sports wagering licensee. “Agent of a regulated gaming entity” includes a 
marketing firm or other similar entity contracted to perform gaming-related services for a 
regulated gaming entity. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 492 of 2020 authorized sports and event wagering generally, 
subject to voter referendum, which was approved by Maryland voters in November 2020. 
Chapter 356 of 2021 implemented sports and event wagering in the State and provided for 
regulation of sports wagering by the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission 
(SLGCC). The Act also established the Sports Wagering Application Review Commission 
to review and award applications for sports wagering facility and mobile sports wagering 
licensure.  
 
Licensing is required for the following who are involved in sports wagering: 
 
 
a person that operates sports wagering; 
 
a person that operates sports wagering on behalf of a sports wagering licensee, 
including an online sports wagering operator; 
 
a person that manages, operates, supplies, provides security for, or provides service, 
maintenance, or repairs for sports wagering equipment and devices; and 
 
an individual directly employed in the operation of sports wagering by a sports 
wagering licensee if the individual does not otherwise hold a valid State gaming 
license. 
 
Additionally, SLGCC may, by regulation, require a person that contracts with a licensee 
and the person’s employees to be licensed if deemed necessary. Regulated gaming entities, 
as defined by the bill, are not specifically prohibited from entering into a contract with an 
institution of higher education.   
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. The Act generally 
must be construed in favor of allowing inspection of a public record, with the least cost and 
delay to the person or governmental unit requesting the information, unless an unwarranted 
invasion of privacy would result, as specified.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) does not 
anticipate an effect on State revenues or expenditures, including expenditures for its 
regulation of gaming, as SLGCA does not regulate marketing and sponsorship agreements 
unless predatory advertising is involved.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 802/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 620 (Senators Hettleman and Zucker) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Independent College 
and University Association; State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3