START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 808 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 808 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Judiciary and Health and Government 
Operations 
Judicial Proceedings and Finance 
 
Reproductive Health Protection Act 
 
 
This bill generally (1) establishes additional protections for information related to “legally 
protected health care” when that information is sought by another state; (2) prohibits a 
health occupations board from taking specified disciplinary actions related to the provision 
of legally protected health care; (3) prohibits a medical professional liability insurer from 
taking “adverse actions” against a practitioner related to the practice of legally protected 
health care; and (4) prohibits specified State entities, agents, and employees from 
participating in any interstate investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or 
sanctions against a person for activity related to legally protected health care (with limited 
exception). The bill also clarifies a provision of law relating to the exemption of 
high-deductible health plans from existing requirements to provide specified coverage of 
abortion care services. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and is not anticipated to materially 
affect governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under the bill, “legally protected health care” means all 
reproductive health services, medications, and supplies related to the direct provision or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 808/ Page 2 
support of the provision of care related to pregnancy, contraception, assisted reproduction, 
and abortion that is lawful in the State. 
 
Maryland Uniform Act to Secure the Attendance of Witnesses from Without the State in 
Criminal Proceedings 
 
Under current law, if a judge of a court of record in any state that has laws for commanding 
persons within that state to attend and testify in the state certifies under the seal of the 
court specified assertions, a judge of a court of record in the county in which the person is 
located must establish a time and place for a hearing upon presentation of the certificate 
and must make an order directing the witness to appear at a specified time and place for 
the hearing. At the hearing, if the judge makes the determinations listed below, the judge 
must issue a summons attached to a copy of the certificate directing the witness to attend 
and testify in the court where the prosecution is pending, or where a grand jury 
investigation has begun or is about to begin at the time and place specified in the summons:   
 
 
the witness is material and necessary; 
 
that it will not cause undue hardship to the witness to be compelled to attend and 
testify in the prosecution or a grand jury investigation in the other state; and 
 
that the laws of the state in which the prosecution is pending, or grand jury 
investigation has begun or is about to begin, and of any other state through which 
the witness may be required to pass by ordinary course of travel, will protect the 
witness from arrest and the service of civil and criminal process. 
 
In the hearing, the certificate is prima facie evidence of all the facts stated above. 
 
Under the bill, a judge is prohibited from issuing a summons under the Uniform Act to 
Secure the Attendance of Witnesses from Without the State in Criminal Proceedings if the 
criminal proceedings or grand jury investigation for which the witness is being summoned 
relates to a violation of another state’s criminal law involving the provision of, receipt of, 
or assistance with legally protected health care in Maryland. However, if the acts forming 
the basis of the prosecution or investigation would constitute a crime in Maryland, then a 
judge may issue a summons pursuant to the Uniform Act. 
 
Maryland Uniform Interstate Depositions and Discovery Act 
 
Under current law, a party requesting issuance of a subpoena must submit a foreign 
subpoena (one that is issued under the authority of a court or record of another state) to a 
circuit court clerk for the county in which discovery is sought to be conducted in Maryland. 
A subpoena is defined as a document issued under authority of a court of record that 
requires a person to (1) attend and give testimony at a deposition; (2) produce and permit 
inspection and copying of designated materials in the possession, custody, or control of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 808/ Page 3 
person; or (3) permit inspection of premises under the control of the person. When a foreign 
subpoena is submitted to a clerk, the clerk must promptly issue a subpoena for service on 
the individual named in the foreign subpoena. The subpoena must incorporate the terms 
used in the foreign subpoena and include or be accompanied by the names and contact 
information of all counsel and unrepresented parties. The subpoena must be served in 
compliance with the Maryland Rules. 
 
Under the bill, a request made pursuant to the Maryland Uniform Interstate Depositions 
and Discovery Act must include a sworn, written statement signed under penalty of perjury 
by the party (or party’s counsel) seeking enforcement, that no portion of the subpoena is 
intended or anticipated to further any investigation or proceeding related to legally 
protected health care. The specified written statement is not required if the out-of-state 
proceeding is based in tort, contract, or statute for which a similar or equivalent claim 
would exist in Maryland and (1) is brought by the patient (or patient’s legal representative) 
who received legally protected health care or (2) is based on conduct that would be 
prohibited under the laws of Maryland. 
 
The Wiretap and Electronic Surveillance Act 
 
Under current law, the Attorney General, State Prosecutor, or any State’s Attorney may 
apply to a judge for (and the judge may grant) an ex parte order authorizing interception of 
a wire, oral, or electronic communication if the judge determines that normal investigative 
procedures have failed, are unlikely to succeed, or are too dangerous. The judge must also 
determine that specified probable cause exists including probable cause to believe an 
individual is committing, has committed, or is about to commit offenses enumerated under 
§ 10-406 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, (e.g., murder, rape, and child 
abuse). 
 
Under the bill, a judge may not issue an ex parte order for the purpose of investigating or 
recovering evidence of actions related to legally protected health care, unless the acts 
forming the basis for the investigation or recovery of evidence would constitute a crime in 
Maryland. 
 
Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act 
 
Under current law, a copy of an authenticated foreign judgment may be filed in the office 
of the clerk of a circuit court, in the District Court for judgements of $2,500 or less, or in 
either court if the judgement is more than $2,500. The court must treat the foreign judgment 
in the same manner as a judgment of the court in which the foreign judgment is filed. 
 
Under the bill, a judgment creditor may not file a copy of any foreign judgment if the 
judgment was issued in connection with any litigation concerning legally protected health 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 808/ Page 4 
care, unless the underlying cause of action is (1) based in tort, contract, or statute for which 
a similar or equivalent claim would exist in Maryland and is brought by the patient (or 
patient’s legal representative) who received legally protected health care, or (2) is based 
on conduct that would be prohibited under the laws of Maryland. 
 
Uniform Criminal Extradition Act 
 
Under current law, extradition is a process where one state (the asylum state) surrenders to 
another state (the demanding state) an individual accused or convicted of an offense outside 
the territory of the asylum state and within the territorial jurisdiction of the demanding 
state. The Governor of Maryland may surrender, on demand of the executive authority of 
any another state, any person in Maryland charged in the other state with committing an 
act that intentionally results in a crime in the demanding state. This provision applies even 
if the accused was not in the state at the time of the commission of the crime and has not 
fled therefrom. 
 
Under the bill, the Governor of Maryland is prohibited from surrendering a person on the 
demand of the executive authority of any another state if the alleged act for which surrender 
is being demanded relates to providing, procuring, or aiding another in providing or 
procuring legally protected health care services and that act would not be a crime in 
Maryland. This prohibition does not apply to a writ of mandamus issued by a federal court. 
 
Health Occupations Boards 
 
Under current law, an individual must be licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized to 
practice by the respective health occupations board before the individual may practice in 
the State (with limited exceptions). Authorizations to practice vary by profession but 
typically require, among other things, specified education and experience, passage of a 
national and/or State examination, and a criminal history records check. Generally, a health 
occupations board has the authority, for individuals who do not comply with enumerated 
practice requirements, to deny an authorization to practice for an applicant or for an 
individual already authorized to practice, place on probation, impose a fine, suspend an 
authorization, or revoke an authorization. Many health occupations professions also 
participate in interstate compacts that offer expedited authorizations to practice for 
individuals already authorized to practice in other compact states. When licensed under the 
compact, disciplinary actions taken by one compact state must be deemed unprofessional 
conduct by other compact states that could subject the practitioner to further disciplinary 
measures in those other compact states. 
 
Under the bill, a health occupations board may not revoke, suspend, discipline, take an 
adverse action against, or refuse to issue or renew a license, certification, or other 
authorization to practice for any “health care practitioner” (an individual licensed, certified, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 808/ Page 5 
or otherwise authorized by law to provide health care services under the Health 
Occupations Article) (1) because of the provision of legally protected health care provided 
in accordance with the standard of care as determined by the relevant Maryland health 
occupations board or (2) if the health care practitioner is disciplined by a licensure board 
in another state because of the provision of legally protected health care provided in 
accordance with the standard of care determined by the relevant Maryland health 
occupations board. If the legally protected health care was not provided in accordance with 
Maryland law, a health occupations board may take any action authorized by statute. 
 
Medical Professional Liability Insurance 
 
Under current law, medical professional liability insurance (also known as medical 
malpractice insurance), covers doctors and other professionals in the medical field for 
liability claims relating to patient treatment. 
 
Under the bill, an insurer that issues to, delivers to, or renews medical professional liability 
insurance for a health care practitioner who is authorized to practice in the State may not 
take an “adverse action” against a practitioner based on that practitioner’s provision of or 
making of a referral for legally protected health care. This prohibition does not apply to a 
medical professional liability insurer taking an adverse action against a health care 
practitioner for conduct that would otherwise constitute professional misconduct. 
 
“Adverse action” includes (1) refusing to renew or execute a contract or agreement with a 
health care practitioner; (2) making a report or commenting to an appropriate private or 
governmental entity regarding practices of legally protected health care; and (3) increasing 
a premium for or making another type of unfavorable change regarding terms of coverage 
under a medical malpractice insurance contract with a health care practitioner. Adverse 
action does not include making a rate filing in accordance with § 11-206 of the Insurance 
Article. 
 
State Employment Policies 
 
The State Personnel and Pensions Article establishes policies pertaining to State 
employment, including rights of State employees and actions prohibited to State 
employees. 
 
Under the bill, an agency of the State or a political subdivision of the State (including 
agents, employees, or private parties providing services on behalf of the State or a political 
subdivision), are prohibited from participating in any interstate investigation or proceeding 
that seeks to impose a civil liability, criminal liability, or administrative sanction against a 
person for an activity relating to legally protected health care. This prohibition includes 
providing information; expending time or money; or using State facilities, property, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 808/ Page 6 
equipment, personnel, or other resources in such an investigation. This prohibition does 
not apply if (1) the interstate investigation or proceeding concerns conduct that would be 
subject to civil liability, criminal liability, or administrative sanction in Maryland or (2) the 
subject of the interstate investigation or proceeding submits a written request to provide 
information or assistance to the investigation or proceeding. 
 
High-deductible Health Plan Exemption from Coverage of Abortion Care Services 
 
Under current law, insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations that provide labor and delivery coverage must cover abortion care services 
without (1) a deductible, coinsurance, copayment, or any other cost-sharing requirements 
and (2) restrictions that are inconsistent with protected rights under Title 20, Subtitle 2 of 
the Health-General Article. Information to consumers about abortion care coverage must 
be provided using the terminology “abortion care” to describe coverage. These provisions 
do not apply to a high-deductible plan, unless the Insurance Commissioner determines that 
abortion care is not excluded from the safe harbor provisions for preventive care under 
specified provisions of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC). 
 
The bill clarifies that a high-deductible plan is exempt from these requirements if the 
Commissioner determines that abortion care services are excluded from the safe harbor 
provisions for preventive care under specified provisions of the IRC. 
 
For a detailed discussion of both federal and State abortion laws, please see the 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 859 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 808/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 808/ Page 8 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion 
 
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
The Dobbs decision does not impact Maryland law as § 20-209 of the 
Health-General Article codifies the protections of Roe and Casey by prohibiting the State 
from interfering with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the health or life of the woman in cases of fetal defect, 
deformity, or abnormality. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 expanded beyond physicians the types of health care providers who 
may provide abortions to include nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives, licensed certified 
midwives, physician assistants, and other qualified licensed health care providers. The Act 
established the Abortion Care Clinical Training Program to (1) ensure there are a sufficient 
number of health care professionals to provide abortion services in the State and (2) require 
health insurers and Maryland Medicaid to cover abortion services without a deductible, 
coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. 
 
A qualified health care provider who performs an abortion is not liable for civil damages 
or subject to a criminal penalty for a decision to perform an abortion made in good faith 
and in the provider’s best clinical judgment using accepted standards of clinical practice. 
The Maryland Department of Health may adopt regulations consistent with established 
clinical practice if they are necessary and the least intrusive method to protect the life and 
health of the woman. 
 
After Dobbs, Maryland is authorized to enact additional laws protecting access to abortion 
or enact restrictions on abortion access that were unconstitutional under Roe and Casey. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 808/ Page 9 
State Actions Following the Dobbs Decision 
 
Exhibit 1 indicates which states have banned abortion or have an abortion ban on hold. 
As of January 2023, 14 states have banned abortion and 9 states have bans on hold. In states 
such as Louisiana, Texas, and Utah, laws restricting abortion access took effect 
immediately following the Dobbs decision (the Utah ban is currently blocked by the 
courts). Seven states passed laws restricting abortion access prior to Roe but never repealed 
the laws following Roe. Those states may be able to enforce these laws post-Dobbs, but 
parties in several states have sought injunctions to prevent enforcement. Other states, such 
as Florida, Idaho, and Kentucky, passed laws restricting abortion, but specified that the 
laws would only take effect if existing precedent protecting the right to an abortion was 
overturned. These laws are also being challenged in state courts, with many challenges 
alleging that restrictions violate provisions of state constitutions. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
States with Abortion Bans in Effect or on Hold 
As of January 2023 
 
 
Note:  State laws with bans include near-total bans on abortion and bans after the detection of a fetal heartbeat or 
six weeks gestational age. Although Michigan is included as having a “Ban on Hold,” Michigan voters approved an 
amendment to its state constitution including the right to an abortion. This will impact the court’s decision on the 
validity of the pre-Roe law banning abortion as the law will now be considered unconstitutional.  
 
Source:  Guttmacher Institute; Center for Reproductive Rights; National Public Radio; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 808/ Page 10 
Seventeen states and the District of Columbia currently have laws that protect the right to 
abortion, mostly before the point of fetal viability. Several states are seeking to establish 
the right to an abortion, either in statute or the state constitution. In November 2022, voters 
in California, Michigan, and Vermont approved ballot initiatives establishing the right to 
an abortion in their state constitutions. In some states where abortions are accessible, there 
have been efforts to limit liability and prevent enforcement of any judgment against an 
individual performing or obtaining an abortion in the state. This is in response to laws 
similar to Texas’ law allowing civil actions against individuals who assist an individual in 
obtaining an abortion. Other states have taken additional measures to expand abortion 
access. For example, several states (including Maryland) require health insurance plans to 
cover abortions without imposing cost-sharing on beneficiaries, and several other states 
(also including Maryland) permit providers other than licensed physicians to perform 
abortions. Several states have introduced or passed laws to weaken or prohibit investigation 
of in-state providers by out-of-state officials to counteract laws in states that subject 
abortion providers to criminal penalties. 
 

END OF PAGE 10