START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 815 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 815 
(Delegate Fennell, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Cancer Screening - Health Insurance and Assessment of Outreach, Education, 
and Health Disparities 
 
 
This bill requires insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) to provide coverage for recommended 
follow-up diagnostic imaging to assist in the diagnosis of lung cancer, subject to specified 
cost-sharing limitations. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must conduct an 
assessment on current outreach, education, and health disparities in cancer screening and 
establish a stakeholder workgroup. The requirements on MDH take effect July 1, 2023; 
the insurance provisions take effect January 1, 2024, and apply to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or 
after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $28,900 in FY 2024 only for 
contractual staff to conduct the assessment and establish the stakeholder workgroup. 
Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance Administration 
(MIA) in FY 2024 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of filings can be 
handled with existing MIA budgeted resources. Any impact on the State Employee and 
Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is indeterminate.   
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$28,900 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($28,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for local governments that purchase fully 
insured medical plans to the extent the bill increases the cost of health insurance. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 815/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Health Insurance Coverage of Lung Cancer Screening 
 
A carrier must provide coverage for recommended follow-up diagnostic imaging to assist 
in the diagnosis of lung cancer for individuals for which lung cancer screening is 
recommended by the U.S. Preventative Services Task Force (USPSTF). The coverage must 
include diagnostic ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and 
image-guided biopsy.  
 
A carrier may not impose a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible requirement on 
coverage for lung cancer screening and diagnosis that is greater than the copay, 
coinsurance, or deductible requirement for breast cancer screening and diagnosis. 
However, if an insured or enrollee is covered under a high-deductible health plan (HDHP), 
a carrier may subject follow-up diagnostic lung imaging to the deductible requirement of 
the HDHP. 
 
Maryland Department of Health Assessment and Stakeholder Workgroup 
 
MDH must conduct an assessment on current outreach, education, and health disparities in 
cancer screening, including the availability of biomarker testing, in the State. The 
assessment must include an examination of current programs overseen by MDH and local 
health departments. In conducting the assessment, MDH must establish a stakeholder 
workgroup (with specified membership) to advise on the current state of cancer screening 
in the State and make recommendations on the development of an outreach plan to educate 
communities negatively impacted by health disparities in cancer screening and cancer care. 
MDH must report to the General Assembly on the assessment by January 1, 2024.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. Carriers must cover breast cancer 
screenings in accordance with the latest screening guidelines issued by the American 
Cancer Society. Currently, the guidelines specify that (1) women ages 40 to 44 may elect 
to get annual breast cancer screenings with mammograms and (2) starting at age 45, women 
should have mammograms every year. Carriers are also required to provide coverage for 
digital tomosynthesis – a radiologic procedure that involves the acquisition of projection 
images over the stationary breast to produce cross-sectional digital three-dimensional 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 815/ Page 3 
images of the breast – if an enrollee’s treating physician determines it is medically 
appropriate and necessary. A deductible may not be imposed for covered digital 
tomosynthesis or mammograms. A carrier is not required to cover breast cancer screenings 
used to identify breast cancer in asymptomatic women that are provided by a facility that 
is not accredited by the American College of Radiology or certified or licensed in 
Maryland. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered 
health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services 
in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. Beyond requiring that benefits be provided for breast cancer screening in 
accordance with the latest screening guidelines issued by the American Cancer Society or 
mandated by the ACA, the Maryland benchmark plan also includes reconstructive breast 
surgery or breast prothesis – for individuals who have undergone a mastectomy – as EHBs. 
 
Health Savings Account-qualified High Deductible Health Plans 
 
Section 223 of the Internal Revenue Code permits eligible individuals to establish health 
savings accounts that require, among other things, that individuals be covered under an 
HDHP and have no disqualifying health coverage. An HDHP may not provide benefits to 
an individual – unless the benefits are for “preventive care” – until the individual has 
satisfied their annual minimum deductible. According to Internal Revenue Service 
guidelines, diagnostic and supplemental breast examinations do not qualify as preventive 
care. 
 
Lung Cancer Screening Recommendations 
 
USPSTF recommends annual screening for lung cancer with low-dose computed 
tomography in adults ages 50 to 80 who have a 20 pack-year (e.g., those who have smoked 
a pack (of 20 cigarettes) a day for 20 years or two packs a day for 10 years) smoking history 
and currently smoke or have quit within the past 15 years. Screening should be 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 815/ Page 4 
discontinued once a person has not smoked for 15 years or develops a health problem that 
substantially limits life expectancy or the ability or willingness to have curative lung 
surgery. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of Health Assessment 
 
MDH general fund expenditures increase by $28,921 in fiscal 2024 only, which reflects 
the July 1, 2023 effective date for the assessment provisions. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one part-time (50%) health policy analyst for a period of seven months to conduct 
the required assessment (including convening the stakeholder workgroup) and submit the 
required report by January 1, 2024. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$18,852 
Operating Expenses 
  10,069 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$28,921 
 
This analysis assumes that the contractual position terminates January 31, 2024, following 
submission of the required report. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the ACA. 
 
Health Insurance Coverage of Lung Cancer Screening 
 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that any impact on the State plan from 
mandated coverage of recommended follow-up diagnostic imaging to assist in the 
diagnosis of lung cancer as specified under the bill is indeterminate. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 965 (Senator Benson, et al.) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 815/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5