START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 870 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 870 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Division of Rehabilitation Services and Developmental Disabilities 
Administration - Memorandum of Understanding 
 
 
This bill requires the Division of Rehabilitation Services (DORS) in the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) and the Developmental Disabilities Administration 
(DDA) within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to enter into a memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) that includes a data sharing agreement for the medical and 
psychological records of mutual clients in order to expedite decisions regarding eligibility 
for services. Records involved in the MOU include medical documentation, psychological 
information, school documentation, and other relevant records. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MDH and MSDE finances are not substantially affected, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DORS is generally responsible for efforts to rehabilitate and place in 
gainful employment individuals who are disabled and susceptible to rehabilitation and to 
rehabilitate individuals to function more independently. DORS is also responsible for 
provision of a coordinated set of activities for transitioning students with a disability that 
promotes movement from school to postschool activities, including postsecondary 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 870/ Page 2 
education, vocational training, integrated employment, supported employment, adult 
services, independent living, and community participation. 
 
DDA provides a coordinated service delivery system for people with developmental 
disabilities. Approximately 98% of individuals served through DDA receive 
community-based services in one of three waiver programs under Medicaid. Through the 
Community Pathways, Community Supports, and Family Supports waiver programs, DDA 
receives a 50% federal match to provide approved services to enrolled individuals. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MSDE advises that DDA and DORS are currently revising an existing 
MOU and that the draft MOU includes a section on sharing records and data between 
DDA and DORS. Thus, MSDE anticipates no fiscal or operational effect under the bill. 
 
MDH similarly anticipates that the bill’s requirement can be implemented via a revision of 
the existing MOU and anticipates that the bill can be handled using existing resources. 
MDH anticipates enhanced efficiencies in its operations as a result of incorporating the 
bill’s requirements into the MOU between DDA and DORS. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2