START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 811 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 811 
(Delegate Vogel, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals - Testing for Fentanyl (The Josh Siems Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a hospital to (1) include testing for fentanyl in a urine drug screening if 
such a screening is conducted to assist in diagnosing an individual’s condition and 
(2) report the deidentified test results of screenings that detect fentanyl to the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) through the State-designated health information exchange 
(HIE). A hospital that does not have chemical analyzer equipment is exempt from this 
requirement. The bill does not affect the State’s “Good Samaritan Law.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect governmental operations or 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local governmental operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Controlled dangerous substances (CDS) are listed on one of five schedules 
(Schedules I through V) set forth in statute depending on their potential for abuse and 
acceptance for medical use. Under the federal Controlled Substances Act, for a drug or 
substance to be classified as Schedule I, the following findings must be made:  (1) the 
substance has a high potential for abuse; (2)the drug or other substance has no currently 
accepted medical use in the United States; and (3) there is a lack of accepted safety for use 
of the drug or other substance under medical supervision. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 811/ Page 2 
Unless specifically exempted, or listed on another schedule, specified opium derivatives, 
including their salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, whenever their existence is possible 
within the specific chemical designation, are deemed Schedule I CDS. Heroin is an opium 
derivative and is listed as a Schedule I CDS. Fentanyl is a Schedule II synthetic opioid. 
 
Chapter 401 of 2014, the “Good Samaritan Law,” established that a person who, in good 
faith, seeks, provides, or assists with the provision of medical assistance for a person 
experiencing a medical emergency after ingesting or using alcohol or drugs must be 
immune from criminal prosecution for specified violations if the evidence for the criminal 
prosecution was obtained solely as a result of the person’s seeking, providing, or assisting 
with the provision of medical assistance. Additionally, a person who experiences a medical 
emergency after ingesting or using alcohol or drugs must be immune from criminal 
prosecution for certain violations if the evidence for the criminal prosecution was obtained 
solely as a result of another person’s seeking medical assistance. The law also establishes 
that the act of seeking, providing, or assisting with the provision of medical assistance for 
another person may be used as a mitigating factor in a criminal prosecution. 
 
The Maryland Health Care Commission designated the Chesapeake Regional Information 
System for Our Patients (CRISP) as the State-designated HIE in 2009, and the 
infrastructure became operational in 2010. An HIE allows clinical information to move 
electronically among disparate health information systems. CRISP offers tools aimed at 
improving the facilitation of care for the region’s health care providers. 
 
Additional Comments:  Results from at least one field study conducted in Baltimore-area 
hospitals and published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention indicated 
that regular fentanyl testing in emergency departments addressed a gap in patient care, 
especially for those patients who tested negative for opiates but were nonetheless positive 
for fentanyl. 
 
Opioid overdose and use continue to be an epidemic in the United States and in Maryland. 
The Commonwealth Fund’s 2022 Scorecard on State Health System Performance ranks 
Maryland as forty-fifth among states for drug overdose deaths per 100,000 population. The 
Maryland Overdose Data Dashboard published by the Opioid Operational Command 
Center indicates that, for the year ending October 2022, there were 8,610 non-fatal 
opioid-related hospital emergency department visits and 2,454 fatal overdoses resulting 
from all substances (including fentanyl, cocaine, alcohol, prescription opioids, heroin, 
methamphetamines, benzodiazepines, and PCP) across Maryland. Approximately 82% (or 
2,001) overdose deaths were attributable to fentanyl. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 811/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 914 (Senators Ellis and Rosapepe) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; The 
Commonwealth Fund; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3