START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 886 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 886 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - 40th District - Alcoholic Beverages 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
Class C beer, wine, and liquor license (BWL) in the 3600 block of Hickory Avenue in the 
40th alcoholic beverages district to a holder of a Class C beer and light wine license. The 
bill also authorizes the board to issue a Class A-7 beer, wine, and liquor license in the 
1200 block of West North Avenue in the 40th alcoholic beverages district, as specified; 
and adds the Class A-7 license as an additional exception to the prohibition against issuing 
an alcoholic beverages license in Baltimore City to an establishment within 300 feet of a 
place of worship or school. The bill alters a specified geographic area in the 40th alcoholic 
beverages district where there is a general prohibition against selling alcoholic beverages 
before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues increase minimally beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent the board issues additional Class C BWL licenses or Class A-7 BWL licenses under 
the bill, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes the board to issue a Class A-7 beer, wine, and liquor 
license in the 1200 block of West North Avenue in the 40th alcoholic beverages district if  
(1) the applicant executes a memorandum of understanding with the Penn North 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 886/ Page 2 
Community Association; (2) alcoholic beverages are sold only as part of a gift basket or 
floral arrangement; and (3) the applicant does not hold or apply for a Class BWLT beer, 
wine, and liquor (on-premises) tasting license. 
 
The bill prohibits the sale of alcoholic beverages before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
within the area of West North Avenue between the 1000 block of West North Avenue and 
the 3200 block of West North Avenue, inclusive, and within 250 yards in any direction of 
that area. 
 
Current Law:   
 
General Prohibition Against Issuance of New Licenses in Specified Districts 
 
The board generally may not issue a new alcoholic beverages license in the 40th, 41st, 
43rd, 44th, or 45th alcoholic beverages districts. However, the law specifies several 
exceptions. 
 
Class C Licenses 
 
In Baltimore City, Class C licenses generally authorize clubs and other organizations to 
sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. A Class C BWL license authorizes 
the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at a club at the place described in the license 
for on-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $550. A Class C beer and light 
wine license authorizes the sale of beer and light wine to a member of a club and a guest 
of the member, at retail, for on-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $82.50. 
 
Class A-7 Licenses 
 
Chapter 537 of 2018 authorized the board to issue a Class A-7 BWL license. The license 
authorizes the holder to sell, for off-premises consumption, beer, wine, and liquor at retail 
at the place described in the license on Monday through Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 
midnight. The annual license fee is $1,500. The board may not issue a Class A-7 license 
after June 30, 2022, and Chapter 510 of 2020 prohibited a Class A-7 license from being 
issued in the 43rd Legislative District. 
 
Distance Restrictions from a Place of Worship or School 
 
The board generally may not issue a new license or approve the transfer of an existing 
license to a building within 300 feet of a place of worship or school. The distance from the 
establishment to the place of worship or school must be measured from the nearest point 
of the establishment to the nearest point of the building of the place of worship or school. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 886/ Page 3 
Restrictions on Hours of Sale 
 
For a license holder in specified geographical areas in the 40th alcoholic beverages district, 
the hours of sale for alcoholic beverages may not begin before 10:00 a.m. or end after 
10:00 p.m. This restriction does not apply to (1) a Class B beer and light wine (restaurant) 
license; (2) a Class B BWL (restaurant) license, as specified; (3) a Class B-BWL (H-M) 
license; (4) a Class C beer and wine license; (5) a Class C BWL license; (6) an arena 
license; or (7) a marketplace license. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the board issues a Class C BWL license to a holder of 
a Class C beer and light wine license in the specified geographic area, Baltimore City 
revenues increase by $1,150 in fiscal 2024 and $600 annually thereafter. This estimate 
accounts for an annual license fee of $550 for the Class C BWL license as well as an initial 
$600 application fee and subsequent $50 renewal fee for each license. Further, to the extent 
the board issues a Class A-7 BWL license in the specified geographic area, Baltimore City 
revenues increase by $2,100 in fiscal 2024 and $1,550 annually thereafter. This estimate 
accounts for an annual license fee of $1,500 for the Class A-7 BWL license as well as an 
initial $600 application fee and subsequent $50 renewal fee for each license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 588 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3