START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 193

Chapter 193

(House Bill 803)

AN ACT concerning

State Retirement and Pension System – Administrative Fees

FOR the purpose of altering the method by which administrative fees for participants in
the State Retirement and Pension System are calculated by and remitted to the State
Retirement and Pension System; requiring the Board of Trustees for the State
Retirement and Pension System to provide certain notice to local participating
employers; and generally relating to the funding of expenses incurred by the Board
of Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension System and the State Retirement
Agency.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–302, 21–303(d), and 21–316
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

21–302.

(a) The following are obligations of the State:

(1) the payment of all allowances and other benefits payable under this
Division II;

(2) the creation and maintenance of reserves in the accumulation funds of
the several systems;

(3) the crediting of regular interest to the annuity savings funds of the
several systems; and

(4) except as provided in § 21–316 of this subtitle, the payment of the
expenses for administration and operation of the several systems.

(b) [Subject to § 21–316 of this subtitle, the] THE assets of the several systems
shall be used to pay the obligations of the State specified in this section.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 193 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) Each fiscal year the State shall pay to the accumulation fund of each State
system at least an amount that when combined with the amount in the accumulation fund
of the system is sufficient to provide the allowances and other benefits payable out of the
fund during that fiscal year.

21–303.

(d) (1) [Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, each] EACH
year, the Board of Trustees shall transfer from the accumulation fund of each State system
to the expense fund of that system the amounts required by § 21–315 of this subtitle.

[(2) The administrative and operational expenses of the Board of Trustees
and the State Retirement Agency, not including amounts as authorized by the Board of
Trustees necessary for investment management services and personnel and operational
expenses of the Investment Division, shall be paid by participating employers as provided
in § 21–316 of this subtitle and may not be transferred from the accumulation fund of each
system.

(3) (i) 1. Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of this subsection, if a
budget amendment is approved in any fiscal year for administrative and operational
expenses for the Board of Trustees and the State Retirement Agency, the Board of Trustees
may transfer the amount approved by budget amendment from the accumulation funds of
the State Retirement and Pension System to the expense funds of the State Retirement and
Pension System.

2. A. Subject to subsubsubparagraph B of this
subsubparagraph, any funds transferred from the accumulation funds under
subsubparagraph 1 of this subparagraph shall be reimbursed to the accumulation funds on
or before June 30 of the second following fiscal year from payments for administrative and
operational expenses received by the Board of Trustees under § 21–316 of this subtitle.

B. Any funds transferred from the accumulation funds under
subsubparagraph 1 of this subparagraph resulting from an underpayment of
administrative and operational expenses owed by the State or local employers under §
21–316 of this subtitle, shall be reimbursed to the accumulation funds as part of the annual
or quarterly administrative and operational expense reimbursements on or before June 30
of the second following fiscal year from payments for administrative and operational
expenses received by the Board of Trustees under § 21–316 of this subtitle by the
appropriate employers.

(ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of this subsection, if the Board of
Trustees and the State Retirement Agency receive administrative and operational expenses
in excess of the amount expended, the Board of Trustees shall offset the annual or quarterly
administrative and operational expense reimbursements of the appropriate employers on
or before June 30 of the second following fiscal year by the excess amount of administrative
and operational expenses received.]

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 193

(2) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30 EACH YEAR, THE ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
THAT ARE PAID BY PARTICIPATING EMPLOYERS AS PROVIDED IN § 21–316 OF THIS
SUBTITLE FOR THAT YEAR SHALL BE REIMBURSED TO THE ACCUMULATION FUND OF
EACH STATE SYSTEM FOR THE AMOUNT TRANSFERRED TO THE EXPENSE FUND OF
THAT SYSTEM UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

21–316.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “ADMINISTRATIVE FEES” MEANS THE ACTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE
AND OPERATIONAL EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND THE
STATE RETIREMENT AGENCY AS OF JUNE 30 OF THE SECOND PRIOR FISCAL YEAR.

(3) “Library” means a library that is established or operates under the
Education Article.

[(3)] (4) “Local employer” means a participating employer other than the
State.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, for each fiscal year, the
State and each local employer shall pay to the Board of Trustees their pro rata shares of
the [amount necessary for the administrative and operational expenses of the Board of
Trustees and the State Retirement Agency] ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.

(2) The pro rata share of THE ADMINISTRATIVE FEES OF the State and of
each local employer for each fiscal year shall be based on the number of members of the
several systems employed by the State or local employer as of June 30 of the second prior
fiscal year compared to the total membership of the several systems as of that date.

(3) The State shall pay the pro rata share under this section of each library.

(4) The administrative [and operational expenses of the Board of Trustees
and the State Retirement Agency] FEES used to determine the pro rata shares under this
subsection may not include costs for the personnel and operational expenses of the
Investment Division.

(c) As part of its annual budget submission for a fiscal year, the Board of Trustees
shall certify to the Secretary of Budget and Management the percentage of the total
membership of the several systems that is employed by the State, the libraries, and each
local employer as of June 30 of the second prior fiscal year.

(d) (1) The Governor shall include in the budget bill an appropriation to the
[expense] ACCUMULATION funds of the State Retirement and Pension System that equals

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 193 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the authorized administrative [and operational expenses of the Board of Trustees and the
State Retirement Agency] FEES for the fiscal year.

(2) The amounts payable by the State under this section with respect to
members employed by each State unit shall be charged against the budget of that unit.

(3) The State shall pay its pro rata share of the amount of administrative
[and operational expenses] FEES authorized in the State budget to the Board of Trustees
on July 1 of the applicable fiscal year.

(E) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
~~SHALL:~~

(1) PROVIDE EACH LOCAL EMPLOYER, OTHER THAN A LIBRARY, AN
~~ESTIMATE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~PAYABLE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~NEXT~~ ~~FISCAL~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~BY~~
~~THE~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~EMPLOYER~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~EQUAL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERCENTAGE~~ ~~CERTIFIED~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION MULTIPLIED BY THE AMOUNT OF
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; AND

(2) NOTIFY THE SECRETARY OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT AND
THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES OF THE ESTIMATES SENT UNDER
ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

[(e)] (F) (1) On or before [February 1 of] OCTOBER 1 each year, the Board
of Trustees shall:

(i) certify to each local employer other than a library the amount
payable by the local employer FOR THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR that is equal to the percentage
certified under subsection (c) of this section multiplied by the amount of administrative ~~and~~
~~operational~~ ~~expenses~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~budget~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~next~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year~~ FEES; and

(ii) notify the Secretary of Budget and Management and the
Department of Legislative Services of the certifications sent under item (i) of this
paragraph.

(2) [On] IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE CERTIFICATION REQUIRED
IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, ON or before October 1, January 1, April 16,
and June 1 of each THE fiscal year IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE CERTIFICATION
REQUIRED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, each local employer shall pay to
the Board of Trustees 25% of the amount certified to the local employer by the Board of
Trustees under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 193

(3) If a local employer does not pay the amounts required under this section
within the time required, the local employer is liable for interest on delinquent amounts at
a rate of 4% a year until payment.

(4) The Secretary of the Board of Trustees may allow a grace period not to
exceed 10 calendar days for payment of the amounts certified under this section.

(5) On notification by the Secretary of the Board of Trustees that a
delinquency exists, the State Comptroller immediately shall exercise the right of setoff
against any money due or coming due to that local employer from the State.

(6) A participating governmental unit or employer required to make
employer contributions under § 21–307 of this subtitle may deduct the payments required
under this section from payments for employer contributions required under §§ 21–305
through 21–307 of this subtitle.

[(f)] (G) On receipt of payments under this section, the Board of Trustees shall
credit these amounts to the [expense] ACCUMULATION fund of the appropriate State
system.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5