START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 897 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 897 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Homeowners' Property Tax Credit - Qualified Homeowner - Application and 
Certification Requirements 
 
 
This bill alters the application requirements for the homeowners’ property tax credit 
program for individuals who receive income only from social security, a pension, or an 
annuity. In these situations, the homeowner must submit a regular application in the 
first year that the individual applies for the property tax credit and a more abbreviated 
certification for the next two years. In the following third year, the homeowner will once 
again have to submit a regular application in order to remain eligible for the property tax 
credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources as the number of overall applications for the homeowners’ property tax credit 
program is not expected to significantly change. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To be eligible for the homeowners’ property tax credit as a qualified 
homeowner, the individual must submit the application to the department only in the 
first year the qualified homeowner applies for the credit and every third year thereafter. For 
any year in which the application is not required, a qualified homeowner must submit to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 897/ Page 2 
the department either (1) a certification that the homeowner resided in the dwelling for at 
least six months in the preceding calendar year; the homeowner continued to have income 
only from social security, a pension, or an annuity in the preceding calendar year; and the 
individuals living in the homeowner’s household did not change in the preceding calendar 
year; or (2) the original homeowners’ property tax credit application. A qualified 
homeowner who submits a certification may not be required to submit any proof of income 
in addition to the certification. 
 
A qualified homeowner is defined as a homeowner whose gross income includes only 
income from (1) any benefit under the Social Security Act; (2) a pension; or (3) an annuity. 
 
Current Law:  The homeowners’ property tax credit program is a State-funded program 
that provides credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who 
qualify based on a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. Counties and 
municipalities have the authority to enact local supplements to the program; the cost of 
such supplemental credits must be borne by the local governments. The fiscal 2024 State 
budget includes $56.5 million in funding for the program. 
 
Homeowners must apply to SDAT each year in order to be eligible for the property tax 
credit. The application is available on the department’s website; current applications may 
be filed through October 1, 2023. Approximately 45,000 individuals receive the property 
tax credit each year. 
 
For purposes of calculating the homeowners’ property tax credit, gross income is defined 
as the total income from all sources for the calendar year that immediately precedes the 
taxable year, whether or not the income is included in the definition of gross income for 
federal or State tax purposes. This amount includes (1) any benefit under the Social 
Security Act or the Railroad Retirement Act; (2) the aggregate of gifts over $300; 
(3) alimony; (4) support money; (5) any nontaxable strike benefit; (6) public assistance 
received in a cash grant; (7) a pension; (8) an annuity; (9) any unemployment insurance 
benefit; (10) any workers’ compensation benefit; (11) the net income received from a 
business, rental, or other endeavor; (12) any withdrawal, payment, or distribution from an 
individual retirement account; (13) any withdrawal, payment, or distribution from any 
qualified retirement savings plan; and (14) any rent on the dwelling, including the rent from 
a room or apartment. 
 
Gross income does not include (1) any income tax refund received from the State or 
federal government or (2) any loss from business, rental, or other endeavor. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill is not expected to significantly affect the number of overall 
applications for the homeowners’ property tax credit program, but rather to make the 
application process less time consuming for certain homeowners who are already receiving 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 897/ Page 3 
the property tax credit. The department advises that the new abbreviated application will 
be designed to be used with current and future tax application processing systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 826 (Senator Hayes) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3