START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 216

Chapter 216

(House Bill 844)

AN ACT concerning

Housing and Community Development – Common Ownership Community
Website

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development to
establish and maintain a website that provides certain information on the rights and
responsibilities of individuals living in a common ownership community; and
generally relating to common ownership communities.

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 2–303 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 3. Miscellaneous
Requirements”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

Subtitle 3. Miscellaneous [Reporting] Requirements.

2–303.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” MEANS:

(I) A CONDOMINIUM, AS DEFINED IN § 11–101 OF THE REAL
PROPERTY ARTICLE;

(II) A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION, AS DEFINED IN §
5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE; OR

(III) A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, AS DEFINED IN § 11B–101
OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 216 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “LOCAL COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY PROGRAM” MEANS A
PROGRAM OPERATED BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION FOR THE REGULATION OR
OVERSIGHT OF COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN A WEBSITE THAT
PROVIDES INFORMATION ON THE CURRENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF
INDIVIDUALS LIVING IN A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON THE
WEBSITE:

(1) A HYPERLINK TO THE WEBSITE OF EACH LOCAL COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY PROGRAM IN THE STATE; AND

(2) INFORMATION ON STATEWIDE LEGISLATION ENACTED IN THE
PRIOR LEGISLATIVE SESSION REGARDING THE RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF
INDIVIDUALS LIVING IN A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY, INCLUDING, FOR
EACH BILL THAT IS ENACTED:

(I) THE BILL TITLE;

(II) THE BILL AND CHAPTER NUMBER;

(III) THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE BILL; AND

(IV) A HYPERLINK TO THE BILL INFORMATION ON THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY WEBSITE.

(D) THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL BE POSTED ON THE DEPARTMENT’S COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITY WEBSITE ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1 EACH YEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2