START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 830 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 830 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Residential Construction - Electric Vehicle Charging 
 
  
This bill requires the construction of a new housing unit to include in or on the garage, 
carport, or driveway (1) one dedicated parking space with electric vehicle (EV) supply 
equipment that is fully installed (“EVSE-installed parking space”) or (2) one EV-ready 
parking space. The bill further requires the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) to 
study the cost of requiring EV-ready and EVSE-installed parking spaces at multifamily 
residential buildings and related issues. MEA must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2023. The 
bill applies only prospectively and does not affect any new construction for which a 
complete commercial or residential service request is made to the local utility or a 
development application or building permit application is filed with a county or 
municipality before the bill’s effective date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by up to $250,000 in FY 2024 only for 
MEA to hire a consultant to complete the required study. No effect on State revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  Any local enforcement of the bill’s requirements can likely be handled with 
existing local resources. Revenues are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 830/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Inclusion of Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces  
 
“Housing units” means (1) single-family detached houses; (2) duplexes; and (3) town 
houses that are subject to the provisions of the International Residential Code. “Housing 
units” does not include multifamily residential buildings that are subject to the provisions 
of the International Building Code.  
 
The bill repeals the requirement that builders (or their agents) provide each buyer or 
prospective buyer with the option to include in or on the garage, carport, or driveway 
specified equipment related to the charging of EVs and instead requires the inclusion of 
one EVSE-installed parking space or one EV-ready parking space.  
 
The bill authorizes a county or municipality, notwithstanding any other law, to require the 
construction of housing units to include a greater number of EVSE-installed parking spaces 
or EV-ready parking spaces than required under the bill. 
 
Study on Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces and Related Costs 
 
MEA must study (1) the cost of requiring multifamily residential buildings to include 
EV-ready and EVSE-installed parking spaces; (2) the appropriate ratio of EVSE-installed 
parking spaces to dwelling units in a multifamily residential building to support the State’s 
greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals; and (3) different options for paying for charging 
an electric vehicle at an EVSE-installed parking space at multifamily residential buildings, 
as specified. 
 
The study must include estimates of the cost to (1) include EV-ready or EVSE-installed 
parking spaces at newly constructed multifamily residential buildings and (2) retrofit 
existing multifamily residential buildings with EV-ready or EVSE-installed parking 
spaces. These cost estimates must include separate estimates:  
 
 
for EV-ready and EVSE-installed parking spaces;  
 
based on the following assumptions:  (1) that at least 10% of the parking spaces will 
be required to be EV-ready or EVSE-installed; (2) that at least 25% of the parking 
spaces will be EV-ready or EVSE-installed; and (3) that at least 50% of the parking 
spaces will be required to be EV-ready or EVSE-installed; and  
 
for the following categories of parking:  (1) open air parking lots; (2) underground 
parking structures; and (3) parking garages. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 830/ Page 3 
The study must also include estimates of, in consultation with the Maryland Department 
of the Environment (MDE), the number of electric vehicles that will be on the road in the 
State in each year from 2024 through 2050, inclusive, after the State adopts the California 
Advanced Clean Cars II regulations.  
 
Current Law:        
 
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations 
 
Chapter 629 of 2021 establishes requirements for builders or builder’s agents regarding 
the inclusion of EV charging stations for newly constructed housing units, including 
single-family detached homes and townhouses. If the construction of one or more new 
housing units includes at least one garage, carport, or driveway for each housing unit, the 
builder or the builder’s agent must provide each buyer or prospective buyer with the option 
to include in or on the garage, carport, or driveway (1) an EV charging station capable of 
providing at least Level 2 charging or (2) a dedicated electric line of sufficient voltage to 
support the later addition of an EV charging station capable of providing at least Level 2 
charging. The builder or the builder’s agent must give to each buyer or prospective buyer 
notice of these options in addition to specific information about any available rebate 
programs related to the purchase or installation of EV charging stations. Chapter 629 does 
not apply to multifamily residential buildings or significant renovations of existing housing 
units.  
 
Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program 
 
The Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Rebate Program, administered by MEA, 
provides rebates to individuals, businesses, and State and local governments. The rebate is 
equal to 40% of the cost of property that is located in the State and used for recharging 
vehicles propelled by electricity, subject to specified maximum values. MEA may also 
reimburse a person for the reasonable costs of installing the qualifying equipment. Funding 
for these rebates is provided by the Strategic Energy Investment Fund. The fiscal 2024 
budget as introduced includes $4.6 million in funding for the rebate program.  
 
Adoption of California Regulations 
 
Pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act (CAA), vehicles sold in the United States must be 
certified under one of two certification programs:  (1) the federal program (Tier 2); or 
(2) the California program (the Clean Car Program). Section 177 of the CAA Amendments 
of 1990 provides states the ability to adopt the California program in lieu of the federal 
program as long as the adopted state program is identical to the California program and the 
state allows two model years lead time from adoption to implementation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 830/ Page 4 
The Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007 (Chapters 111 and 112) requires MDE to adopt 
regulations implementing the California Clean Car Program (also referred to as the 
California Low Emissions Vehicle Program, or CAL LEV) in Maryland. Maryland’s 
implementing 
regulations 
adopted, 
through 
incorporation 
by 
reference 
in 
COMAR 26.11.34.02, the applicable California regulations. The CAL LEV program is a 
dynamic, changing program in which many of the relevant California regulations are 
continuously updated. To retain California’s standards, Maryland must remain consistent 
with its regulations, which means when California updates its regulations, Maryland must 
reflect those changes by amending State regulations. Of note, on August 25, 2022, the 
California Air Resources Board adopted the Advanced Clean Cars II regulation requiring 
that all new cars and light trucks sold in California be zero emission vehicles, including a 
certain percentage of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, by 2035.  
 
State Expenditures:  MEA advises that it does not have the expertise to conduct the 
required study related to the installation of EV parking spaces at multifamily residential 
buildings. Accordingly, special fund expenditures for MEA increase by up to $250,000 in 
fiscal 2024 only to hire a consultant to complete the required study and the related report.  
 
MDE can consult on the study with existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1146 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 477 (Senator Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; City of 
Annapolis; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Energy Administration; Public 
Service Commission; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 830/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 27, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5