START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 803 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 803 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Administrative Fees 
 
 
This bill alters the process and timing for calculating administrative fees paid by 
participating employers to the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension 
System (SRPS) to cover the annual operating expenses for the board and the State 
Retirement Agency (SRA). The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is largely procedural in nature and has no material effect on State 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is largely procedural in nature and has no material effect on local 
government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Administrative fees” are defined as the actual administrative and 
operational expenses incurred by the SRPS board and SRA as of June 30 of the second prior 
fiscal year. 
 
By October 1 of each year (instead of February 1), the SRPS board must certify to each 
local employer, other than a library, the amount payable by the local employer for the next 
fiscal year that is equal to the employer’s share of system membership and the amount of 
administrative fees, as defined by the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 803/ Page 2 
The board must notify the Secretary of Budget and Management and the Department of 
Legislative Services of the estimates and certifications provided to local employers. 
 
Following the certification by the board, local employers must each pay 25% of their 
certified fees to the board by October 1, January 1, April 16, and June 1 of the fiscal year 
immediately following the certification. 
 
The bill includes additional provisions to ensure that only payments received from 
participating employers, and not assets of the State pension fund (the accumulation fund), 
are used to pay administrative expenses for the board and SRA. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 397 of 2011 required participating employers of SRPS, including 
the State, local school boards, community colleges, and participating governmental units, 
to pay their prorated share of the system’s administrative costs based on their share of total 
membership in the system; the State pays the share of public libraries. Prior to fiscal 2013, 
SRA’s budget was funded solely from the system’s assets. Chapters 727 and 728 of 2018 
made expenses of the Investment Division nonbudgeted and, therefore, not included in the 
calculation of administrative fees paid by participating employers. 
 
The basis for the initial calculation and certification of administrative fees is the Governor’s 
allowance for the agency in the budget submitted for the following fiscal year. As part of 
its budget submission every year, the SRPS board must certify the percentage of the total 
membership that is employed by the State, libraries, and each local employer as of June 30 
of the second prior fiscal year. By February 1 of each year, after the submission of the 
Governor’s budget, the SRPS board must certify to each local employer, other than a 
library, the amount payable by the employer for the following fiscal year. The amount 
payable is derived by multiplying the employer’s percentage share of system membership 
by the amount of administrative and operational expenses in the State budget for the next 
fiscal year. 
 
By October 1, January 1, April 16, and June 1 of each fiscal year, each local employer must 
pay 25% of its annual share. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 834 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 803/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3