START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 800 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 800 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Execution on a Judgment - Child Support Arrearages - Workers' Compensation 
 
 
This bill specifies that 25% of the net recovery by a debtor on a claim for workers’ 
compensation indemnity benefits is subject to execution on a judgment for a child support 
arrearage, including any weekly benefits or settlement proceeds payable to the debtor. The 
bill also specifies that for the purpose of executing on a judgment for a child support 
arrearage under § 11-504 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, “net recovery” 
means the sum of money to be distributed to a debtor after deduction of attorney’s fees, 
expenses, medical bills, and satisfaction of any liens or subrogation claims arising out of 
the claims for personal injury, including those arising under a workers’ compensation 
insurance plan. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 11-504 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, 25% of the 
net recovery by a debtor on a claim for personal injury is subject to execution on a judgment 
for a child support arrearage. The bill does not alter this provision. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 800/ Page 2 
Labor and Employment Article (Workers’ Compensation Act) 
 
Section 9-732 of the Labor and Employment Article states that except as provided in 
Title 10 of the Family Law Article, before the issuance and delivery of a check or draft for 
any money payable under the Workers’ Compensation Act, the money may not be 
assigned, charged, or taken in attachment or execution. 
 
Family Law Article 
 
Title 10 of the Family Law Article establishes the Child Support Administration, along 
with mechanisms for enforcing child support liens in circuit court to collect overdue child 
support payments. The Maryland Rules also permit the garnishment of property to enforce 
a child support lien. 
 
“Earnings” for the purpose of an earnings withholding notice or order for child support 
arrearages, includes workers’ compensation benefits (Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the Family Law 
Article), and in determining “actual income” for the purpose of computing the amount of 
child support owed, workers’ compensation benefits are included. (Title 12, Subtitle 2 of 
the Family Law Article). 
 
In R.K. Grounds Care v. Wilson, 235 Md. App. 20, 27-29 (2017), the parties’ dispute 
concerned whether workers’ compensation money may be garnished to pay child support 
arrearages. The Court of Special Appeals (now the Appellate Court of Maryland) noted the 
“interrelated” provisions, described above, from the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article, the Labor and Employment Article, and the Family Law Article, but ultimately did 
not decide the issue because it held that there was no subject matter jurisdiction over the 
particular dispute in question (the argument had been raised originally before the 
Workers’ Compensation Commission, which does not have jurisdiction to decide 
garnishment questions, rather than in the circuit court, which has jurisdiction over 
garnishment proceedings). 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 650 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 71 (Senator Brooks) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 800/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3