START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 812 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 812 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health - Reproductive Health Services - Protected Information and Insurance 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits the disclosure of mifepristone data or the diagnosis, procedure, 
medication, or related codes for abortion care and other “sensitive health services” by a 
health information exchange (HIE), electronic health network (EHN), or health care 
provider beginning December 1, 2023. Beginning June 1, 2024, a person who knowingly 
violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to 
$10,000 per day. The bill establishes a Protected Health Care Commission (PHCC), staffed 
by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), to make specified recommendations to the 
Secretary of Health on what should be classified as “legally protected health care.” The 
Secretary must respond to PHCC reports within 60 days of receipt, use the reports in 
making specified determinations, and adopt emergency regulations within 90 days of the 
bill’s effective date to identify which specified codes should be restricted. The Maryland 
Health Care Commission (MHCC) must (1) adopt emergency regulations within 
nine months of the bill’s effective date to restrict data of patients related to legally protected 
health care and (2) submit quarterly reports on the bill’s implementation in fiscal 2024 and 
2025. The bill also alters certain disclosures under the Maryland Public Information Act. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2024 only for 
contractual services. The bill’s remaining provisions can likely be implemented within 
existing budgeted resources. Special fund revenues are not affected. General fund revenues 
are not materially affected, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are primarily procedural in nature and do not materially 
affect local governmental finances.    

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 812/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Legally protected health care” means all reproductive health services, 
medications, and supplies related to the provision of abortion care and other sensitive 
health services as determined by the Secretary based on the recommendation of PHCC. 
“Sensitive health services” includes reproductive health services other than abortion care.  
 
Maryland Public Information Act 
 
A custodian must deny inspection of the part of a public record that (1) contains the name 
or other identifying information of an individual related to a licensed ambulatory surgical 
facility (except for the owner, primary contact, attorney, or consultant contained in an 
application to MHCC for a certificate of need (CON) or CON exception or determination 
request) or a licensed surgical abortion facility or (2) relates to an investigation of a licensee 
or certificate holder regarding the provision of legally protected health care. The bill also 
specifies that, for a health occupations board licensee, a custodian must allow inspection 
of the part of a public record that gives the business address of the licensee only (rather 
than the home address of the licensee if the business address is not available as under 
current law).  
 
Health Information Exchange and Electronic Health Network Data Confidentiality 
 
The purpose of MHCC is expanded to include the establishment of policies and standards 
to protect the confidentiality of patient and health care practitioner information related to 
legally protected health care. MHCC must adopt regulations for implementing connectivity 
to the HIE that restrict data of patients who have obtained legally protected health care. 
 
Beginning December 1, 2023, an HIE or EHN is prohibited from disclosing mifepristone 
data or the diagnosis, procedure, medication, or related codes for abortion care and other 
sensitive health services (as determined by the Secretary) to a treating provider, a business 
entity, another HIE, or another EHN, unless the disclosure is (1) for the adjudication of 
claims or (2) to a specific treating provider at the written request of and with the consent 
of a patient, parent, or guardian, as specified.  
 
Beginning June 1, 2024, a person who knowingly violates this prohibition is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 per day. The fine to be imposed 
must be based on consideration of (1) the extent of actual or potential public harm caused 
by the violation; (2) the cost of investigating the violation; and (3) whether the person 
previously violated this prohibition.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 812/ Page 3 
Subject to specified guidelines and recommendations, the Secretary must determine, for 
abortion care and sensitive health services, the procedure, diagnosis, medication, and other 
related codes that are subject to specified disclosure restrictions due to a substantial risk to 
patients or health care providers that would result from disclosure. The Secretary must 
adopt regulations to restrict the disclosure of abortion care and other sensitive health 
services information, as specified, and may adopt restrictions on the disclosure of abortion 
care or other sensitive health services that are applicable only to disclosures by HIEs or 
EHNs to out-of-state treating providers or business entities or other HIEs or EHNs provided 
that any restrictions on disclosing mifepristone data must apply to recipients located both 
in and outside the State.   
 
Health Care Providers – Medical Record Disclosures  
 
The disclosure of abortion care or other sensitive health services information, as specified, 
by a health care provider is subject to the related disclosure prohibitions established for 
HIEs and EHNs under the bill.  
 
Protected Health Care Commission  
 
PHCC is established to make recommendations to the Secretary regarding sensitive health 
services that should be determined by the Secretary to be legally protected health care. 
PHCC must identify sensitive health services information by diagnosis, procedural, 
medication, or related codes for which disclosure by an HIE or EHN to a treating provider, 
business entity, another HIE, or another EHN would create a substantial risk to patients or 
health care providers. PHCC may consult with organizations with expertise in (1) legal 
issues impacting providers of legally protected health care; (2) consumer health privacy; 
(3) health information technology; and (4) clinical, policy, or legal issues related to the 
work of PHCC.  
 
PHCC must (1) select a chair each year; (2) meet at least four times per year; and (3) issue 
semiannual reports to the Secretary on its recommendation, as specified, including an 
assessment of the potential risk to patients and health care providers that would result from 
the disclosure of the sensitive health services that are addressed in the reports. Within 
60 days of receiving a report, the Secretary must submit a written response to the report, 
including the findings and determinations of the Secretary, to PHCC and specified 
committees of the General Assembly.  
 
Health Insurance – Coverage of Abortion Care Services 
 
An insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or health maintenance organization that provides 
labor and delivery coverage must cover abortion care services, as specified, 
notwithstanding § 31-116 of the Insurance Article related to the essential health benefits 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 812/ Page 4 
(EHBs) required pursuant to the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), 
which generally exempts a grandfathered health plan from covering EHBs.  
 
Current Law:     
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act 
 
The Public Information Act (PIA) establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to 
information about the affairs of government and the official acts of public officials and 
employees. Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public 
record at any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are 
to be made available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of 
the types of public records that have been so designated. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective  
July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of 
public records that are available for inspection under PIA, as specified. 
 
A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a public record if (1) the 
public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the inspection would be contrary 
to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the Maryland Rules, or an order of a court 
of record. A custodian may deny inspection of part of a public record, if a custodian 
believes that inspection of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to 
the public interest. PIA also requires denial of inspection for specified types of records and 
information.  
       
Maryland Health Care Commission – Health Information Exchange Data Confidentiality 
 
MHCC is an independent commission that functions within MDH and must coordinate the 
exercise of its functions with MDH and the Health Services Cost Review Commission to 
ensure an integrated, effective health care policy for the State. MHCC must adopt specified 
regulations for implementing a statewide HIE. MHCC designated the Chesapeake 
Regional Information System for Our Patients (CRISP) as the State-designated HIE in 
2009, and the infrastructure became operational in 2010. An HIE allows clinical 
information to move electronically among disparate health information systems. CRISP 
offers tools aimed at improving the facilitation of care for the region’s health care 
providers.  
 
Health Care Providers – Medical Record Disclosures 
 
A health care provider is a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized to 
practice under the Health Occupations Article or a facility where health care is provided to 
patients or recipients. In general, a health care provider must keep the medical record of a 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 812/ Page 5 
patient or recipient confidential and disclose the information only as authorized and subject 
to specified requirements and limitations.  
 
Health Insurance – Abortion Care Services  
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 requires that a carrier that provides labor and delivery coverage must 
cover abortion care services without (1) a deductible, coinsurance, copayment, or any other 
cost-sharing requirement and (2) restrictions that are inconsistent with the protected rights 
under Title 20, Subtitle 2 of the Health-General Article. A carrier must provide information 
to consumers about abortion care coverage using the terminology “abortion care” to 
describe coverage. These requirements do not apply to (1) a multistate plan that does not 
provide coverage for abortions in accordance with federal law or (2) a high-deductible plan, 
unless the Insurance Commissioner determines that abortion care is not excluded from the 
safe harbor provisions for preventive care under federal law. 
 
A religious organization that is eligible to obtain an exclusion from the requirement to 
cover prescription contraceptive drugs or devices may obtain an exclusion from abortion 
care coverage and notice requirements if the requirements conflict with the organization’s 
bona fide religious beliefs and practices. If the Commissioner determines that enforcement 
of these provisions may adversely affect the allocation of federal funds to the State, the 
Commissioner may grant an exemption for these requirements to the minimum extent 
necessary to ensure the continued receipt of federal funds. 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription 
drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care. 
 
State Revenues:  While the bill establishes a maximum fine of $10,000 a day to be 
imposed for violations of a specified prohibition, the amount of the fine is subject to 
multiple considerations under the bill. Moreover, this analysis assumes general compliance 
with the bill’s provisions related to the disclosure of specified records. Thus, general fund 
fine revenues are not materially affected under the bill. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHCC advises that it will require a one-time expenditure of 
$100,000 in fiscal 2024 only for contractual services to develop policies and standards 
protecting the confidentiality of patient and health care practitioner information related to 
legally protected health care information. MHCC further advises that the commission has 
sufficient funds available to cover this expenditure.  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 812/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  For a detailed discussion of both federal and State abortion laws, 
please see the Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 786 (Senator Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 812/ Page 7 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion 
 
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
The Dobbs decision does not impact Maryland law as § 20-209 of the 
Health-General Article codifies the protections of Roe and Casey by prohibiting the State 
from interfering with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the health or life of the woman in cases of fetal defect, 
deformity, or abnormality. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 expanded beyond physicians the types of health care providers who 
may provide abortions to include nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives, licensed certified 
midwives, physician assistants, and other qualified licensed health care providers. The Act 
established the Abortion Care Clinical Training Program to (1) ensure there are a sufficient 
number of health care professionals to provide abortion services in the State and (2) require 
health insurers and Maryland Medicaid to cover abortion services without a deductible, 
coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. 
 
A qualified health care provider who performs an abortion is not liable for civil damages 
or subject to a criminal penalty for a decision to perform an abortion made in good faith 
and in the provider’s best clinical judgment using accepted standards of clinical practice. 
MDH may adopt regulations consistent with established clinical practice if they are 
necessary and the least intrusive method to protect the life and health of the woman. 
 
After Dobbs, Maryland is authorized to enact additional laws protecting access to abortion 
or enact restrictions on abortion access that were unconstitutional under Roe and Casey. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 812/ Page 8 
State Actions Following the Dobbs Decision 
 
Exhibit 1 indicates which states have banned abortion or have an abortion ban on hold. 
As of January 2023, 14 states have banned abortion and 9 states have bans on hold. In states 
such as Louisiana, Texas, and Utah, laws restricting abortion access took effect 
immediately following the Dobbs decision (the Utah ban is currently blocked by the 
courts). Seven states passed laws restricting abortion access prior to Roe but never repealed 
the laws following Roe. Those states may be able to enforce these laws post-Dobbs, but 
parties in several states have sought injunctions to prevent enforcement. Other states, such 
as Florida, Idaho, and Kentucky, passed laws restricting abortion, but specified that the 
laws would only take effect if existing precedent protecting the right to an abortion was 
overturned. These laws are also being challenged in state courts, with many challenges 
alleging that restrictions violate provisions of state constitutions. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
States with Abortion Bans in Effect or on Hold 
As of January 2023 
 
 
Note:  State laws with bans include near-total bans on abortion and bans after the detection of a fetal heartbeat or 
six weeks gestational age. Although Michigan is included as having a “Ban on Hold,” Michigan voters approved an 
amendment to its state constitution including the right to an abortion. This will impact the court’s decision on the 
validity of the pre-Roe law banning abortion as the law will now be considered unconstitutional.  
 
Source:  Guttmacher Institute; Center for Reproductive Rights; National Public Radio; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 812/ Page 9 
Seventeen states and the District of Columbia currently have laws that protect the right to 
abortion, mostly before the point of fetal viability. Several states are seeking to establish 
the right to an abortion, either in statute or the state constitution. In November 2022, voters 
in California, Michigan, and Vermont approved ballot initiatives establishing the right to 
an abortion in their state constitutions. In some states where abortions are accessible, there 
have been efforts to limit liability and prevent enforcement of any judgment against an 
individual performing or obtaining an abortion in the state. This is in response to laws 
similar to Texas’ law allowing civil actions against individuals who assist an individual in 
obtaining an abortion. Other states have taken additional measures to expand abortion 
access. For example, several states (including Maryland) require health insurance plans to 
cover abortions without imposing cost-sharing on beneficiaries, and several other states 
(also including Maryland) permit providers other than licensed physicians to perform 
abortions. Several states have introduced or passed laws to weaken or prohibit investigation 
of in-state providers by out-of-state officials to counteract laws in states that subject 
abortion providers to criminal penalties. 
 

END OF PAGE 9