START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 884 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 884 
(Baltimore City Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Insurance - Certificates of Guarantee for County Bond 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill authorizes, but does not require, Baltimore City to honor certificates of guarantee 
issued by a nonprofit association of contractors, or its wholly owned subsidiary in order to 
satisfy certain city bond requirements. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland Insurance Administration can enforce the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill authorizes, but does not require, Baltimore City to honor certificates 
of guarantee issued by a nonprofit association of contractors. Baltimore City finances are 
not affected.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “certificate of guarantee” means an instrument that is issued on behalf 
of a contractor for the purpose of satisfying county bond requirements for public 
improvements or other county bond requirements.  A “contractor” means a person that, for 
a fixed price, commission, fee, or percentage, undertakes to bid on or accepts or offers to 
accept orders or contracts to perform or supervise the construction, improvement, or 
maintenance of a building, structure, or road. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 884/ Page 2 
Other counties that are authorized but are not required to honor certificates of guarantee 
include Calvert, Charles, Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, St. Mary’s, and 
Washington. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since the bill authorizes, but does not require, Baltimore City to 
honor certificates of guarantee issued by a nonprofit association of contractors, 
Baltimore City advises that there appears to be no impact on its finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
km/hlb    
 
Analysis by:  Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2