START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 863 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 863 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Chief Medical Examiner - Corrections to Autopsy Findings and 
Conclusions 
 
 
This bill extends the time period within which a person in interest may request the medical 
examiner to correct findings and conclusions on the cause and manner of death, with 
specified exception, from within 60 days to within 180 days after the medical examiner 
files those findings and conclusions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s change can be handled with existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. No material effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual who performs an autopsy must prepare detailed written 
findings during the autopsy. The original copy of such findings and the conclusions drawn 
from them must be filed in the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (within the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH)), and a copy must be filed in the office of the medical 
examiner for the county where the death occurred. 
 
With the exception of cases where the finding is homicide, a person in interest (defined as 
the spouse, adult child, parent, adult sibling, grandparent, or guardian of the person of the 
deceased at the time of the deceased’s death) may request that the medical examiner correct 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 863/ Page 2 
findings and conclusions on the cause and manner of death recorded on a certificate of 
death within 60 days after the medical examiner files the findings and conclusions. 
 
If the Chief Medical Examiner denies the request of a person in interest to correct the 
findings and conclusions on the cause or manner of death, the person in interest may appeal 
the denial to correct the cause and manner of death to the Secretary of Health, who must 
then refer the matter to the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). A contested hearing 
before OAH must be a hearing on both (1) the denial of the request and (2) the 
establishment of the findings and conclusions on the cause and manner of death. 
 
Following a hearing, an administrative law judge (ALJ) must submit findings of fact to the 
Secretary. After a review of the ALJ’s findings, the Secretary, including a designee, must 
issue an order to either (1) adopt the findings of the ALJ or (2) reject the findings of the 
ALJ and affirm the findings of the medical examiner. If the ALJ’s findings are rejected, 
the person in interest may further appeal to a circuit court in an appropriate jurisdiction. 
 
If a final decision (by either the Secretary, including a designee, or the appropriate 
circuit court) establishes a different finding or conclusion on the cause or manner of death 
of a deceased than that recorded on the certificate of death, the medical examiner must 
amend the certificate to reflect the different finding or conclusion. 
 
If the findings of the medical examiner are upheld by the Secretary, the person in interest 
who appealed is responsible for the costs of the contested case hearing. Otherwise, MDH is 
responsible for the costs. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  While extending the timeframe within which a person in interest may 
request a correction to the findings and conclusions on the cause and manner of death from 
within 60 days to within 180 days may result in more correction requests, MDH advises 
that relatively few correction requests are received under current law so an extension can 
likely be handled with existing staff resources. OAH similarly advises that the number of 
new hearings that may be generated under the bill and any training for ALJs would be 
minimal and could be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 863/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3