START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 874 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 874 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Office of the Attorney General - Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes 
Unit - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes an Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes Unit of the Office of 
the Attorney General (OAG) to investigate and prosecute violations of State criminal 
environmental and natural resources laws. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $566,200 in FY 2024. Future years 
reflect annualization and inflation. General/special fund revenues may increase, beginning 
as early as FY 2024, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF/SF Rev. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$566,200 
$700,400 
$729,400 
$759,100 
$796,000 
Net Effect 
($566,200) 
($700,400) 
($729,400) 
($759,100) 
($796,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may increase, beginning as early as FY 2024, 
as discussed below. Expenditures are not expected to be materially affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes an Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes Unit 
of OAG to (1) investigate and prosecute cases against persons that violate State criminal 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 874/ Page 2 
environmental and natural resources laws and (2) investigate and prosecute any other 
criminal offense discovered in the course of an investigation. 
 
The unit must include (1) a full-time Chief Counsel of Environmental and Natural 
Resources Crimes and (2) staff, including assistant Attorneys General, investigators, and 
administrators, as provided in the State budget. Salaries and expenses of the unit must be 
as provided in the State budget and, in cooperation with the Secretary of Budget and 
Management, the Attorney General must set minimum salaries, qualifications, and 
standards of training and experience for positions within the unit. 
 
In conducting an investigation and prosecuting cases, the unit may act with the full powers, 
rights, privileges, and duties of a State’s Attorney, including the use of a grand jury in any 
county. The bill also gives specified authority to the Attorney General or a deputy Attorney 
General, or an assistant Attorney General designated in writing by the Attorney General, 
to issue a subpoena – for the limited purpose of furthering an ongoing criminal 
investigation by the unit – to a person to produce telephone, business, government, or 
corporate records or documents. The bill authorizes the circuit court with jurisdiction over 
the matter to grant appropriate relief – after a specified hearing – if a person fails to obey 
a lawfully served subpoena. 
 
By November 30 each year, the Attorney General must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on all the activities of the unit and any actions taken by the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) or the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) in 
response to findings and recommendations of the unit. 
 
Current Law:  Under the Maryland Constitution, the Attorney General’s responsibilities 
include investigating, commencing, and prosecuting or defending any civil or criminal suit 
or action or category of such suits or actions in any of the federal courts or in any court of 
the State, or before administrative agencies and quasi legislative bodies, on the part of the 
State or in which the State may be interested, which the General Assembly (by law or 
resolution) or the Governor directs to be investigated, commenced, and prosecuted or 
defended. The constitution also establishes a State’s Attorney in each county that must 
perform such duties as prescribed by the General Assembly. 
 
Statute establishes that the Attorney General has general charge of the legal business of the 
State and, unless a law expressly provides for a general counsel as the legal adviser and 
representative of the officer or unit, the Attorney General is the legal adviser of and must 
represent and otherwise perform all of the legal work for each officer and unit of the State 
government. Statute expressly designates the Attorney General as the legal adviser to MDE 
and DNR. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 874/ Page 3 
Statute establishes that a State’s Attorney must, in the county served by the State’s 
Attorney, prosecute and defend on the part of the State all cases in which the State may be 
interested. 
 
The Attorney General, and in limited cases State’s Attorneys, are also given specific 
authority in certain instances to enforce specific laws within the Environment Article and 
Natural Resources Article of the Maryland Code. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $566,203 in fiscal 2024, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring (1) one principal counsel to serve as the Chief Counsel of Environmental and 
Natural Resources Crimes; (2) two assistant Attorney General positions, specializing in 
environmental and natural resources law; and (3) one investigator. OAG indicates that 
these additional staff are expected to be combined with existing staff within the office that 
focus on the investigation and prosecution of criminal environmental violations, to form 
the Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes Unit under the bill to address both 
criminal environmental and natural resources violations. The estimate includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including 
contractual services for expert testimony. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$490,217 
Contractual Services 
37,500 
Operating Expenses 
  38,486 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$566,203 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Any incarceration penalties imposed as a result of the establishment of the Environmental 
and Natural Resources Crimes Unit (and its subsequent investigation and prosecution of 
criminal cases) that otherwise would not have been imposed in the absence of the bill are 
not expected to materially affect State finances. 
 
State Revenues:  General/special fund revenues may increase, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024, to the extent monetary penalties and/or restitution are collected as a result of 
the establishment of the Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes Unit that otherwise 
would not have been collected in the absence of the bill. The extent of any increase cannot 
be reliably estimated. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local government revenues may increase, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024, to the extent monetary penalties are collected as a result of the establishment 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 874/ Page 4 
of the unit that otherwise would not have been collected in the absence of the bill. The 
extent of any increase cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Any incarceration penalties imposed as a result of the establishment 
of the Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes Unit that otherwise would not have 
been imposed in the absence of the bill are not expected to materially affect local 
government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in resource-based industries may meaningfully 
benefit to the extent the unit’s investigation and prosecution of violations of criminal 
environmental and natural resources laws increases compliance with those laws. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 611 (Senator Bailey, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Office of the 
Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4