START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 814 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 814 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange - State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance 
Subsidies Pilot Program - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date of the State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance 
Subsidies Pilot Program by two additional years. Subject to the availability of funds, in 
fiscal 2024 through 2026, the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) may designate 
funds from the MHBE Fund to provide up to $20.0 million in annual subsidies to young 
adults under the pilot program. MHBE, in consultation with the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA), must conduct a study and submit a report, as specified, by 
December 1, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023; the pilot program terminates 
June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHBE special fund expenditures for young adult subsidies continue through 
FY 2026; specifically, special fund expenditures increase by as much as $10.0 million in 
FY 2024, as much as $20.0 million in FY 2025, and as much as $10.0 million in FY 2026, 
as discussed below. General fund revenues are affected only to the extent reversions are 
lower than they otherwise would be (not shown below). 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
10.0 
20.0 
10.0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($10.0) 
($20.0) 
($10.0) 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 814/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MHBE, in consultation with MIA, must conduct a study of (1) available 
federal and State subsidies; (2) the State’s § 1332 waiver and whether it should be amended 
to include young adults or otherwise to maximize federal pass-through funds and impact 
the largest number of individuals so as to reduce the State’s uninsured rate; and (3) the 
number of individuals who signed up for health insurance through MHBE because of the 
young adult subsidy. MHBE must submit a report on its findings and recommendations to 
the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee by December 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law:  MHBE was created during the 2011 session to provide a marketplace for 
individuals and small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage. Through the 
Maryland Health Connection, Maryland residents can shop for health insurance plans, 
compare rates, and determine their eligibility for federal advanced premium tax credits, 
cost-sharing reduction plans, and public assistance programs such as Medicaid. MHBE is 
funded in part from a mandated $32.0 million diversion of premium tax revenues that 
would otherwise go to the general fund. However, any of these special funds that remain 
unspent at fiscal year closeout revert to the general fund. 
 
Chapters 777 and 778 of 2021 required MHBE to establish and implement the State-Based 
Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program for calendar 2022 and 2023 to help 
make health insurance more affordable for uninsured young adults. Subject to available 
funds, in fiscal 2022 through 2024, MHBE may designate funds from the MHBE Fund to 
be used for the pilot program so that no more than $20.0 million in annual subsidies may 
be provided in calendar 2022 and 2023. 
 
Under the program, young adults ages 18 to 34 with incomes between 138% and 400% of 
the federal poverty level (FPL) are eligible for State premium assistance subsidies. 
Subsidies are allocated to reduce the maximum expected premium contribution of 
individuals ages 18 to 30 by 2.5%. For individuals ages 31 to 34, the subsidy is 
progressively lower for each age, reducing the maximum expected contribution by 0.5% 
each year. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHBE advises that, as the young adult subsidies are already 
established and operational, no additional personnel are needed nor are additional costs 
anticipated to continue the pilot program for two additional years. Any ongoing 
information technology maintenance costs can be absorbed within MHBE’s existing 
budget. MHBE, in consultation with MIA, can conduct the required study and submit its 
findings and recommendations using existing budgeted resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 814/ Page 3 
Subject to available funds, MHBE may continue to designate funds from the MHBE Fund 
so that up to $20.0 million in annual subsidies may be provided in calendar 2024 and 2025. 
Thus, special fund expenditures increase by as much as $10.0 million in fiscal 2024 to 
provide subsidies for the program for the first half of calendar 2024. In fiscal 2025, 
special fund expenditures increase by as much as $20.0 million to provide subsidies for the 
second half of calendar 2024 and the first half of calendar 2025. In fiscal 2026, special fund 
expenditures increase by as much as $10.0 million to provide subsidies for the second half 
of calendar 2025. 
 
Actual expenditures will vary based on the number of individuals who enroll in the 
program and any future changes to eligibility and payment parameters for the subsidies. 
MHBE advises that, in calendar 2022, 45,000 young adults received a subsidy at a 
preliminary cost to the State of $13.9 million. In calendar 2023, 48,095 young adults are 
projected to receive subsidies at a cost of $17.9 million. 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $10.0 million for the 
young adult subsidy program. This reflects an anticipated decrease of $10.0 million over 
fiscal 2023 as the pilot program is intended to provide subsidies through calendar 2023 
only and is set to terminate June 30, 2024. 
 
Additional Comments:  MHBE advises that the young adult subsidy pilot program 
reduced net premiums for young adults by 34%, an average of $36 per month. As of 
January 31, 2022, the number of young adults in active coverage increased 11% over the 
prior year, the largest increase in four years. MHBE is in the process of further assessing 
the impact of the pilot program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 601 (Senator Feldman, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 814/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4