START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 885 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 885 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Related Event Promoter's Permit 
 
 
This bill alters certain provisions associated with a related event promoter’s permit issued 
by the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners. The bill also makes a technical 
change updating an obsolete reference to the previous authority of the Comptroller’s Office 
to reference the authority of the Executive Director of the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission (ATC). The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Baltimore City operations or 
finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Definition of Related Event 
 
Chapter 764 of 2019 authorized the board to issue a related event promoter’s permit that 
authorizes an individual, for-profit organization, or nonprofit organization and a 
participating license holder to conduct a social event related to and around the same time 
and location as the basketball tournament of the Central Intercollegiate Athletic 
Association (CIAA). 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 885/ Page 2 
A “related event promoter” is an individual, for-profit organization, or nonprofit 
organization that promotes a social event related to and around the same time and location 
as the CIAA Basketball Tournament. A “related event” is an event in which a license holder 
participates in a coordinated promotion with a third-party promoter to sell or provide 
alcoholic beverages during a specified time, and at which at least 75 individuals are 
reasonably expected to attend. A related event includes an event for which tickets are sold 
to the public, including a concert, an entertainment event, a happy hour, or a party. 
 
The bill includes in the definition of a related event, an event for which tickets are sold to 
the public, either in advance or at the door, or a cover charge is imposed. 
 
Reduction of the Number of Days for Specified Actions 
 
Under current law, the time period for an applicant to submit an application to the board 
for a permit is at least 90 days before the date of the related event. The bill changes the 
time period to at least 30 days before the date of the related event. 
 
Under current law, the board must grant or deny the permit or request additional 
information from the applicant within 14 days after receiving the application. Under the 
bill, the board is required to grant or deny the permit or request additional information from 
the applicant within 7 days after receiving the application. 
 
Currently, a permit may not be altered within 30 days before the scheduled related event. 
The bill changes the time period for when a permit may not be altered before the scheduled 
related event to 14 days. 
 
Standard for Determining Permit Fees 
 
Under current law, the application fee for a permit is $50. The permit fee is $500, if 75 to 
299 individuals are reasonably anticipated to participate; and the permit fee is $1,500, if 
300 or more individuals are reasonably anticipated to participate. The bill changes the 
standard for determining the $500 and $1,500 permit fees respectively by requiring the 
Baltimore City Fire Marshal to determine whether the maximum capacity for the proposed 
location is less than 300 persons for the $500 permit fee, or 300 or more persons for the 
$1,500 permit fee.  
 
Definition of Certain Offense 
 
Currently, for the offense of publicizing, selling tickets for, organizing, operating, 
producing, facilitating, or staging a related event with the knowledge or a reason to know 
that a related event promoter’s permit required under Title 12 of the Alcoholic Beverages 
Article has not been obtained, the board must impose a fine of not less than $1,000 and not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 885/ Page 3 
more than $3,000 or suspend the license or both. The bill alters the definition of the offense 
by adding or imposing a cover charge. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 589 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3