START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 817 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 817 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government - Regulation Procedures and the Maryland Register 
 
 
This bill makes various changes to the processes and procedures for units of State 
government to submit regulations to the Administrator of the Division of State 
Documents (DSD), the Joint Committee on Administrative, Executive, and Legislative 
Review (AELR), and the Department of Legislative Services (DLS). Among other things, 
DLS must adopt procedures for the required submission of proposed and emergency 
regulations, work plans, and evaluation reports. The Administrator must consult with DLS 
to ensure that the notice of the receipt of proposed and emergency regulations is submitted 
from the Administrator to AELR and DLS in a timely manner. By October 1, 2023, the 
Administrator must develop and maintain an electronic filing system for use by units of 
State government, AELR, DLS, and DSD for the submission and tracking of proposed and 
emergency regulations, as specified. The bill also specifies that DSD must make at least 
the 15 most recent issues of the Maryland Register available on its website. The provisions 
related to the electronic filing system takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DSD increase by $124,200 in FY 2024 for 
contractual staff and supplemental funding for lost revenues; out-years reflect ongoing 
costs, including continued supplemental funding, and termination of contractual support. 
Special fund revenues for DSD decrease by $29,300 in FY 2024 and by $39,000 annually 
thereafter; special fund expenditures decrease correspondingly. Expenditures for DSD may 
increase, potentially significantly, as discussed below; any such costs are not reflected in 
the table below. Any impacts on other State agencies are primarily operational. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
($29,300) 
($39,000) 
($39,000) 
($39,000) 
($39,000) 
GF Expenditure 
$124,200 
$122,700 
$39,000 
$39,000 
$39,000 
SF Expenditure 
($29,300) 
($39,000) 
($39,000) 
$0($38,975) 
($39,000) 
Net Effect 
($124,200) 
($122,700) 
($39,000) 
($78,000) 
($39,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 817/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. Local finances are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Online Publication of the Maryland Register 
 
Under current law, DSD is required to make the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 
and any other material DSD determines to be in the public interest available to the public 
at no cost with direct online searching. Under the bill, DSD must also make at least the 
15 most recent issues of the Maryland Register available online as well. 
 
Under current law, AELR must adopt guidelines for the Administrator to set the price for 
a copy of or a subscription to COMAR and the Maryland Register. Revenue received from 
fees for copies and subscriptions to COMAR and the Maryland Register are deposited into 
DSD’s special fund, the purpose of which is to pay the costs of publishing and distributing 
DSD products. 
 
Preliminary Review of Proposed Regulations by the Joint Committee on Administrative, 
Executive, and Legislative Review 
 
Under current law, a promulgating unit must submit proposed regulations to AELR and 
DLS at least 15 days before submitting the regulation to the Maryland Register for 
publication. This time period is referred to as the preliminary review. 
 
The bill requires the proposed regulation to be submitted in accordance with new 
procedures adopted by DLS under the bill and requires that the proposed regulation be 
submitted to AELR, DLS, and the Administrator.  
 
The bill also establishes a new requirement that, if a unit wants to alter the text of a 
proposed regulation after it has been submitted to AELR and DLS for initial review and 
before the proposed regulation is published in the Maryland Register, such that any part of 
the text as submitted for publication differs substantively from the text that was previously 
submitted, the unit must (1) notify AELR, DLS, and the Administrator of the change; 
(2) withdraw the proposed regulation; and (3) resubmit the proposed regulation with the 
altered text to AELR, DLS, and the Administrator at least 15 days prior to publication. 
Further, the bill requires a unit that wishes to make a nonsubstantive change to the text of 
the proposed regulation after submission to AELR and DLS and before publication in the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 817/ Page 3 
Maryland Register to (1) notify AELR, DLS, the Office of the General Assembly Counsel, 
and the Administrator of the change; and (2) include a certificate from the unit that the 
change is nonsubstantive with the notice, as specified. If the Office of the 
General Assembly Counsel determines that a change submitted by a unit is not 
nonsubstantive, the unit must withdraw and resubmit the proposed regulation, as specified.  
 
New Procedures on Submission Requirements Adopted by the Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Under the bill, DLS must adopt procedures for the submission of proposed and emergency 
regulations, work plans, and evaluation reports to AELR by a unit. Each promulgating unit 
is required to follow these procedures and must also include the text of the proposed 
regulation and the notice of proposed adoption when submitting a proposed regulation to 
AELR. The Administrator must consult with DLS to ensure that notice of the receipt of 
proposed and emergency regulations is transmitted to and received by AELR and DLS in 
a timely manner. Further, when the Administrator transmits a proposed or emergency 
regulation to AELR and DLS, the Administrator must also provide receipt of the transmittal 
to the promulgating unit. 
 
The bill specifies that the submission of a regulation, work plan, or an evaluation report to 
AELR under these provisions does not satisfy any requirement for a unit to submit a 
regulation, work plan, or an evaluation report to the Administrator for publication in the 
Maryland Register. Additionally, any requirement under Title 10, Subtitle 11 of the State 
Government Article (which governs the regulatory promulgation process) for a unit to 
submit a regulation to AELR may not be satisfied by submitting the regulation to DSD. 
 
Administrative Hold Override Notices 
 
Under current law, a unit may not adopt a proposed regulation until (1) the proposed 
regulation has been submitted to AELR for preliminary review and (2) at least 45 days 
after first published in the Maryland Register. If AELR determines that an appropriate 
review cannot be reasonably conducted within the standard 45 days, and that additional 
review time is necessary, AELR may delay the final adoption of the regulation by notifying 
the promulgating unit and DSD, in writing, before the expiration of the 45-day period. This 
delay is referred to as an administrative hold. 
 
Under current law, if a proposed regulation is placed under an administrative hold (and 
appropriate notice has been provided), the promulgating unit may not adopt the regulation 
until it notifies AELR, in writing (referred to as the hold override notice) of its intention to 
adopt the regulation. Under the bill, the hold override notice must be sent to AELR by 
U.S. Mail and electronic mail. Further, under current law, in addition to the hold override 
notice, the promulgating unit must provide AELR with a further period of review of the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 817/ Page 4 
regulation that terminates not earlier than the later of the following:  (1) the 30th day 
following the hold override notice being provided by the promulgating unit; or (2) the 
105th day following the first publication of the regulation in the Maryland Register. Under 
the bill, the timeframe for the additional review period is increased to (1) the 60th day 
following the hold overnight notice being provided by the promulgating unit or (2) the 
105th day following the first publish of the regulation in the Maryland Register. The bill 
further requires that the hold override notice be published in the Maryland Register within 
30 days of receipt by AELR. 
 
Development and Maintenance of an Electronic Filing System and Required Report 
 
The bill requires the Administrator to develop and maintain an electronic filing system for 
use by units of State government, AELR, DLS, and DSD for the submission and tracking 
of proposed and emergency regulations from the time of submission to AELR through 
publication in the Maryland Register and final approval by the unit, or in the case of an 
emergency regulation, approval by AELR. The Administrator must consult with DLS on 
the functionality and security of the electronic filing system. 
 
The electronic filing system must (1) allow a unit to upload the text of proposed and 
emergency regulations in a format approved by the Administrator and DLS, along with all 
statutorily required information; (2) contain a tracking function and an automated 
notification system that sends notice of new or updated regulations to AELR and DLS; 
(3) prohibit anyone other than DSD employees from modifying the text of regulations or 
any other required submittals; (4) allow AELR and DLS to access and download all 
information that is submitted by a unit relating to a regulation in a format required by DLS; 
(5) allow AELR and DLS to approve emergency regulations (including providing for the 
timeframe during which the emergency status is approved); (6) allow a unit to view all 
related information for a regulation that is submitted by a unit, including all tracking 
information; (7) allow for the tracking of regulatory holds; and (8) include the 
functionalities necessary for DSD to publish the Maryland Register. 
 
The Administrator must report to AELR on the status of the development and deployment 
of the required electronic system by December 31, 2023. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Costs to Develop and Maintain the Electronic Filing System 
 
DSD has been working with DoIT and a third-party contractor to update its electronic filing 
system (ELF) to a newer version, referred to as “ELF 2.0.” The intention was for ELF 2.0 
to have equivalent functionality and operate off an upgraded server for security purposes. 
Although ELF 2.0 went online for use in fall 2022, there are a number of nonfunctioning 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 817/ Page 5 
elements that need to be fixed and finalized before the system is useable for all units of 
State government, AELR, DLS, and DSD. DSD and DoIT are currently working to address 
these problems with the contractor. The bill’s requirements essentially codify prior 
functionality of the original ELF system, but DLS was unable to obtain a clear estimate 
from DoIT as to whether the bill’s requirements exceed the current plan and/or contract for 
ELF 2.0. Although the bill requires the Administrator to develop and maintain the 
electronic filing system, it is unclear which party – DSD, DoIT, or the contractor – is 
ultimately responsible for costs to fix and finalize ELF 2.0. According to a preliminary 
estimate from DoIT, these costs could be significant, perhaps several million dollars. 
Without additional information about how the bill’s requirements differ from the current 
plans for ELF 2.0 (if at all), and which party is responsible for final costs, DLS is unable 
to independently verify these potential costs.  
 
Thus, depending on the outcome of current negotiations and the current status of ELF 2.0, 
general fund expenditures may increase for the Administrator in fiscal 2024. As 
responsibility has not yet been determined, a reliable estimate is not feasible, so any 
fiscal effect on the Administrator is not reflected in the fiscal summary database above. 
 
Administrative Costs for the Division of State Documents 
 
The lack of full functionality of ELF 2.0 has created major disruptions with units of State 
government that promulgate regulations and for DSD staff. DSD requires administrative 
help to manage the regulation submission process in the absence of a functional system, 
and to assist units involved in the process. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures for DSD increase by $124,172 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s varying effective dates. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one contractual employee with legal expertise and programming skills to (1) act as a liaison 
to facilitate the repair and completion of ELF 2.0; (2) consult with DLS as necessary to 
establish updated procedures for the receipt of proposed and emergency regulations; 
(3) perform additional administrative work necessary while ELF 2.0 is under construction; 
(4) generally update internal notice and regulatory procedures to implement the bill; and 
(5) communicate updates about the new system and help units of State government make 
the transition when it is fully operational. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including additional general funds to 
supplement operating expenditures due to the loss of special fund revenues, as discussed 
below. The information and assumptions used in calculating the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
DSD needs to hire a contractual employee for two years who has contract and 
programming expertise to act as a liaison between DSD and DoIT staff and the 
contractors working on ELF 2.0 in order to ensure that the final product is fully 
useable; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 817/ Page 6 
 
the costs to publish and distribute products published by DSD (including COMAR 
and the Maryland Register) are funded from fees collected for copies and 
subscriptions for these products and maintaining additional issues of the  
Maryland Register online results in a decrease in special fund revenues of $29,250 
in fiscal 2024 (as discussed below) and a corresponding decrease in special fund 
expenditures; and 
 
these lost special fund revenues must be back-filled with general funds because 
DSD must continue publishing these documents even absent print or electronic 
subscribers, thus general fund expenditures increase correspondingly (reflected 
below).  
 
Contractual Position 
1 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$87,248 
Supplemental General Funding 
29,250 
Operating Expenses 
      7,674 
Total FY 2024 DSD Administrative Costs  
$124,172 
 
Future years reflect termination of the contractual employee at the end of fiscal 2025. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
State Revenues:  DSD charges the following fees for subscriptions to the  
Maryland Register:  (1) $225 for a single year of the Maryland Register that is printed and 
mailed to the subscriber; and (2) $190 for a single-user annual e-subscription, which 
provides a searchable PDF text file of each issue and is emailed directly to each recipient’s 
email address. DSD anticipates that maintaining the 15 most recent issues of the  
Maryland Register online will result in a significant decrease in subscriptions. Thus, 
special fund revenues for DSD decrease by $29,250 in fiscal 2024 (which accounts for 
three-quarters of a year of lost revenues) and by approximately $39,000 annually thereafter. 
These estimates reflect the loss of 55 print subscribers and 140 electronic subscribers on 
an annualized basis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 649 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 817/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Commerce; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Secretary of State; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing 
and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural 
Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Public Service Commission; 
Legislative Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - July 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - July 25, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7