START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 923 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 923 
(Delegate B. Barnes, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Appointment of Secretary and Student Financial Assistance - 
Accommodations at Public Institutions for Religious Beliefs 
 
 
This bill alters the selection process for the Secretary of Higher Education. The bill also 
alters the eligibility requirements for the Guaranteed Access (GA) Grant component of the 
Delegate Howard P. Rawling Educational Excellence Awards (EEA) program and requires 
institutions of higher education, rather than the Maryland Higher Education Commission 
(MHEC) Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA), to notify award recipients 
beginning July 1, 2025. The bill also changes the eligibility requirements for the Maryland 
Community College Promise (MCCP) Scholarship and requires community colleges in the 
State, not OSFA, to select scholarship recipients and verify recipient eligibility. Finally, 
the bill requires each public institution of higher education to (1) adopt a policy, as 
specified, to accommodate students’ faith-based or religious practices and (2) provide a 
space on campus for such practices. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2023; 
however, provisions transferring GA Grant notification take effect July 1, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $278,200 in FY 2024 and may 
increase in FY 2026 for one-time contractual costs. Higher education expenditures at 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) increase beginning in FY 2024 to administer 
the MCCP Scholarship; beginning in FY 2026, higher education expenditures for all public 
institutions likely increase minimally to implement notification systems for GA Grant 
awards; all or a portion of these costs may be offset by general fund expenditures, in which 
case higher education revenues increase. Otherwise, impacts are minimal. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Higher Ed Rev. 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$278,200 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
Higher Ed Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($278,200) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 923/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Locally funded community colleges incur additional expenditures to 
properly verify applicant income, distribute MCCP Scholarship awards, and report awards 
to OSFA beginning in FY 2024. Locally funded community colleges similarly incur 
additional minimal expenditures to notify students of GA Grant eligibility beginning in 
FY 2026; to the extent State funding is available to offset these costs, revenues increase 
beginning in FY 2026. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Secretary of Higher Education and Office of Student Financial Assistance Organization 
 
The bill alters the selection process for the Secretary of Higher Education by removing the 
requirement that the Governor select the Secretary from a list of three nominees provided 
by MHEC. The bill further specifies that the Secretary of Higher Education serves at the 
pleasure of the Governor, not MHEC. 
 
The bill repeals uncodified language in Chapters 639 and 640 of 2022 expressing the intent 
of the General Assembly that MHEC be reorganized to establish OSFA as a separate 
independent agency in fiscal 2024. 
 
Guaranteed Access Grant – Eligibility  
 
Effective July 1, 2023, the bill alters requirements for GA Grant awards made under the 
Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program, allowing more individuals to qualify for or 
retain their awards. Specifically, the bill removes the requirements that a recipient (1) attain 
a grade point average (GPA) of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale at the end of the first semester of 
the senior year in high school and (2) have successfully completed a college preparatory 
program in high school. The bill also alters other GA Grant requirements by (1) expanding 
the window of time within which a recipient must begin college after completing high 
school (or achieve a passing score on the diploma by examination), except under 
extenuating circumstances, from one to six years and (2) increasing the maximum age of a 
first-time award recipient to include individuals younger than age 26 instead of younger 
than age 22. Additionally, the bill removes the requirement that a student who prequalifies 
for a GA Grant agree in writing to refrain from substance abuse. Further, the bill lowers 
the minimum score required on each module for individuals who received a diploma by 
examination. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 923/ Page 3 
Guaranteed Access Grant – Administration  
 
Effective July 1, 2025, the bill establishes a process for making initial and renewal 
GA Grant awards that generally requires institutions of higher education to use information 
from OSFA to notify students of awards and issue awards for the appropriate amount in 
accordance with statute. Additionally, applicants may accept an offer of a GA award from 
an institution of higher education, and institutions of higher education must then notify 
OSFA of the number of individuals receiving a GA Grant award. OSFA must reimburse 
each institution using the list provided from institutions of higher education. OSFA must 
adopt regulations to implement the new award notification processes. Additionally, MHEC 
must work with the Segmental Advisory Council and the Financial Assistance Advisory 
Council in establishing regulations to implement new GA Grant processes, including award 
deadlines and procedures for renewal awards.  
 
Under the bill, OSFA remains responsible for verifying applicant eligibility, but instead of 
OSFA directly making GA Grant awards, OSFA must turn over lists of eligible students to 
institutions of higher education for them to notify students of eligibility and make awards.  
 
Compilation and Certification of Lists:  For initial GA Grant awards, the bill requires 
OSFA – beginning when financial aid information is available each year, but no later than 
October 1 – to compile and certify lists for the entire State that rank applicants for the 
GA Grant by financial need. For renewal awards, OSFA must also compile and certify lists 
of students who previously received a GA Grant award and are eligible for renewal, though 
the bill does not specify a timeline for the creation of the renewal lists.  
 
Provision of Lists:  For initial GA Grant awards, OSFA must regularly provide lists of 
eligible students to each institution of higher education in the State. OSFA must also 
provide each institution of higher education in the State with lists of students who 
previously received a GA Grant award and are eligible for a renewal award, though the bill 
does not specify that this must be done regularly as with initial award applicants.  
 
Use of Lists and Notifications by Institutions:  Each institution of higher education must 
use the lists provided by OSFA (in concert with the statutory requirements of the GA Grant 
award) to determine which applicants will be offered both initial and renewal GA Grant 
awards as well as the amount of initial and renewal GA Grant awards. Each institution 
must then send award notifications to initial applicants or continuing students to offer an 
initial or renewal GA Grant award.  
 
Awards Made and Related Reimbursement:  The bill further specifies a new process for 
initial award acceptance and for how OSFA must reimburse institutions of higher education 
for GA Grant awards. Once an applicant receives notification for an initial award, the 
applicant may accept the offer of a GA Grant from an institution of higher education. Each 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 923/ Page 4 
semester, each institution must submit a list to OSFA containing all students who were 
awarded a GA Grant for the semester and the amounts awarded. For initial awards, OSFA 
must then reimburse each institution for the GA Grants provided to students in accordance 
with the lists submitted by institutions of higher education. In the case of renewal awards, 
OSFA must reimburse in accordance with the lists generated by OSFA containing students 
who previously received a GA Grant award and are eligible for a renewal award.  
 
OFSA must adopt regulations to implement these changes to the awarding of initial and 
renewal GA Grant awards. 
 
Related Notification Information:  In a financial aid award notification to a student, each 
institution of higher education must include the availability of the EA Grant administered 
by OSFA, including a description of OSFA and the EA Grant, information on EA Grant 
award timelines, and a point of contact in OSFA for students. 
 
Educational Assistance Grant – Administration  
 
The bill makes various conforming changes, effective July 1, 2025, to specify that OSFA 
must continue to administer EA Grant awards, which requires that OSFA continue to 
compile and certify lists for the entire State that rank applicants by financial need. 
Accordingly, OSFA must make EA Grant awards to eligible students, based on financial 
need, from any remaining funding for EEA (so after the GA Grant awards process 
delineated above). 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that, by April 15 each year, OSFA must send notification 
to each individual who applied for an EEA indicating whether the student is the recipient 
of an award and the amount, if applicable. Similarly, OSFA no longer must notify each 
senator and delegate of individuals in each legislative district who receive an EEA. 
 
Financial Aid Office Funding 
 
The bill expresses legislative intent that, beginning in fiscal 2026, the Governor must 
include funding for financial aid offices at public institutions of higher education to 
implement administration of GA Grant awards by institutions of higher education. 
 
Next Generation Scholars Program 
 
The Next Generation Scholars of Maryland program must provide guidance and services 
to students who qualify to receive free or reduced-price lunch under the National School 
Lunch Program to aid students in specified ways as the program already does for students 
who prequalify for a GA Grant. Additionally, the bill allows students who have participated 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 923/ Page 5 
in the program for one full year to continue to receive services under the program should 
they relocate to another county in the State that does not participate in the program. 
 
Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship – Eligibility and Priority 
 
Under the bill, a recipient of an MCCP Scholarship must only enroll in 6, rather than 
12, credits per semester to retain the scholarship. The bill specifies priority for non-initial 
scholarship awards made under the program. Priority must be given to prior-year recipients 
who remain eligible for the program as well as all eligible students who are enrolled in 
either at least 12 credits per semester or a sequence of credit or noncredit courses that lead 
to licensure or certification. Then, if any funds remain to be allocated, students enrolled in 
at least 6 credits per semester may be awarded scholarships. 
 
Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship – Administration 
 
The bill shifts responsibility for the selection and distribution of awards under the 
MCCP Scholarship from OSFA to each community college in the State. The bill further 
tasks each community college with promoting the MCCP Scholarship (in addition to 
existing promotion from OSFA). Each community college, not OSFA, must select eligible 
applicants to award MCCP Scholarships. Instead of applying directly to OSFA, a student 
may apply annually to a Maryland community college located in the county or, in the case 
of a regional community college, the region in which the applicant lives. As under current 
law, if an applicant’s community college or regional community college does not offer the 
degree or certification program in which the applicant wants to enroll, an applicant may 
apply to a community college or regional community college outside the region where the 
applicant lives to receive an MCCP Scholarship. OSFA must allocate MCCP Scholarship 
funding to each community college in the State based on the proportion of Pell-eligible 
students at each community college. If a community college does not award all funding 
allocated, the community college must distribute the remaining funding to other 
community colleges to make MCCP Scholarship awards in the award year.  
 
Each community college must verify the eligibility (including income eligibility using 
federal standards and in accordance with income eligibility criteria established by OSFA) 
of applicants, maintain records of any eligibility determinations for at least five years 
post-award, and provide MHEC with an audit that shows proof of proper verification and 
award of scholarships. OSFA must review these audits provided to MHEC at least once 
every three years. If OSFA determines that an award was made in error, the community 
college that made the award in error must remit, to MHEC, the total amount of the award 
made in error. Remitted funds must be paid to the Need-based Student Financial Assistance 
Fund, and the community college may not require a student to repay the award made in 
error. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 923/ Page 6 
The bill makes other conforming changes to generally allow community colleges to 
administer scholarships in ways OSFA previously has, including authorizing community 
colleges (instead of OSFA) to extend scholarships and to determine eligibility for placing 
an award on hold. 
 
Religious Accommodations Policy  
 
Each public institution of higher education must adopt a written policy that provides 
reasonable academic accommodations for students to practice sincerely held faith-based or 
religious beliefs. The policy must (1) provide an accommodation for a student, including 
excused absences, for a student to observe faith-based or religious holidays or participate 
in organized religious activities; (2) provide that a student be allowed reasonable 
alternative accommodations for missing an examination or other academic requirements 
due to an excused absence for a student’s faith-based or religious beliefs; and (3) include a 
grievance procedure to report noncompliance with the policy. Each public institution of 
higher education must post the policy prominently on its website. 
 
Except for the University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC), each public institution of 
higher education must also provide a space on campus to accommodate faith-based or 
religious practices. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission – Membership, Meetings, and Responsibilities  
 
MHEC consists of 12 members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of 
the Senate. Each year, from among the members of MHEC, the Governor must designate 
a chairperson; MHEC must elect other officers as required. The Secretary of Higher 
Education is appointed by the Governor, from a list of three nominees for the position 
submitted by MHEC, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Governor may reject 
the list of nominees and request MHEC to submit the names of additional nominees. The 
Secretary of Higher Education is responsible for selecting, organizing, and directing the 
staff of MHEC and generally executing the policies and decisions of MHEC. The Secretary 
of Higher Education serves at the pleasure of MHEC. 
 
MHEC is the State of Maryland’s higher education coordinating board responsible for 
establishing statewide policies for Maryland public and private colleges and universities 
and for-profit career schools. MHEC, through OSFA, also administers State financial aid 
programs that affect students on a statewide basis. Generally, MHEC is responsible for the 
overall growth and development of postsecondary education in the State. To that end, 
MHEC must develop and implement an overall State Plan for Higher Education, support 
community colleges, coordinate regional higher education centers, act as the State 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 923/ Page 7 
Postsecondary Education Commission, be the approving agency for purposes of 
educational benefits programs, develop a program of desegregation and equal education 
opportunity including developing an enhancement for historically Black colleges and 
universities (better known as HBCUs), and administer State funds for private institutions.  
 
In addition, MHEC has responsibilities related to scholarships established in State law. 
Subject to specified provisions of State law, MHEC must administer the various 
scholarship, grant-in-aid, and tuition assistance programs established by law. Further, one 
of the councils that MHEC must establish is a Financial Assistance Advisory Council.  
 
Office of Student Financial Assistance – Organization and Responsibilities  
 
OSFA is established as a suboffice of MHEC and is headed by an executive director who 
must be appointed by the Secretary of Higher Education. The executive director exercises 
powers and duties subject to the general policies of MHEC and the general supervision of 
the Secretary of Higher Education. Generally, in conducting their operations, MHEC and 
OSFA must share resources and coordinate their activities in order to enhance the efficient 
utilization of resources.  
 
Generally, OSFA is responsible for (1) administering student financial assistance 
programs; (2) issuing and disseminating public information about student financial 
assistance; (3) regulating the form and submission of applications for student financial 
assistance; and (4) conducting conferences and interviews with applicants to evaluate their 
eligibility. OSFA may adopt rules and regulations necessary to carry out its powers and 
duties, including those related to the performance of a service obligation as a condition of 
award, the repayment of student financial assistance funds should a recipient fail to perform 
a service obligation, and waiver and deferment of a service obligation in circumstances 
determined by MHEC. Generally, OSFA must administer any federal scholarships or 
grants to students or institutions, arrange for the competitive examination as required for 
certain scholarships, and analyze the financial need of each applicant for applicable 
scholarships on behalf of the person or institution who awards the scholarship. 
 
Chapters 639 and 640 expressed the intent of the General Assembly that MHEC be 
reorganized to establish OSFA as an independent agency in fiscal 2024.  
 
Delegate Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards Program – Generally  
 
The EEA program consists of two types of awards for full-time undergraduate students:  
(1) GA Grants that are awarded to the neediest students to ensure that 100% of educational 
costs are paid; and (2) EA Grants that are awarded to low- and moderate-income students 
to assist in paying educational costs.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 923/ Page 8 
An EEA award may be used at a degree-granting institution of higher education, an eligible 
institution with an associate degree program that provides transfer credit for an accredited 
baccalaureate program, or a hospital diploma school for training registered nurses if the 
curriculum is approved by MHEC. The award may be used for educational expenses as 
defined by MHEC, including tuition and fees and room and board.  
 
An EEA award may be used at a school in another state if (1) there is a specified reciprocal 
agreement and (2) the school meets the same requirements that an in-state school must 
meet. OSFA may not award more than 10% of the funds available for either the GA Grant 
or the EA Grant for use by students attending schools in another state. EEA award 
recipients are required to successfully complete 30 credits at the end of their 
sophomore year to receive their maximum renewal award. A student who fails to meet the 
30-credit completion requirement but completes between 24 and 29 credits is eligible for a 
prorated renewal award.  
 
Guaranteed Access Grant 
 
The GA Grant is a component of the EEA program that covers 100% of need when 
combined with a federal Pell Grant for the State’s lowest income students. The maximum 
award is capped at the cost of education at the highest cost four-year University System of 
Maryland institution, excluding the University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus (UMB) 
and UMGC. The maximum award for the 2023-2024 award cycle is $20,000. Students that 
meet all program criteria are guaranteed funding. The criteria include (1) enrolling as a 
full-time student directly from high school absent extenuating circumstances; (2) being 
younger than age 22 at the time of receiving the first award; (3) successfully completing a 
college preparatory program; (4) having certain family income limits; and (5) satisfying 
any additional criteria set by MHEC.  
 
MHEC identifies first-time applicants who are potentially eligible for the GA Grant based 
on Free Application for Federal Student Aid or the Maryland State Financial Aid 
Application (for qualified children of undocumented immigrants who are eligible for 
in-state tuition) – submitted by the March 1 deadline set by MHEC. Previously, students 
were required to determine themselves whether they might be eligible and submit a 
separate GA Grant application to MHEC.  
 
Among other requirements, statute requires that eligible GA Grant applicants have an 
annual family income below a poverty index determined by MHEC. MHEC has set the 
income requirement using the federal poverty level, which accounts for family size, at 
130% for first-time students and 150% for renewal awards. Students meeting all the 
requirements are guaranteed funding. As a result of Chapter 23 of 2022, a GA Grant 
recipient who otherwise becomes ineligible because of a change in family income still 
receives the full award if the recipient remains eligible to receive a federal Pell Grant. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 923/ Page 9 
For a GA Grant, each recipient must demonstrate a definite financial need to OSFA or an 
eligible institution of higher education. A verification obtained by an applicant from 
one institution of higher education may be used at any eligible institution for an EEA. 
 
A student in grade 7 or 8 can prequalify for a GA Grant to be used at the time of enrollment 
at an institution of higher education. Chapter 578 of 2021 expanded prequalification 
eligibility to allow a student in grade 9 or 10 who meets other existing eligibility 
requirements to automatically prequalify for an award if the student is (1) eligible for free 
or reduced-priced meals or (2) attends a school that participates in the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Community Eligibility Provision (better known as CEP) and the student is 
identified by direct certification or income information provided by the family of the 
student to the local school system on an alternative form developed by the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE).  
 
To prequalify, a student must agree in writing, as a secondary and undergraduate student, 
to (1) satisfy the attendance policy of the applicable school; (2) refrain from substance 
abuse; (3) provide information required by MHEC or the State Board of Education (SBE); 
(4) apply for admission to an institution of higher education during the student’s 
senior year in high school; (5) complete and file, on a timely basis, applications for federal 
student aid for each year that the student plans to enroll in postsecondary education; 
(6) participate in the Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program until the student 
graduates from high school and matriculates at an institution of higher education; 
(7) maintain a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale or its equivalent; and (8) satisfy 
any other program requirements set by OSFA, MHEC, SBE, or MSDE. Chapter 23 requires 
that GA Grant eligibility for a student who prequalified under the Next Generation Scholars 
of Maryland Program be based on the annual family income determination used when the 
student prequalified. 
 
In addition, for academic years 2017-2018 and 2018-2019, a student in grade 9 who 
otherwise met the prequalifying conditions for grades 7 and 8 students described above 
could prequalify if the student applied and met the financial need standards established by 
MHEC.  
 
Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program 
 
MSDE, in collaboration with MHEC, the local boards of education, local superintendents, 
and institutions of higher education, must administer the Next Generation Scholars of 
Maryland Program. 
 
The program must provide guidance and services to students who qualify for a GA Grant 
to assist the students in successfully (1) completing a college preparatory curriculum; 
(2) graduating from high school; (3) matriculating at an institution of higher education; and 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 923/ Page 10 
(4) making timely progress to complete a degree program. Under Chapter 23, the Next 
Generation Scholars of Maryland Program may continue to provide services to students 
when they attend an institution of higher education. 
 
To administer the Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program, MSDE must:  
 
 
publicize the program through community outreach and marketing materials;  
 
award grants to nonprofit organizations to administer the program;  
 
solicit applications from nonprofit organizations to administer the program in local 
school systems; and  
 
give priority to applications from Maryland-based nonprofit organizations and that 
include businesses and institutions of higher education partners.  
 
The following guidance and services must be provided to students participating in the 
program:  
 
 
a high school graduation plan;  
 
summer work or internship opportunities;  
 
financial aid literacy assistance;  
 
career interest assessments;  
 
mentorship and one-on-one counseling;  
 
visits to college campuses and workplaces;  
 
an intensive summer bridge program for students entering an institution of higher 
education directly from high school or a matriculation assistance program; and  
 
a plan to matriculate and graduate from an institution of higher education.  
 
The Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million for 
the program. MSDE must use the mandated funding to distribute grants to nonprofit 
organizations that are selected in accordance with specified priorities to administer the 
program in local school systems in which at least 50% of the students are eligible to receive 
a free lunch under National School Lunch Program in the 2015-2016 school year.  
 
There is a Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program Fund to provide funds to 
administer the program. MSDE must administer the fund. The Next Generation Scholars 
of Maryland Program Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that consists of (1) money 
appropriated in the State budget; (2) interest earnings; and (3) any other money from any 
other source given to the fund. The fund may only be used to administer the program, and 
expenditures from the fund may be only in accordance with the State budget. Any 
investment earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund.  
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 923/ Page 11 
Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship  
 
Chapter 554 of 2018 created a scholarship program in Maryland to provide tuition 
assistance to students who attend a community college in the State and who meet specified 
eligibility criteria, including an income limitation. The MCCP Scholarship is a last-dollar 
award that is applied after State or federal non-loan aid to eligible recipients has been 
applied; an award cannot exceed $5,000 annually or actual tuition, whichever is less. 
Chapter 464 of 2019 specified that, if a local community college offers a Promise 
Scholarship, an award from the statewide program must be applied before the award of the 
local scholarship.  
 
To be eligible for the program, a student must: 
  
 
be eligible for in-state tuition and enroll at a community college, in an eligible 
program;  
 
have earned at least a 2.3 high school GPA at the end of the first semester or the end 
of the senior year unless the applicant graduated from high school five or more years 
before the date of application, for an initial award, or have earned at least a 2.5 GPA 
while enrolled at a community college in the State; and  
 
have a gross adjusted income of $100,000 or less if the applicant is single or resides 
in a single-parent household or of $150,000 or less if married or resides in a 
two-parent household.  
 
An applicant also has to attend the applicant’s local community college, except under 
specified circumstances. In addition, an applicant must either enroll as a candidate for a 
vocational certificate, a certificate, or an associate degree or participate in a registered 
apprenticeship at a community college in the State. Further, an applicant must enroll in at 
least 12 credits per semester or a sequence of credit or noncredit courses that leads to 
licensure or certificate.  
 
The Governor must appropriate at least $15.0 million annually for the program.  
 
Initial awards are made based on greatest demonstrated need. Eligible applicants who do 
not receive an award are placed on a waiting list. In subsequent years, priority is to be given 
to prior-year recipients who remain eligible for the program. A recipient can receive the 
award for a total of three years. To maintain the award, the recipient must complete 
12 credits per semester or make satisfactory progress toward a vocational certificate and 
earn a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5. The recipient must meet the designated income 
requirements for the program, remain eligible for in-state tuition, apply annually, and 
continue to make satisfactory academic progress as determined by the community college.  
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 923/ Page 12 
MHEC must contact each school counselor at each public high school in the State with 
information on the MCCP Scholarship, including eligibility, availability, and deadlines for 
the scholarship. In addition, MHEC and each community college must post this 
information in a readily accessible location on their respective websites. Finally, MHEC 
must annually report to the General Assembly on specified aspects of its implementation 
of the MCCP Scholarship, including its outreach activities.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:    
 
Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship – Eligibility and Priority 
 
Altering priority for the MCCP Scholarship does not affect overall spending. This analysis 
assumes allowing recipients to enroll in 6, rather than 12, community college credits has 
no impact on overall spending for the program. Students must otherwise meet the same 
eligibility criteria, and students receiving the scholarship part time would need the same 
number of credit hours to graduate as full-time students and, therefore, receive the same 
amount of scholarship funds spread out over a longer term, subject to the three-year cap. 
Further, any increased applications or awards that do result from the ability of recipients to 
enroll half time are likely absorbable within existing appropriations to the program. The 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a general fund 
appropriation of $15.0 million for the program. In fiscal 2022, the program made 
approximately $5.6 million in awards to 1,904 recipients. 
 
Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship – Maryland Higher Education 
Commission and Baltimore City Community College 
 
To implement changes to the MCCP Scholarship, general fund expenditures increase by 
$131,669 in fiscal 2024 for contractual expenses associated with changes to the Maryland 
College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS). MHEC advises that the bill necessitates these 
significant contractual expenditures due to the amount of reporting and auditing necessary 
for MHEC to ensure that awards are made in alignment with program terms.   
 
MHEC further advises that OSFA requires one new administrative specialist to coordinate 
with participating community colleges, process new reports that community colleges are 
required to submit, and assist with regular auditing of awards made by community colleges. 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that, due to the bill removing 
awarding responsibility of the MCCP Scholarship from OSFA, OSFA can likely absorb 
these responsibilities using existing resources; however, during the first year of 
implementation, resources may need to be diverted from other projects. Further, DLS notes 
that, while distributing MCCP Scholarship funds based on the number of Pell-receiving 
students is achievable with existing resources, MHEC may face additional logistical 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 923/ Page 13 
burdens to determine the number of Pell-eligible students at each community college in the 
State for the purposes of distributing funds. 
 
Conversely, beginning in fiscal 2024, higher education expenditures at BCCC likely 
increase to take on the responsibility for awarding the MCCP Scholarship to students 
attending the college. 
 
Guaranteed Access Grant – Eligibility Expansion  
 
The EEA program (the GA Grant and the EA Grant) receives one appropriation; the 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes an appropriation of 
$112.0 million for the EEA program. The GA Grant provides awards for any individuals 
who meet all eligibility criteria, while EA Grant awards are made from the funds remaining 
once all GA Grant awards have been made. Thus, if more GA Grant awards are made, there 
is less funding for EA Grant awards. When EA Grant funding for a fiscal year is exhausted, 
individuals eligible for the EA Grant are placed on the waiting list. 
 
Therefore, expanding GA Grant eligibility may increase State general fund expenditures 
to the extent existing appropriations to the Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program 
are insufficient to cover awards for eligible GA Grant recipients. Alternatively, and 
because of the way the EEA program is structured, expanding eligibility for the GA Grant 
without increasing expenditures may necessitate reducing the number of EA Grant awards 
that could be made. Based on fiscal 2022 expenditures, expanding eligibility for the GA 
Grant without adding to the EA Grant waiting list may result in general fund expenditures 
of approximately $12,916 for each additional GA Grant award beginning in fiscal 2024. 
Further, current law governing the EEA program provides that, should total calculated 
EEA awards exceed total appropriations, MHEC may reduce all award amounts by a 
percentage to keep award dollars within total appropriated funds. 
 
A recent DLS Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability report found 
that, during the 2020-2021 academic year, only 32% of 3,558 individuals identified as 
eligible for a first-time GA Grant actually received one. Another 32% of students received 
an EA Grant award, and 37% of identified students received no EEA whatsoever, 
potentially because their high school GPA was less than the required 2.5 on a 4.0 scale or 
equivalent or they failed to submit official transcripts with their GPA to MHEC, among 
other reasons.  
 
For illustrative purposes only and under the assumption that the additional 37% of 
identified students, 1,316 students, who received no EA Grant or GA Grant would receive 
an average GA Grant award amount as a result of the bill removing GA Grant requirements, 
State expenditures for GA Grant awards increase by as much as $17.0 million in 
fiscal 2024. Given the rapid growth of the GA Grant between fiscal 2020 and 2022, the 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 923/ Page 14 
total cost of GA Grant awards once GPA requirements are lifted is difficult to estimate. 
Based on the assumption that $55.0 million of the EEA program appropriation would be 
used for GA Grant awards under current law and, as discussed above, the bill would likely 
add an additional $17.0 million in costs, fiscal 2024 expenditures for the GA Grant could 
be $72.0 million.  
 
Guaranteed Access Grant – Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
MHEC advises that, to implement changes to the EEA program, general fund expenditures 
increase by an additional $146,547 in fiscal 2024 for contractual expenses associated with 
enhancements to MDCAPS. Additional costs may be incurred for further changes to 
MDCAPS in fiscal 2026. MHEC also advises that OSFA requires two new administrative 
officers to coordinate with participating institutions of higher education and conduct audits 
for the restructured GA Grant. However, DLS advises that, due to the bill removing 
awarding responsibility for the MCCP Scholarship from OSFA in fiscal 2024 and 
transferring responsibility for notifying individuals eligible for GA Grant awards in 
fiscal 2026, OSFA can likely absorb these responsibilities using existing resources. 
Nevertheless, resources may need to be diverted from other projects, particularly because 
OSFA retains responsibility for determining eligibility for GA Grant awards.  
 
Guaranteed Access Grant – Public Institutions of Higher Education 
 
Although exact costs are difficult to estimate, public institutions of higher education may 
incur minimal staffing, equipment/systems, and training costs to provide notice for 
GA Grant awards as specified in the bill. Exact costs depend on notification methods used 
by public institutions of higher education and the resources required to annually coordinate 
with OSFA to report information on awards.  
 
The bill expresses legislative intent that the Governor include funding in the budget for 
financial aid offices at public institutions of higher education to implement changes to the 
Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program; accordingly, general fund expenditures may 
increase beginning in fiscal 2026 for this purpose. If so, such funding would be available 
to the public four-year institutions, BCCC, and locally funded community colleges. 
 
Legislative Intent for the Office of Student Financial Assistance to Be Independent 
 
To the extent repealing the language in Chapters 639 and 640 expressing legislative intent 
that MHEC be reorganized to establish OSFA as a separate independent agency in 
fiscal 2024 forestalls creation of an independent OSFA, the State avoids costs to do so. The 
fiscal and policy note for the legislation (Senate Bill 501 and House Bill 1030 of 2022) 
noted that creating an independent OSFA would increase expenditures by an estimated 
$675,000 in fiscal 2023 for moving and equipment costs and by an estimated $571,385 in 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 923/ Page 15 
fiscal 2024 to hire at least four additional staff (one information technology director, 
one fiscal services administrator, one accountant, and one administrative specialist) due to 
loss of MHEC technical support. That analysis further assumed future year expenditures 
would include full salaries with annual increases, inflation, and ongoing operating 
expenses. However, it is unclear if further legislation was required to initiate the 
reorganization. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Locally funded public community colleges face challenges similar 
to those for public four-year colleges and universities to notify students about and make 
GA Grant awards beginning in fiscal 2026. The bill expresses legislative intent that the 
Governor include funding in the budget for financial aid offices at public institutions of 
higher education to implement changes to the Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program; 
accordingly, revenues for locally funded community colleges may increase beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to offset, in total or partially, such costs. 
 
Locally funded community colleges also face potentially meaningful administrative 
burdens as they verify applicant income, distribute MCCP Scholarship awards, and report 
such awards to OSFA beginning in fiscal 2024. To the extent community colleges must 
redistribute unspent MCCP Scholarship funds to other community colleges, scholarship 
revenues and expenditures for those community colleges may be further affected.  
 
Additional Comments:  Nonpublic institutions of higher education eligible for the 
Joseph A. Sellinger State aid program incur additional, likely minimal, costs to notify 
applicants about and make GA Grant awards beginning in fiscal 2026. Although they are 
reimbursed for the awards, their financial aid offices are not eligible for funding to offset 
their administrative costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 662 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Maryland Independent College and University Association; 
Morgan State University; University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 923/ Page 16 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 16