START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 905 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 905 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Garrett County Alcoholic Beverages Act of 2023 
 
 
This bill establishes the framework for the expiration of alcoholic beverages licenses in 
Garrett County. The bill also (1) decreases, from 25 to 10 rooms, the requirement of a 
Class B beer, wine, and liquor license held by a hotel or motel; (2) expands the 
authorization of a gift basket permit to include alcoholic beverages purchased from a 
wholesaler; (3) authorizes the holder of a multiple event and specified Class C alcoholic 
beverages licenses to hold another alcoholic beverages license of a different class or nature; 
and (4) extends the hours of sale for Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages in the county to 
6:00 a.m. to midnight. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Judiciary can handle the increase in workload with existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Garrett County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. The bill’s extension of the hours of Sunday 
sales of alcoholic beverages could increase sales for the affected licensed establishments. 
 
 
Analysis 
Bill Summary:   
 
Expiration of Local Licenses 
 
A license issued by the Garrett County Board of License Commissioners expires 
six months after the license holder has closed the business or stopped active alcoholic 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 905/ Page 2 
beverages operations at the premises unless (1) an application for approval or transfer to 
another person or location, as specified, has been approved or is pending; (2) an application 
for a certificate of permission or a renewal license for continuation of business, as 
specified, has been approved or is pending; or (3) a written request for a hardship extension 
is filed within the six-month period. 
 
A license holder or another appropriate party may submit a written request to the board to 
extend the life of the license due to hardship which automatically extends the life of the 
license for one year after the date the business stopped operations. A hardship extension 
may not prolong the life of an inactive license beyond the total of one year after the date of 
closing and any time period during which the license is suspended, as specified. 
 
The period for which a license may be considered unexpired begins at the earlier of the 
closing of the business or stopping of alcoholic beverages operations and may be suspended 
only by filing an application or specified request. The expiration period resumes on the last 
to occur of (1) the final action of the board; (2) the final judgment of the reviewing court, 
as specified; or (3) the dismissal of a petition for judicial review of the board’s action. 
 
If an application or request is withdrawn, the period for automatic expiration of the license 
may not be suspended on the basis of the withdrawal and the application or request must 
be considered as if it had not been filed. 
 
If a licensed premises is forced to close due to casualty loss, the board may, without 
circuit court approval, extend the license for up to two years after the closing. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Expiration of Local Licenses 
 
A license issued by the board expires 10 days after the license holder has vacated or been 
evicted from the licensed premises unless an application is pending or has been approved 
for (1) a transfer of a license to another person or location, as specified, or (2) a certificate 
of permission or a renewal license for continuation of business, as specified. 
 
A license acquired for public use expires 180 days after acquisition unless an application 
is pending or has been approved for (1) a transfer of a license to another person or location, 
as specified, or (2) a certificate of permission or a renewal license for continuation of 
business, as specified. The board may postpone, for a period of up to 20 days, the expiration 
of a license to avoid hardship. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 905/ Page 3 
General Prohibition on Issuance of Multiple Licenses to a Single License Holder 
 
Generally, and with specified exceptions, the number of alcoholic beverages licenses that 
may be issued to an individual license holder is limited to one. In Garrett County, a person 
may hold multiple licenses for specified bowling establishments if the licenses are Class D 
beer or Class D beer and wine licenses. 
 
Class B Motel and Hotel Licenses 
 
The board may issue a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license to specified hotels or motels 
with at least 25 rooms. 
 
Gift Basket Licenses 
 
The board may issue a gift basket permit to persons whose primary business is the sale and 
delivery of gift baskets containing food, beverages, and flowers. This permit may not be 
granted to those who already hold another liquor license or related permit or for use in 
conjunction with a chain store, supermarket, or discount house. Permitted persons who 
seek to sell alcoholic beverages as a part of their gift baskets must source these alcoholic 
beverages from a retail license holder. 
 
Sunday Sales 
 
Generally, Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages in Garrett County are authorized from 
10:00 a.m. to midnight. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 821 (Senator McKay) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Samuel A. Kebede 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3