START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 913 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 913 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Financial Institutions - Student Financing Companies - Required Registration 
and Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires “student financing companies” to register with the Office of the 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) beginning March 15, 2024. The bill also 
requires those entities to report annually to OCFR, as specified. OCFR, the Office of the 
Attorney General (OAG), and local State’s Attorneys are authorized to enforce the bill. 
OCFR is also authorized to adopt regulations to implement the bill’s requirements. 
Provisions of the bill are severable.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  OCFR can implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
Revenues are likely not materially affected, as registration fees are paid directly to a 
third-party licensing system.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions  
 
The bill defines “student financing company” as an entity engaged in the business of 
securing, making, or extending student financing products, or any purchaser, assignee, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 913/ Page 2 
holder of student financing products. However, it does not include (to the extent that State 
regulation is preempted by federal law): 
 
 
a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, or credit union; 
 
a wholly owned subsidiary of a bank or credit union; or 
 
an operating subsidiary where each owner is wholly owned by the same bank or 
credit union.  
 
“Student financing” means an extension of credit to a consumer, contractual or otherwise, 
contingent or absolute, that is: 
 
 
not made, insured, or guaranteed under Title IV of the federal Higher Education Act 
of 1965; 
 
extended to a consumer expressly, in whole or in part, for postsecondary educational 
expenses, regardless of whether the extension of credit is provided by the institution 
of postsecondary education the consumer attends; and 
 
not a loan secured by real property or a dwelling.  
 
“Student financing” also includes (1) an extension of credit used to refinance or repay 
existing student financing or federal student loan debt and (2) financial obligations in which 
the repayment amount is equal to a predetermined percentage of a consumer’s future 
income. 
 
For purposes of the bill, institutions of postsecondary education include nonaccredited 
institutions or institutions not authorized to operate in the State. 
 
Required Registration 
 
Beginning March 15, 2024, a student financing company must register with OCFR before 
providing services in the State; the registration must be renewed annually, as specified. An 
application must include specified information. OCFR may adopt and enforce: 
 
 
registration procedures for student financing companies, which may include the use 
of the Nationwide Multistate Licensing System (NMLS);  
 
registration fees for student financing companies, which may include fees for the 
use of NMLS, to be paid directly by the student financing company; 
 
procedures and fees for renewing a registration, which may include fees for the 
renewed use of NMLS, to be paid directly by the student financing company; and 
 
alternate registration procedures and fees for institutions of postsecondary education 
that offer student financing products. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 913/ Page 3 
Annual Reporting Requirement 
 
Beginning March 15, 2024 (and annually thereafter), a student financing company that 
secures, makes, or extends student financing in the State must report specified information 
to OCFR. For example, a student financing company must report (among other things):  
 
 
a list of all schools attended by consumers who received student financing from the 
company and resided in Maryland at the time of the transaction and whose debt is 
outstanding (including student financing used to refinance an existing debt);  
 
the total outstanding dollar amount owed by consumers residing in the State who 
received student financing; and  
 
the rate of default for consumers residing in Maryland who obtained student 
financing, if applicable. 
 
The bill establishes similar requirements for a student financing company that acquires or 
assumes student financing products in the State.  
 
If a student financing company is required to report the required information under another 
provision of State or federal law, then OCFR may establish a process to avoid duplicative 
reporting. 
 
By June 15, 2024, and annually thereafter, OCFR must make specified information and 
documents reported by the student financing companies available on a publicly accessible 
website developed and maintained by OCFR. 
 
Enforcement Provisions 
 
OCFR may use specified investigative and enforcement powers to enforce the bill’s 
requirements. In addition, the bill authorizes OAG or a local State’s Attorney (if applicable) 
to use the same powers.  
 
A student financing product provided or acquired by a student financing company that is 
owed by a Maryland resident is void and unenforceable if OCFR finds (after notice and a 
hearing) that the company has knowingly violated the bill’s requirements, at the time that 
the product was provided or acquired, by (1) failing to comply with any registration or 
reporting requirements or (2) furnishing inaccurate information to OCFR.   
 
OCFR may order a person barred from acting as a stockholder, an officer, a director, a 
partner, an owner, or an employee of a student financing company for up to 10 years if the 
person has (1) been found to have knowingly violated any provision of the bill or regulation 
adopted as a result and (2) caused financial harm to a consumer.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 913/ Page 4 
Current Law:  
 
Student Loan Ombudsman 
 
OCFR must designate an individual to serve as a Student Loan Ombudsman. The 
ombudsman, among other things, receives and processes complaints about student 
education loan servicing and may refer any matter that is abusive, unfair, deceptive, or 
fraudulent to OAG for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution. 
 
In addition, a student loan servicer (i.e., the entities collecting principal, interest, or other 
amounts owed on student loans) is also prohibited from taking specified adverse actions 
with regard to student loan borrowers, including misrepresenting information in connection 
with the servicing of a student education loan and misapplying (or refusing to correct) a 
misapplication of a payment. 
 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation – Investigative and Enforcement Powers  
 
OCFR has the power to vigorously investigate financial transactions to determine whether 
a person has violated a law, regulation, rule, or order over which the commissioner has 
jurisdiction. For the purposes of an investigation or proceeding, the commissioner may 
administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel the attendance of 
witnesses, and require the production of documents and other evidence. If a person refuses 
to obey a subpoena from the commissioner, the commissioner may apply to the appropriate 
circuit court to issue an order requiring the person to appear before the commissioner and 
produce any requested evidence. If the court issues such an order, failure to obey it subjects 
the person to contempt of court. 
 
When the commissioner determines, after notice and a hearing, as specified, that a person 
has engaged in a violation of a law, regulation, rule, or order, the commissioner may issue 
a cease and desist order, suspend or revoke the license of the violator, and/or issue a penalty 
order against the person for up to $10,000 for a first violation and up to $25,000 for each 
subsequent violation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses in the State that engage in student financing 
activities are subject to both initial and ongoing registration and reporting requirements 
under the bill and may incur compliance costs.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 913/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5