START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 922 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 922 
(Delegates Buckel and Hornberger) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Program Participation - Cannabis Business 
Establishments 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Department of Commerce from denying specified cannabis business 
entities licensed by the State certain economic development and financial assistance 
program benefits solely because the business entities are cannabis establishments. The 
business entities must otherwise satisfy the requirements of the economic development or 
financial assistance program. The prohibition applies to programs under Title 5 of the 
Economic Development Article and the More Jobs for Marylanders Program. An affected 
business that was denied benefits prior to July 1, 2023, may reapply to the relevant 
program. The bill also adds the growth, processing, or dispensing of cannabis, in 
accordance with the laws of the State, as eligible business activities under the Job Creation 
and One Maryland tax credit programs. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The prohibition against denying cannabis businesses certain economic 
development and financial assistance program benefits solely because they are cannabis 
businesses generally conforms to Commerce’s existing practice and, therefore, has no 
direct effect on State finances or operations. This includes the related change to the More 
Jobs for Marylanders Program. General fund revenues decrease, potentially significantly, 
beginning in FY 2025 to the extent that newly eligible cannabis dispensaries qualify for 
and claim the Job Creation and One Maryland tax credits, but most of the revenue loss can 
be expected from the One Maryland credit, which is up to $5.0 million per credit and not 
subject to an annual cap. Special fund revenues may also decrease, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease to the extent Job Creation and 
One Maryland tax credits are claimed against the corporate income tax. Local expenditures 
are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 922/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Title 5 of the Economic Development Article contains most of 
Commerce’s economic development and financial assistance programs. For example, the 
Title includes the Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority and Fund, the 
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account, and the Cannabis Business 
Assistance Fund. 
 
Job Creation Tax Credit 
 
In addition to meeting other specified requirements, to qualify for the Job Creation Tax 
Credit, a business must be primarily engaged in specified industries, including 
manufacturing or mining; agriculture, forestry, or fishing; research, development, or 
testing; warehousing; business services, if the business facility established or expanded is 
located in a State priority funding area; or entertainment, recreation, cultural, or 
tourism-related activities in a multi-use facility located within a revitalization area if the 
facility meets other requirements. 
 
Credits are for $3,000 to $6,000 per qualified position, depending on various factors, and 
Commerce may only issue up to $4.0 million in credit certificates per year. 
 
One Maryland Tax Credit 
 
In addition to meeting other specified requirements, to qualify for the One Maryland Tax 
Credit, a business must be primarily engaged in specified industries, including 
manufacturing or mining; filmmaking, resort business, or recreational business; 
agriculture, forestry, or fishing; research, development, or testing; warehousing; or other 
business services. 
 
Credits may be for up to $5.0 million, depending on the number of qualified positions 
created, and there is no annual limit to the number of credits the department can offer. 
 
More Jobs for Marylanders 
 
Chapter 149 of 2017 established the More Jobs for Marylanders program, which, after 
several modifications, provides a refundable State income tax credit to certain businesses 
that create and maintain a minimum number of qualified jobs. For businesses certified 
beginning June 1, 2022, the credit is equal to 4.75% of the wages paid to each qualified 
position. Credits are available for manufacturing businesses, or other businesses if they are 
located in opportunity zones. Retailers are not eligible, except for grocery stores in 
opportunity zones. Credits may be claimed for 5 or 10 years, depending on the location of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 922/ Page 3 
the business. Commerce may issue up to $5.0 million in credit certificates in each of 
fiscal 2023 and 2024 and may not issue new tax credit certificates after May 31, 2024. 
 
Medical Cannabis and Legalization for Personal Use 
 
The Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission is responsible for implementation 
of the State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make medical cannabis 
available to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. The program allows for the 
licensure of growers, processors, and dispensaries and the registration of their agents, as 
well as registration of independent testing laboratories and their agents. There is a 
framework to certify health care providers (including physicians, dentists, podiatrists, 
nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, and physician assistants), qualifying patients, and their 
caregivers to provide qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via 
written certification. Additionally, there are legal protections for third-party vendors 
authorized by the commission to test, transport, or dispose of medical cannabis, medical 
cannabis products, and medical cannabis waste. 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022 and the passage of the associated constitutional referendum, 
from January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, possession of the personal use amount of 
cannabis and possession of the civil use amount of cannabis (as those terms are defined) 
are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use amount is subject to a 
criminal penalty. As of July 1, 2023, (1) a person at least age 21 may use and possess the 
personal use amount of cannabis; (2) possession of the personal use amount of cannabis by 
a person younger than age 21 and possession of the civil use amount of cannabis are subject 
to civil penalties; and (3) possession of more than the civil use amount of cannabis is 
subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
State Revenues:  Commerce advises that the prohibition against denying cannabis 
businesses certain economic development and financial assistance program benefits solely 
because they are cannabis businesses generally conforms to the department’s existing 
practice and, therefore, has no direct effect on State finances or operations. This also 
applies to the More Jobs for Marylander’s Program. There is likewise no direct effect from 
allowing certain businesses to reapply for program benefits. 
 
Changes to the Job Creation and One Maryland tax credit programs generally allow 
cannabis dispensaries to be eligible, as growing and processing are likely covered under 
existing eligible business activities. The Job Creation Tax Credit is capped at $4.0 million 
annually, and in fiscal 2022, Commerce issued approximately $3.0 million in credit 
certificates, so there is not much additional revenue loss possible under that credit. 
One Maryland is not capped, however, and is a large credit at up to $5.0 million each. 
Therefore, general fund revenues decrease, potentially significantly, beginning in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 922/ Page 4 
fiscal 2025 to the extent that newly eligible cannabis dispensaries qualify for and claim the 
two credits. Most of the revenue loss can be expected from the One Maryland credit. 
 
To the extent tax credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, a portion of tax 
credits claimed decreases Transportation Trust Fund revenues (and expenditures to local 
governments) and Higher Education Investment Fund revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small cannabis businesses – generally, dispensaries – benefit from 
eligibility under the Job Creation and One Maryland tax credits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 525 (Senator McKay) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Health; 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4