START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 969 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 969 
(Delegate Qi) 
Economic Matters and Health and 
Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Service Commission – Cybersecurity Staffing and Assessments (Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity Act of 2023) 
 
   
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to include one or more employees 
that are experts in cybersecurity on its staff for specified purposes. In supervising and 
regulating public service companies, PSC must also consider the protection of a public 
service company’s infrastructure against cyberattack threats. Each public service company, 
except common carriers and telephone companies, must take specified actions related to 
cybersecurity, including engaging a third party by July 1, 2024, and every two years 
thereafter, for a cybersecurity assessment and submitting related certifications of 
compliance to PSC. By January 1, 2025, and every two years thereafter, PSC must submit 
a report with related information and recommendations to the State Chief Information 
Security Officer (SCISO), or the SCISO’s designee. The bill also specifies authorized uses 
of Dedicated Purpose Account (DPA) funds by the Department of Information of 
Technology (DoIT) for fiscal 2024 for certain purposes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $364,400 in FY 2024, under 
the assumptions discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and the elimination of 
one-time costs. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $364,000 
in special funds and three new positions for PSC, contingent on the enactment of this bill 
or its cross file. DoIT can handle the bill’s requirements with existing available resources. 
Authorizing language related to DPA does not affect State finances. 
   
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$364,400 
$446,200 
$465,700 
$485,600 
$510,500 
SF Expenditure 
$364,400 
$446,200 
$465,700 
$485,600 
$510,500 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 969/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Expenditures for municipal electric utilities increase beginning in FY 2024 
by an unknown but potentially significant amount to comply with the bill’s requirements, 
including third-party cybersecurity assessments every two years. Revenues are not directly 
affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
   
  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Dedicated Cybersecurity Staff 
 
The commission must include on its staff one or more employees that are experts in 
cybersecurity to: 
 
 
advise the PSC chair and the other commissioners on measures to improve oversight 
of the cybersecurity practices of public service companies; 
 
consult with the Office of Security Management (OSM) in DoIT on cybersecurity 
issues related to utility regulation; 
 
assist PSC in monitoring the minimum security standards developed under the bill; 
 
participate in briefings to discuss cybersecurity practices based on applicable 
National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners guidance and 
improvements to cybersecurity practices recommended in the cybersecurity 
assessments required under the bill; and 
 
support public service companies that do not meet minimum security standards with 
remediating vulnerabilities or addressing cybersecurity assessment findings. 
 
PSC Actions Related to Cybersecurity  
 
In supervising and regulating public service companies, PSC must also consider the 
protection of a public service company’s infrastructure against cyberattack threats.  
 
PSC must collaborate with OSM to establish cybersecurity standards and best practices for 
regulated entities, taking into account utility needs and capabilities based on size. PSC must 
periodically share information on cybersecurity initiatives and best practices with 
municipal electric utilities. 
 
By January 1, 2025, and every two years thereafter, PSC must collect certifications of a 
public service company’s compliance with standards used in the assessments conducted by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 969/ Page 3 
public service companies under the bill and must submit a report with related information 
and recommendations to the SCISO or the SCISO’s designee. In addition to other 
information, the report must include, grouped by utility type:  (1) a general overview of 
cybersecurity technology and policies used by public service companies in the State; and 
(2) general recommendations for improving cybersecurity technology and policies used by 
public service companies in the State. 
 
Public Utility Cybersecurity Requirements 
 
Each public service company, except common carriers and telephone companies, must 
adopt and implement cybersecurity standards that are equal to or exceed the standards 
adopted by PSC, adopt a zero-trust cybersecurity approach for on-premises services and 
cloud-based services, and establish minimum security standards for each operational 
technology and information technology (IT) device.   
 
Additionally, by July 1, 2024, and every two years thereafter, each affected public service 
company must engage a third party to conduct an assessment of the operational technology 
and IT devices, as specified. Each company must submit certification of the company’s 
compliance with the standards used in the assessment to PSC. 
 
Each public service company must report a cybersecurity incident, including an attack on 
a system being used by the public service company, to the State Security Operations Center 
in DoIT, as specified. The center must immediately notify appropriate State and local 
agencies of the reported incidents. The SCISO, in consultation with PSC, must establish a 
process for such reports and related criteria, processes, and requirements.   
 
Use of Dedicated Purpose Account Funds 
 
The bill also authorizes the use of DPA funds by DoIT for fiscal 2024 for the purpose of 
adding additional staffing and operational capacity for DoIT to improve State and local 
cybersecurity.   
 
Legislative Intent 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that PSC work with the federal Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency and OSM to improve PSC’s capacity to implement the bill. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 969/ Page 4 
Current Law:  
 
Public Service Commission Generally  
 
PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies subject its jurisdiction to  
(1) ensure their operation in the interest of the public and (2) promote adequate, 
economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in the State without unjust 
discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, the economy of the State, 
the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards and for affected workers, the 
conservation of natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, and the 
achievement of the State’s climate commitments for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
PSC must also enforce compliance with legal requirements by public service companies, 
including requirements with respect to financial condition, capitalization, franchises, 
equipment, manner of operation, rates, and service.  
 
“Public service company” means a common carrier company, electric company, 
gas company, sewage disposal company, telegraph company, telephone company, 
water company, or any combination of public service companies. 
 
Cybersecurity Regulations 
 
PSC adopted cybersecurity regulations in 2022 for all electric, gas, and water companies 
(“utilities”) regulated by the commission. The utilities are required to follow good 
cybersecurity practice, generally. At a minimum, cybersecurity plans must address 
cybersecurity related governance, risk management, procurement practices, personnel 
hiring, training policies, situational awareness, response, recovery, and transparent 
reporting of cybersecurity incidents to State and federal entities. 
 
Each utility with 30,000 or more customers in the State must provide periodic confidential 
cybersecurity reports describing the utility’s adherence to good cybersecurity practice, 
including the utility’s cybersecurity maturity level trends, cybersecurity performance 
metric trends, or any other cybersecurity related topics of current interest to PSC and such 
additional representatives as PSC designates. Reports are required at least every 
three years, or as otherwise directed by PSC. 
 
Each utility (regardless of size) must report confirmed cybersecurity breaches of a smart 
grid system, IT system, or operations technology system to a PSC-designated 
representative without divulging energy/electric infrastructure information, no later than 
one business day after confirmation, unless prohibited or recommended by law 
enforcement to avoid compromising an investigation. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 969/ Page 5 
Office of Security Management 
 
The SCISO is the head of OSM, and the officer’s responsibilities include, among other 
things, (1) developing and maintaining IT security policies, standards, and guidance 
documents consistent with best practices developed by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology and (2) providing technical assistance to localities in mitigating and 
recovering from cybersecurity incidents.   
 
Chapters 241, 242, and 243 of 2022 expanded and enhanced the State’s regulatory 
framework for State and local government cybersecurity. Among other things the Acts 
codified the Maryland Cyber Defense Initiative (which codified OSM within DoIT) and 
the Maryland Cybersecurity Coordinating Council and expanded the responsibilities of 
OSM and the council. 
 
The Acts also required the Governor to include in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2024 an 
appropriation of at least 20% of the aggregated amount appropriated for information 
technology and cybersecurity resources in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2023. The 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $152.0 million for DPA to 
meet the mandated appropriations required for Chapters 241, 242, and 243. DoIT processed 
a fiscal 2023 budget amendment to transfer $94.0 million from DPA for remediation of 
State and local governments’ cybersecurity. Although DoIT typically provides services on 
a reimbursable basis, these funds will enable DoIT to provide the remediation services at 
no cost to State and local government agencies, consistent with the requirements of 
Chapters 241, 242, and 243. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$364,000 in special funds and three new positions for PSC, contingent on the enactment of 
this bill or its cross file. In the absence of additional information from PSC, this estimate 
assumes that amount of funding is sufficient for PSC to implement the bill.   
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $364,424 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one IT director 
and two IT technicians and reflects current salaries paid by PSC for those job 
classifications. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$335,447 
Operating Expenses 
28,977 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$364,424 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 969/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Special fund revenues increase 
correspondingly from assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
DoIT advises that it can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources 
and that the bill’s authorizing language related to DPA does not affect State finances. The 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the DPA funding is already available in the 
fiscal 2024 budget, ostensibly for the purposes authorized by the bill pursuant to the 
requirements of Chapters 241, 242, and 243 of 2022. The bill adds clarity to the use of 
those funds. 
 
Small Business Effect:  PSC regulates the rates of 22 water/sewer companies, which 
combined serve approximately 11,000 residents. These companies – several of which are 
likely small businesses – are public service companies by definition in the Public Utilities 
Article and must comply with the bill’s requirements for public service companies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 800 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of Information 
Technology; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 6, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 26, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6