START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 85

Chapter 85

(House Bill 991)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Basket of Cheer

FOR the purpose of repealing the requirement in Frederick County that alcoholic beverages
in a basket of cheer be produced in Maryland; and generally relating to basket of
cheer alcoholic beverages permits in Frederick County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1317
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

20–1317.

(a) There is a basket of cheer permit.

(b) The Board shall grant the permit at no cost to a holder of a Class C per diem
beer and wine license or a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license.

(c) The permit authorizes the permit holder to provide as a prize at a benefit
performance a basket of cheer of alcoholic beverages [produced in Maryland,] consisting of:

(1) for a holder of a Class C per diem beer and wine license, not more than:

(i) 288 ounces of beer; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 85 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) 2.25 liters of wine; and

(2) for a holder of a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license, not
more than:

(i) 288 ounces of beer;

(ii) 2.25 liters of wine; and

(iii) 2.25 liters of liquor.

(d) The alcoholic beverages contained in a basket of cheer shall be for
off–premises consumption.

(e) A holder of the permit:

(1) shall obtain the alcoholic beverages contained in a basket of cheer from
a holder of a retail license; and

(2) may raffle off not more than 10 baskets of cheer at each benefit
performance.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2