START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 977 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 977 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
 
 
This bill establishes the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) as a unit within 
the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to advance forensic science through medical 
education and research, as staffing allows, and carry out any other duty established in law. 
The bill redesignates the State Postmortem Examiners Commission to be the Postmortem 
Examiners Advisory Committee, which must advise the Secretary of Health and OCME 
on the implementation of the Postmortem Examiners Commission Subtitle (which is not 
renamed in the bill) and OCME’s duties. The bill excludes a retiree of the Employees’ 
Pension System (EPS) who is reemployed on a contractual basis by MDH as a health care 
practitioner in OCME from a specified benefit reduction from the State Retirement and 
Pension System (SRPS). The bill also makes other technical changes, including updating 
the list of units in MDH. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes are procedural in nature and do not materially affect 
governmental finances. Since the bill’s pension provision is assumed to apply in a limited 
number of cases, it has no material effect on pension liabilities or contribution rates.  
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 977/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In general, the bill transfers the responsibilities of the 
former State Postmortem Examiners Commission to MDH, the newly established 
Postmortem Examiners Advisory Committee, or OCME. 
 
Redesignation of the State Postmortem Examiners Commission as the Postmortem 
Examiners Advisory Committee 
 
Under current law, the commission consists of five members, as specified. The commission 
must elect a chairman and a vice chairman from among its members, determine the manner 
of election of officers and their terms of office, and determine the times and places of its 
meetings. A member of the commission may not receive compensation. The commission 
may employ staff, as specified. 
 
Under the bill, the committee replaces the commission, requires the Secretary to appoint a 
chair to the committee, and retains the same membership, but authorizes the Secretary of 
Health, in consultation with OCME, to appoint any other member to the committee. As 
under current law for the commission, the committee must determine the times and places 
of its meetings and members may not receive compensation (however, the bill specifies 
that compensation cannot be received for performing committee duties). The committee 
must advise the Secretary and OCME on the implementation of the Postmortem Examiners 
Commission Subtitle of the Health-General Article. 
 
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner  
 
Under current law, the commission is empowered to employ a staff in accordance with the 
State budget for the operation of the commission and to maintain accreditation. The staff 
must include specified positions. The Chief Medical Examiner and deputy chief medical 
examiners must be board certified in anatomic and forensic pathology by the American 
Board of Pathology. Assistant medical examiners appointed on or after October 1, 2008, 
must either be certified by the American Board of Pathology in anatomic and forensic 
pathology or obtain certification within three years of appointment. The commission may 
also employ any physician on a contract basis for part-time services. MDH must ensure 
that the number of staff employed by the commission does not fall to a level that would 
constitute a Phase II violation according to the National Association of Medical Examiners 
(NAME). With the approval of the Secretary of Budget and Management, the commission 
must set the compensation for appointed personnel. The commission may adopt rules and 
regulations to carry out the provisions of the Postmortem Examiners Commission Subtitle 
of the Health-General Article. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 977/ Page 3 
Under the bill, MDH (rather than the commission) is empowered to employ staff in 
accordance with the State budget for the operation of OCME. The staff must include fellow 
medical doctors who are training in forensic pathology in accordance with the number of 
positions approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (rather 
than four resident medical doctors training in forensic pathology). MDH may also employ 
any physician on a contract basis for part-time service or per diem services, 
notwithstanding any other provision of law. Assistant medical examiners not already 
certified as specified must obtain certification within the appointee’s period of board 
eligibility provided by the American Board of Pathology. MDH must ensure that the 
number of staff employed by OCME does not fall to a level that would constitute a NAME 
Phase II violation. MDH must set the compensation for appointed personnel, with the 
approval of the Secretary of Budget and Management. Additionally, the Secretary of 
Health must consult with the committee regarding matters related to the employment of 
the Chief Medical Examiner. MDH, in consultation with the committee, may adopt rules 
and regulations to carry out the provisions of the Postmortem Examiners Commission 
Subtitle of the Health-General Article.  
 
Under the bill, OCME, rather than the commission, must see that proper equipment is 
provided for the medical examiners. Also, OCME, rather than the commission, may 
appoint one or more deputy medical examiners and forensic investigators for each county 
– generally from a list of qualified individuals submitted by the county’s medical society. 
 
The bill also repeals language that prohibits the Secretary from (1) disapproving or 
modifying any decision or determination that the commission makes under authority 
specifically delegated by law to the commission and (2) transferring by rule, regulation, or 
written directive, any staff, functions, or funds of the commission. However, under the bill, 
MDH and the committee are prohibited from interfering with the clinical findings or 
conclusions prepared by an individual who performs an autopsy. 
 
State Retirement and Pension System – Retiree Earnings Limitations and Exceptions 
 
Under current law, a retiree who receives a retirement benefit from SRPS may be 
reemployed, except that the retiree may not be reemployed by the State or any participating 
SRPS employer within 45 days of retiring. In most cases, a retiree who is rehired by the 
same employer for whom the retiree worked at the time of retirement is subject to an 
earnings cap. The purpose of the cap, which is the member’s average final compensation 
(AFC) at the time of retirement, is to ensure that a retiree does not earn more in retirement 
than the retiree earned as an active member with the same employer. If the sum of a retiree’s 
earnings and initial retirement allowance exceeds the earnings cap, the retiree is subject to 
a dollar-for-dollar offset of the retirement benefit for any amount that exceeds the cap. For 
a member who retires directly from State service, the State is regarded as a single employer, 
so reemployment with any State agency activates the benefit reduction.   
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 977/ Page 4 
Statute includes several broad exemptions from the benefit reduction, including for retirees 
who: 
 
 
have been retired for at least five years; 
 
retired with an AFC of less than $25,000 and are reemployed on a permanent, 
temporary, or contractual basis;  
 
are serving in any specified elected position; or 
 
are reemployed on a contractual basis by MDH as a health care practitioner in 
specified capacities. 
 
The bill excludes a retiree of EPS who is reemployed on a contractual basis by MDH as a 
health care practitioner in OCME from the benefit reduction. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4