START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 910 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 910 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Energy Storage - Targets and Maryland Energy Storage Program - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to establish the Maryland Energy 
Storage Program and set targets for the cost-effective deployment of new energy storage 
devices in the State with a goal of achieving at least a cumulative total of 750 megawatts 
(MW) by the end of the 2027 PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM) delivery year, 1,500 MW 
by the end of the 2030 PJM delivery year, and 3,000 MW by the end of the 2033 PJM 
delivery year. If a target cannot be met cost effectively, the target must be reduced to the 
maximum cost-effective amount for the relevant delivery year. The program must be 
implemented by July 1, 2025, as specified. By December 31, 2023, PSC must report to the 
General Assembly on pending designs for the program and any additional statutory 
changes required to fully implement an effective program to meet the minimum energy 
storage targets established under the bill.   
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No fiscal effect assumed in FY 2024. Special fund expenditures for PSC 
increase by $649,600 in FY 2025. Future years reflect inflation and the elimination of 
one-time costs. Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed 
on public service companies. State expenditures for electricity likely increase beginning as 
early as FY 2025 as discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$649,600 
$637,000 
$665,200 
$700,200 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$649,600 
$637,000 
$665,200 
$700,200 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures likely increase beginning as early as  
FY 2025 as discussed in the Additional Comments below. Revenues are not directly 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 910/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The program must include competitive procurement mechanisms to reach 
a minimum of 3,000 MW of energy storage, or the maximum cost-effective amount of 
energy storage that can be deployed, by the end of the 2033 PJM delivery year. 
 
The program may include:  
 
 
a system of energy storage credits and market-based incentives designed to develop 
a robust energy storage market in the State;  
 
a requirement that investor-owned electric companies install or contract for energy 
storage devices or contract for energy storage credits from an energy storage project 
under the Maryland Energy Storage Pilot Program;  
 
a requirement that program participants make reasonable efforts to apply for all 
applicable State and federal grants, rebates, tax credits, loan guarantees, and other 
similar benefits as the benefits become available; or 
 
any other mechanism or policy that PSC determines is appropriate to achieve the 
goal of a robust cost-effective energy storage system in the State. 
 
PJM defines a “delivery year” as the 12 months beginning June 1 and extending through 
May 31 of the following year. Delivery year may also be referred to as planning year or 
planning period. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 427 of 2019 required PSC to establish an Energy Storage Pilot 
Program by June 1, 2019. Under the program, each of the State’s four investor-owned 
electric companies was required to request proposals for two energy storage projects and 
apply for PSC approval. The cumulative size of the pilot projects under the program must 
be between 5 MW and 10 MW, with a minimum of 15 megawatt-hours (MWh). The 
projects were required to fit within four commercial and regulatory models, featuring 
varying levels of utility, private sector, and customer involvement. 
 
PSC has approved eight projects totaling approximately 9 MW and 31 MWh under the 
pilot program. For three consecutive years beginning July 1, 2023, each electric company 
must annually submit certain related information – such as project costs, size, financing 
methods, the cost recovery mechanism, and technology used – to PSC, the Maryland 
Energy Administration, and the Office of People’s Counsel. 
 
PSC must evaluate the program and submit to the General Assembly an interim report by 
July 1, 2024, and a final report by December 31, 2026. 
 
The current Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard does not include energy storage. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 910/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect:  PSC advises that additional staff are needed to evaluate energy storage 
benefits, avoided electric distribution costs, the value of avoided outages, peak demand 
reduction capacity, and energy savings and air emissions reductions, among other things, 
in addition to handling processing of energy storage renewable energy credit applications, 
plus a rulemaking to promulgate regulations for energy storage credits. The additional 
workload cannot be absorbed within existing resources. 
 
The bill’s 3,000-MW power output goal is approximately 325 times the combined power 
output of the eight current pilot projects. Based on previous estimates for a smaller potential 
program, the Department of Legislative Services estimates that PSC requires six additional 
staff. This estimate assumes staff are hired July 1, 2024, one year prior to the July 1, 2025 
deadline for program commencement and in time to assist with the significant preparatory 
work; actual expenditures will vary with the timing of program commencement. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $649,555 in fiscal 2025. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring three regulatory economists and three engineers to 
handle the requirements discussed above. Current staff will also be involved in PSC 
rulemaking. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
6.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$603,447 
Operating Expenses 
46,108 
Total FY 2025 PSC Expenditures 
$649,555 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public 
service companies. 
 
Additional Comments:  The “planning year” term under the bill is ambiguous. More 
specifically, it is unclear whether the planning years start or end in the year specified in 
the bill. PSC expenditures for staff are generally unaffected by the distinction, but costs 
associated with the utilities complying with the program vary based on when the energy 
storage must be available.  
 
The cost to the State, local governments, and small businesses (through electricity prices) 
for the incentives necessary to reach the energy storage goals in the bill are unknown but 
likely significant, even if the program may only build out to cost-effective levels. 
Cost-effective does not mean cost-neutral, and it will be up to PSC to determine what to 
measure in terms of cost-effectiveness. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 910/ Page 4 
Capital cost estimates from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory for residential and 
utility scale energy storage in 2025 under a moderate cost reduction scenario are 
$2,600 per kilowatt and $1,100 per kilowatt, respectively. Assuming 90% of new energy 
storage additions are utility scale, the total cost to construct sufficient storage to reach 
3,000 MW of power output at those prices is $3.8 billion – although not all costs must be 
directly incurred by the electric companies, and some portion of the costs would 
presumably be offset by avoided costs and market revenues. This does not include costs 
for ongoing operations and maintenance. Costs experienced by the electric companies 
would be recoverable through electricity rates over time:  the scale of the potential 
expenditures and associated cost recovery on ratepayers is worth consideration. Costs 
likely begin no earlier than fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 697 (Senators Augustine and Hester) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; PJM Interconnection, LLC; 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4