START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 357

Chapter 357

(House Bill 967)

AN ACT concerning

General Provisions – Commemorative Days – Dashain Day

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor annually to proclaim October 5 as Dashain Day.

BY renumbering
Article – General Provisions
Section 7–416 through 7–418
to be Section 7–417 through 7–419, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – General Provisions
Section 7–416
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Dashain Day is a festival, originating in Nepal, that is celebrated in
parts of South Asia and in South Asian communities around the world, including in
Maryland; and

WHEREAS, The festival is rooted in the central cultural beliefs of unity and diversity
and the belief that the world is one family, embodied by the spiritual Sanskrit phrase,
“Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam”; and

WHEREAS, The festival is celebrated from Ghatasthapana until Kojagrat Purnima,
lasting up to 15 days; and

WHEREAS, During the festival, individuals make resolutions to create harmony in
the fight against evil throughout the year; now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 7–416 through 7–418 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code
of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–417 through 7–419, respectively.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – General Provisions
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 357 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

7–416.

THE GOVERNOR SHALL ANNUALLY PROCLAIM OCTOBER 5 AS DASHAIN DAY,
A FESTIVAL ORIGINATING IN NEPAL THAT CELEBRATES AND SYMBOLIZES VICTORY
OF GOOD OVER EVIL.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2