START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 950 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 950 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Native Plants Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Native Plants Program – administered by the Maryland 
Department of Agriculture (MDA) and the University of Maryland Extension (UME) – to, 
among other things, develop a Commercial Maryland Native Plant List and create (1) a 
voluntary certification program for growers and retailers; (2) a “Maryland Natives” 
marketing program; and (3) a “Maryland Native Plants” webpage. For fiscal 2025 and each 
fiscal year thereafter, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill specified 
appropriations of $150,000 for UME and $100,000 for MDA. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $285,100 in FY 2025. Future years 
reflect ongoing costs and inflation. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes 
mandated appropriations beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
285,100 
262,100 
273,400 
287,300 
300,100 
Net Effect 
($285,100) 
($262,100) 
($273,400) 
($287,300) 
($300,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 950/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Native Plants Program 
 
The purpose of the Maryland Native Plants Program is to (1) respond to the increasing 
demand for, use of, and sale of native plants by retail garden centers, retail nurseries, and 
wholesale nurseries and (2) educate the public, landscapers, and other plant users on the 
importance, benefit, and availability of native plants. 
 
MDA must administer the program, and UME must administer the educational components 
of the program in coordination with MDA and other agencies. 
 
UME must hire an extension agent with expertise in native plants to serve as a native plant 
specialist. The native plant specialist must (1) assist UME in fulfilling educational and 
professional training responsibilities related to the program; (2) coordinate with MDA to 
deliver educational components of the program; (3) provide input and expertise to MDA 
in the development of the Commercial Maryland Native Plant List (discussed below); 
(4) provide input and expertise to MDA on the development of a list of certified Maryland 
native plant growers and retailers; (5) teach growers and other stakeholders about 
techniques for growing native plants; and (6) coordinate education, applied research, and 
outreach to teach the public, landscapers, and other plant users about the importance, 
benefit, and availability of native plants. 
 
“Native plant” means a plant that occurs naturally in the State and surrounding region, 
ecosystem, and habitat, without direct or indirect human actions. This includes plants that 
were present before colonial settlement or are listed as native to the State on the 
Maryland Plant Atlas website. 
 
For fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation of $150,000 for UME to hire one extension agent as a native 
plant specialist and $100,000 for MDA to hire staff to administer the program. 
 
Commercial Maryland Native Plant List 
 
UME must provide input to MDA, who must receive input from the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) and the Maryland Native Plant Society to (1) develop a Commercial 
Maryland Native Plant List and (2) review and update the list at least once every 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 950/ Page 3 
When a cultivar or hybrid of a native plant fills an ecological niche that a native plant is no 
longer able to fill due to widespread attack by disease or insects, the native plant specialist 
must first receive input from DNR and the Maryland Native Plant Society and then inform 
and guide MDA in evaluating the cultivar or hybrid of a native plant for inclusion on the 
Commercial Maryland Native Plant List. 
 
“Commercial Maryland Native Plant List” means a list of plants that are native to Maryland 
that are commercially available and appropriate for growing in residential or commercial 
landscapes. 
 
Voluntary Certification Program 
 
MDA, in consultation with UME, must create a voluntary certification program for growers 
and retailers that are selling native plants listed on the Commercial Maryland Native Plant 
List to be identified as a Maryland Native Plant Grower and/or a Maryland Native Plant 
Retailer. MDA must develop and maintain a list of certified Maryland Native Plant 
Growers and Maryland Native Plant Retailers. 
 
Maryland Natives Marketing Program 
 
MDA, in coordination with UME, must create a “Maryland Natives” marketing program 
to encourage and promote the use and sale of native plants that are listed on the Commercial 
Maryland Native Plant List. The marketing program must develop a “Maryland Natives” 
logo to identify listed plants and a QR code containing plant identification information that 
links to the webpages and websites described below. The “Maryland Natives” logo must 
be made available to growers and retailers who may (1) place the logo on labels, stickers, 
or pots of each plant listed on the Commercial Maryland Native Plant List and (2) use the 
logo in displays with listed plants. 
 
Maryland Native Plants Webpage 
 
UME must create a “Maryland Native Plants” webpage on its website. The webpage must 
include (1) the Commercial Maryland Native Plant List; (2) the lists of certified Maryland 
Native Plant Growers and Maryland Native Plant Retailers; and (3) general information on 
native plants. MDA must promote the Maryland Native Plants Program and include this 
information on the “Maryland’s Best” website. 
 
A link to the “Maryland Native Plants” webpage must be posted on DNR’s native plants 
website. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 950/ Page 4 
Current Law:  DNR must create, maintain, and publish on its website a list of plant species 
native to the State. The list must identify native plants that may be used and planted as an 
alternative to the use and planting of tier 2 invasive plants. 
 
The Secretary of Agriculture is required to adopt regulations that establish a list of tier 1 
invasive plants and tier 2 invasive plants, and MDA regulations contain those lists. “Tier 1 
invasive plants” are defined to include invasive plant species that cause or are likely to 
cause severe harm within the State and “tier 2 invasive plants” are defined to include 
invasive plant species that cause or are likely to cause substantial negative impact within 
the State. A person generally may not propagate, import, transfer, sell, purchase, transport, 
or introduce any living part of a tier 1 invasive plant in the State. A tier 2 invasive plant 
may not be sold at a retail outlet, or through landscaping services, without providing 
specified notice to the customer that it is a tier 2 invasive plant. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $285,050 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects costs for 
(1) UME to hire the native plant specialist to undertake the responsibilities listed in the bill; 
(2) MDA to hire a marketing specialist to administer the program; and (3) MDA to develop 
a logo for the “Maryland Natives” marketing program as required by the bill. The estimated 
costs associated with the native plant specialist and the marketing specialist are higher than 
the respective mandated appropriations for UME and MDA in the bill. The estimate 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$257,702 
Logo Development 
4,000 
Operating Expenses 
  23,348 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$285,050 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business growers and retailers of native plants may 
meaningfully benefit from the increased marketing and awareness of native plants under 
the program and the opportunity to be certified under the program. Growers and retailers 
of plants that do not qualify for the Commercial Maryland Native Plant List may be 
negatively affected. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 950/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 836 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2023 
Enrolled - May 2, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5