START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 947 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 947 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Charles County - Property Tax - Credit for Volunteer Emergency Responders 
 
 
This bill authorizes Charles County to grant a property tax credit for real property owned 
and occupied as the principal residence of an emergency responder or an unmarried 
surviving spouse of a deceased emergency responder if the federal adjusted gross income 
of the emergency responder or the unmarried surviving spouse for the immediately 
preceding taxable year is $150,000 or less. An emergency responder is an individual who 
is an active or retired volunteer member of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical services 
company in Charles County. Charles County may provide for (1) the amount and duration 
of the tax credit; (2) additional eligibility criteria for the credit; and (3) any other provision 
necessary to implement the credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Charles County property tax revenues decrease by $347,300 in FY 2024 
and by $375,900 in FY 2028 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. County 
expenditures increase by $115,900 in FY 2024 and by $130,400 in FY 2028 to the extent 
the property tax credit is granted. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 686 of 2017 authorized county and municipal governments to 
grant a property tax credit for dwellings owned by specified public safety officers. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 947/ Page 2 
Chapter 654 of 2018 altered the calculation of the property tax credit by specifying that the 
tax credit may not exceed the lesser of $2,500 or the amount of property tax imposed on 
the dwelling. Chapters 239 and 240 of 2019 altered the eligibility criteria for the property 
tax credit by adding volunteer emergency medical technicians to the definition of public 
safety officers that are eligible recipients of the property tax credit. 
 
Local Revenues:  Charles County property tax revenues decrease by $347,300 in 
fiscal 2024 and by $375,900 in fiscal 2028 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. 
The estimate is based on the following:   
 
 
approximately 1,200 eligible emergency responders in the county; 
 
75% of emergency responders live within the county; 
 
76.9% of emergency responders are homeowners; and 
 
Charles County grants a $500 property tax credit. 
 
Future year estimates reflect a 2% annual increase in the number of property tax credit 
recipients. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Charles County expenditures may increase by $115,900 in 
fiscal 2024 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. This represents the cost to hire 
one additional staff person in the County Treasurer’s Office to administer the property tax 
credit. Future year expenditures are expected to total $130,400 by fiscal 2028, which 
reflects a 3% annual increase in operating costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1416 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 521 (Charles County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 947/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3