START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 989 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 989 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Miniature Golf Course License 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class B-MGC (miniature golf course) beer, wine, and liquor license 
in Frederick County and authorizes the Frederick County Board of License Commissioners 
to issue the license for use at a miniature golf course that is open to the public; features at 
least 18 holes; and has accommodations that are predominantly dedicated to miniature golf. 
The license authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises 
consumption – during normal business hours – as long as the licensee offers food on site 
at all times when alcoholic beverages are being sold. The annual license fee is $1,500. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues increase by $1,500 beginning in FY 2024 due 
to the issuance of one new Class B-MGC license under the bill. Frederick County can 
handle any additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Miniature golf courses in Frederick County that obtain an 
alcoholic beverage license may realize higher revenues as a result of being able to sell beer, 
wine, and liquor on site. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that a licensee’s annual sales from alcoholic beverages 
may not exceed 35% of the licensee’s annual gross sales. Miniature golf games and food 
sales must comprise, respectively, at least 50% and 15% of the licensee’s annual gross 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 989/ Page 2 
sales. Before the board may renew a Class B-MGC beer, wine, and liquor license, the 
licensee must provide the board with an annual gross sales report showing that the licensee 
has met the specified minimum sales percentages for miniature golf games and food sales 
and stayed below the specified maximum sales percentage for alcoholic beverages. 
 
Current Law:  In Frederick County, the board is authorized to issue specified alcoholic 
beverage licenses, if certain conditions are met, for use by a range of different venues. 
Examples include the following:  art galleries engaged in the display and sale of original 
artwork; barbershops and beauty salons; cinemas; country and golf clubs; dinner theaters; 
hotel lobbies; municipal golf courses; and stadiums. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Frederick County estimates that one business will apply for the 
license. Accordingly, Frederick County revenues increase by $1,500 beginning in 
fiscal 2024 from license fee revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2