START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

Chapter 114

(House Bill 984)

AN ACT concerning

Public Employee Relations Act

FOR the purpose of consolidating and altering certain laws governing collective bargaining
for certain public employees, including laws related to the establishment of
bargaining units, elections and certification of exclusive representatives, employee
and employer rights, unfair labor practices, and strikes and lockouts; establishing
the Public Employee Relations Board to oversee collective bargaining activities for
certain public employees; repealing the State Labor Relations Board, the State
Higher Education Labor Relations Board, and the Public School Labor Relations
Board; establishing that certain grievance procedures for State employees serve as
a certain procedure for certain disputes between certain parties; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~
~~of~~ ~~Administrative~~ ~~Hearings~~ ~~to~~ ~~resolve~~ ~~certain~~ ~~disputes~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~memorandum~~ ~~of~~ ~~understanding~~ ~~or~~ ~~written~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~
and generally relating to collective bargaining for public employees.

BY repealing
Article – Education
Section 6–403, 6–406, 6–407, 6–407.2, 6–409 through 6–411, 6–504, 6–506, 6–507,
6–509, 6–509.2, and 6–512 through 6–514; 6–801 through 6–807 and the
subtitle “Subtitle 8. Public School Labor Relations Board”; and 16–704
through 16–706, 16–710, 16–712, 16–714, and 16–715
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 3–201 through 3–209 and the subtitle “Subtitle 2. State Labor Relations
Board”; 3–2A–01 through 3–2A–09 and the subtitle “Subtitle 2A. State Higher
Education Labor Relations Board”; 3–301 through 3–307 and the subtitle
“Subtitle 3. Rights of Employees and Employers; Strikes, Lockouts, and
Unfair Labor Practices Prohibited”; and 3–401 through 3–407 and the subtitle
“Subtitle 4. Election and Certification of Exclusive Representative”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Education
Section 6–404, 6–405, 6–407.1, 6–408, 6–408.1, 6–505, 6–508, 6–509.1, 6–510,
16–707, 16–708, 16–709, 16–711, and 16–713
to be Section 6–403, 6–404, 6–405, 6–406, 6–407, 6–504, 6–505, 6–506, 6–507,
16–704, 16–705, 16–706, 16–707, and 16–708, respectively
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 2–205(e)(4), 6–401, 6–402, 6–501, 6–503, 9.5–703(c)(2) and (3), 16–701,
16–702, and 16–703
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–403, 6–404, ~~6–406(c)(3),~~ 6–405, 6–504, 6–505, ~~6–507(c)(3),~~ 6–506, and
16–708
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Section 3 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–903(c)(2) and (3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 21–101 through 21–601 to be under the new title “Title 21. Public Employee
Relations”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 3–101, 3–501(e), and 3–502
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 3–102(c) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 6–403, 6–406, 6–407, 6–407.2, 6–409 through 6–411, 6–504, 6–506, 6–507,
6–509, 6–509.2, 6–512 through 6–514; 6–801 through 6–807 and the subtitle “Subtitle 8.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

Public School Labor Relations Board”; and 16–704 through 16–706, 16–710, 16–712,
16–714, and 16–715 of Article – Education of the Annotated Code of Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2 AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 3–201 through
3–209 and the subtitle “Subtitle 2. State Labor Relations Board”; 3–2A–01 through
3–2A–09 and the subtitle “Subtitle 2A. State Higher Education Labor Relations Board”;
3–301 through 3–307 and the subtitle “Subtitle 3. Rights of Employees and Employers;
Strikes, Lockouts, and Unfair Labor Practices Prohibited”; and 3–401 through 3–407 and
the subtitle “Subtitle 4. Election and Certification of Exclusive Representative” of Article –
State Personnel and Pensions of the Annotated Code of Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 6–404, 6–405,
6–407.1, 6–408, 6–408.1, 6–505, 6–508, 6–509.1, 6–510, 16–707, 16–708, 16–709, 16–711,
and 16–713 of Article – Education of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be
Section(s) 6–403, 6–404, 6–405, 6–406, 6–407, 6–504, 6–505, 6–506, 6–507, 16–704, 16–705,
16–706, 16–707, and 16–708, respectively.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Education

2–205.

(e) (4) (i) The Public [School Labor] EMPLOYEE Relations Board shall
decide any controversy or dispute arising under Title 6, Subtitle 4 or Subtitle 5 of this
article.

(ii) A decision of the Public [School Labor] EMPLOYEE Relations
Board is final.

6–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the Public [School Labor] EMPLOYEE Relations Board
[established under Subtitle 8 of this title].

(b–1) “Day” means a calendar day unless otherwise indicated.

(c) “Employee organization” [means an organization that:

(1) Includes certificated employees of a public school employer or
individuals of equivalent status in Baltimore City; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Has as one of its main purposes the representation of the employees in
their relations with that public school employer] HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–101
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(d) (1) “Home and hospital teacher” means a teacher employed by a public
school employer to provide instructional services to a public school student who is unable
to function effectively in the classroom setting due to the student’s medical, physical, or
emotional condition.

(2) A home and hospital teacher may teach in:

(i) A private home;

(ii) A hospital;

(iii) A therapeutic center;

(iv) A school; or

(v) Any other appropriate site.

(d–1) “New employee processing” means the process for a newly hired public school
employee, whether in person, online, or through other means, in which new employees are
advised of their employment status, rights, benefits, duties, responsibilities, and other
employment–related matters.

(e) (1) “Public school employee” means a certificated professional individual
who is employed by a public school employer or an individual of equivalent status in
Baltimore City, except for a county superintendent or an individual designated by the
public school employer to act in a negotiating capacity as provided in § 6–408(c) of this
subtitle.

(2) In Montgomery County, “public school employees” include:

(i) Certificated and noncertificated substitute teachers employed by
the public school employer for at least 7 days before March 1 of the school fiscal year ending
June 30, 1978, and each year after; and

(ii) Home and hospital teachers employed by the public school
employer for at least 7 days before March 1 of the school fiscal year ending June 30, 2000,
and each year after.

(3) In Baltimore County, “public school employee” includes a secondary
school nurse, an elementary school nurse, and a special school nurse.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(4) In Frederick County, “public school employee” includes a social worker
employed by a public school employer.

(5) In Prince George’s County, “public school employee” includes home and
hospital teachers and Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) instructors.

(6) In Baltimore County, Calvert County, Charles County, and Garrett
County, “public school employee” includes Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC)
instructors.

(7) In Carroll County, “public school employee” includes:

(i) A registered nurse;

(ii) Supervisory noncertificated employees as defined under §
6–501(i) of this title; and

(iii) Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) instructors.

(f) “Public school employer” means a county board of education or the Baltimore
City Board of School Commissioners.

6–402.

(a) Public school employees may form, join, and participate in the activities of
employee organizations of their own choice for the purpose of being represented on all
matters that relate to salaries, wages, hours, and other working conditions.

[(b) An employee organization may establish reasonable:

(1) Restrictions as to who may join; and

(2) Provisions for the dismissal of individuals from membership.]

(B) PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYERS, AND
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES ARE SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 21 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

6–403.

(a) [Each public school employer shall designate, as provided in this subtitle,
which employee organization, if any, shall be the exclusive representative of all public
school employees in a specified unit in the county.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the public school
employer shall determine the composition of the unit in negotiation with any employee
organization that requests negotiation concerning the composition of the unit.

(2)] In St. Mary’s County, licensed registered school nurses, Junior Reserve
Officers’ Training Corps (JROTC) teachers, and supervisory noncertificated employees of
the public school employer shall be included in the unit.

[(c)] (B) (1) There may not be more than two units in a county.

(2) In Baltimore County, one of the units shall consist of employees who
are administrative and supervisory certificated employees. The second unit shall consist of
all other public school employees as defined under § 6–401(e)(1) and (3) of this subtitle.

[(d)] (C) All eligible public school employees shall:

(1) Be included in one of these units; and

(2) Have the rights granted in this subtitle AND TITLE 21 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

6–404.

(a) [The designation of an employee organization as an exclusive representative
shall be made as provided in this section.

(b) If an employee organization certifies to the public school employer that it has
a membership enrollment of at least 30 percent of the total number of public school
employees in a specified unit in a county as of June 1 of the year in which certification is
made, this certification is a request for recognition as exclusive representative of all public
school employees in the specified unit in the county.

(c) If another employee organization certifies that it has a membership
enrollment of at least 10 percent of the total number of public school employees in the unit
as of the same June 1, an election shall be held in which the public school employees in the
unit shall be offered the opportunity to choose:

(1) One of the employee organizations as the exclusive representative of all
public school employees in the unit; or

(2) Not to have exclusive representation.

(d) If no other employee organization certifies that it has a membership
enrollment of at least 10 percent of the total number of public school employees in the unit,
on the request of the employee organization under subsection (b) of this section, an election
shall be held and the ballot shall offer a choice between:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(1) Exclusive representation by the organization; and

(2) Not to have exclusive representation.

(e) The public school employer shall designate the employee organization
described in subsection (b) of this section as the exclusive representative of all public school
employees in the specified unit in a county if:

(1) No other employee organization certifies that it has a membership
enrollment of at least 10 percent of the total number of public school employees in the unit;

(2) The employee organization does not request an election under
subsection (d) of this section; and

(3) The employee organization certifies that it has a membership
enrollment of the majority of the public school employees in the unit in the county.

(f) (1) The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for:

(i) Verifying the number of certificated employees of the public
school employer or individuals of equivalent status in Baltimore City who are members in
good standing of an employee organization on the date of the certification or who have
signed a petition under this section; and

(ii) Holding elections under this section and the certification of their
results.

(2) The Board shall provide for supervision of these elections.

(3) The elections] AN ELECTION HELD UNDER TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 4
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE shall be held:

[(i)] (1) In each school facility where public employees are
assigned on a regularly scheduled school day;

[(ii)] (2) In a manner assuring the secrecy of the ballot; and

[(iii)] (3) On a regular working day for public school employees,
between June 1 and June 15, inclusive, except in Baltimore City where the elections shall
be held between November 1 and November 15 following the date on which certification of
required membership enrollment is made.

[(4) In any election held under this section, the employee organization that
receives the largest number of votes cast in a unit shall be declared to be the exclusive
representative of all public school employees in the unit. If the largest number of votes in

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the election is cast not to have exclusive representation, a representative may not be
designated for the unit.

(5)] (B) The public school employer shall provide any assistance required
in holding the elections.

6–405.

(a) (1) (i) Each public school employer shall provide the exclusive
representative access to new employee processing.

(ii) Except as provided in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, the
public school employer shall provide the exclusive representative at least 10 days’ notice in
advance of a new employee processing.

(iii) The public school employer may provide the exclusive
representative with less than 10 days’ notice if there is an urgent need critical to the public
school employer’s new employee processing that was not reasonably foreseeable.

(2) (i) The structure, time, and manner of the access required in
paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be determined through negotiations between the
public school employer and the exclusive representative in accordance with [§ 6–408] §
6–406 of this subtitle.

(ii) When negotiating access to new employee processing under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, if any dispute has not been resolved within 45 days
after the first meeting of the public school employer and the exclusive representative, or
within 60 days after an initial request to negotiate, whichever occurs first, either party may
request that the Board declare an impasse under [§ 6–408(e)] § 6–406(E) of this subtitle.

(iii) In an impasse proceeding under [§ 6–408(e)] § 6–406(E) of this
subtitle, the mediator or Board shall consider:

1. The ability of the exclusive representative to communicate
with the public school employees it represents;

2. The legal obligations of the exclusive representative to the
public school employees;

3. Applicable State, federal, and local laws;

4. Any stipulations of the parties;

5. The interests and welfare of the public school employees
and the financial condition of the public school employer;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

6. The structure, time, and manner of access of an exclusive
representative to new employee processing in comparable public school employers,
including the access provisions in other memoranda of understanding or collective
bargaining agreements; and

7. Any other facts routinely considered in establishing the
structure, time, and manner of access of an exclusive representative to new employee
processing.

(3) (i) A request to negotiate under paragraph (2) of this subsection
made between July 1, 2018, and the expiration date of an existing collective bargaining
agreement between the parties shall reopen the existing collective bargaining agreement
only for the purpose of negotiating the access of the exclusive representative to the public
school employer’s new employee processing.

(ii) Either party may elect to negotiate a separate agreement on the
access of the exclusive representative to the public school employer’s new employee
processing in lieu of reopening the existing collective bargaining agreement.

(b) This section does not prohibit a public school employer and an exclusive
representative from negotiating access to new employee processing that varies from the
requirements of this section.

(c) Nothing in this section shall abrogate existing collective bargaining
agreements between public school employers and exclusive representatives.

~~6–406.~~

(c) (3) A public school employer may not negotiate the school calendar[, the
maximum number of students assigned to a class,] or any matter that is precluded by
~~applicable~~ ~~statutory~~ ~~law.~~

6–501.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the Public [School Labor] EMPLOYEE Relations Board
[established under Subtitle 8 of this title].

(c) “Confidential employee” includes an individual whose employment
responsibilities require knowledge of the public school employer’s posture in the collective
negotiation process, as determined by the public school employer in negotiations with an
employee organization that requests negotiation on this issue.

(c–1) “Day” means a calendar day unless otherwise indicated.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) “Employee organization” [means an organization that:

(1) Includes noncertificated employees of a public school employer; and

(2) Has as one of its main purposes the representation of the employees in
their relations with that public school employer] HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–101
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(e) [“Management personnel”] “MANAGERIAL EMPLOYEE” includes an
individual who is engaged mainly in executive and managerial functions.

(e–1) “New employee processing” means the process for a newly hired public school
employee, whether in person, online, or through other means, in which new employees are
advised of their employment status, rights, benefits, duties, responsibilities, and other
employment–related matters.

(f) “Noncertificated employee”, in Montgomery County, means only a full–time
employee.

(g) (1) “Public school employee” means a noncertificated individual who is
employed for at least 9 months a year on a full–time basis by a public school employer.

(2) “Public school employee” includes a noncertificated employee in
Baltimore City notwithstanding that the noncertificated employee does not work for at
least 9 months a year on a full–time basis.

(3) “Public school employee” does not include:

(i) [Management personnel] A MANAGERIAL EMPLOYEE; OR

(ii) A confidential employee[; or

(iii) Any individual designated by the public school employer to act in
a negotiating capacity as provided in § 6–510(c) of this subtitle].

(h) (1) “Public school employer” means the county board in each county.

(2) “Public school employer” includes the Baltimore City Board of School
Commissioners.

(i) “Supervisory employee” includes any individual who responsibly directs the
work of other employees.

6–503.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(a) Public school employees may form, join, and participate in the activities of
employee organizations of their own choice for the purpose of being represented on all
matters that relate to salaries, wages, hours, and other working conditions.

[(b) An employee organization may establish reasonable restrictions as to who
may join and reasonable provisions for the dismissal of individuals from membership,
except that these restrictions and provisions may not discriminate with regard to the terms
or conditions of membership because of race, color, marital status, creed, sex, age, or
national origin.]

(B) PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYERS, AND
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES ARE SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 21 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

6–504.

(a) [(1) Each public school employer may designate, as provided in this subtitle,
which employee organization, if any, shall be the exclusive representative of all public
school employees in a specified unit in the county.

(2) In Baltimore City, Garrett County, and Frederick County, the public
school employer shall designate, as provided in this subtitle, which employee organization,
if any, shall be the exclusive representative of all public school employees in a specified unit
in the county.

(b) The public school employer shall determine the composition of the unit in
negotiation with any employee organization that requests negotiation concerning the
composition of the unit.

(c)] (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (5) of this subsection, there
may not be more than three units in a county and a unit may not include both supervisory
and nonsupervisory employees.

(2) If a county has more than three recognized units and, as of July 1, 1974,
the units have exclusive representation for collective negotiations, these units may
continue as negotiating units.

(3) In Baltimore County, there shall be three units, including one unit of
supervisory employees as defined in § 6–501(i) of this subtitle.

(4) In Carroll County, beginning on October 1, 2007:

(i) There shall be no more than three units; and

(ii) All units shall be nonsupervisory units.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) In Baltimore City, the public school employer may designate a fourth
unit composed of all Baltimore City school police officers, as defined in § 4–318 of this
article, up to and including the rank of lieutenant.

[(d) (1)] (B) All eligible public school employees shall:

[(i)] (1) Be included in one of these units; and

[(ii)] (2) Have the rights granted in this subtitle.

[(2) Except for an individual who is designated as management personnel
or a confidential employee under this subtitle, each public school employee is eligible for
membership in one of the negotiating units.]

6–505.

(a) Employee organizations recognized by the public school employer as the
exclusive representative of all public school employees in a specified unit on July 1, 1978
shall continue to be the exclusive representative[:

(1) For the rest of the 2–year initial period as provided by § 6–507 of this
subtitle; and

(2) Beyond the 2–year period until another election is held as provided
under § 6–507 of this subtitle] SUBJECT TO TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(b) Any collective negotiation agreement that has been entered into by an
exclusive representative and a public employer as of July 1, 1978 shall continue in effect
for the term of the agreement.

6–506.

(a) (1) (i) Each public school employer shall provide the exclusive
representative access to new employee processing.

(ii) Except as provided in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, the
public school employer shall provide the exclusive representative at least 10 days’ notice in
advance of a new employee processing.

(iii) The public school employer may provide the exclusive
representative with less than 10 days’ notice if there is an urgent need critical to the public
school employer’s new employee processing that was not reasonably foreseeable.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(2) (i) The structure, time, and manner of the access required in
paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be determined through negotiations between the
public school employer and the exclusive representative in accordance with [§ 6–510] §
6–507 of this subtitle.

(ii) When negotiating access to new employee processing under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, if any dispute has not been resolved within 45 days
after the first meeting of the public school employer and the exclusive representative, or
within 60 days after an initial request to negotiate, whichever occurs first, either party may
request that the Board declare an impasse under [§ 6–510(e)] § 6–507(E) of this subtitle.

(iii) In an impasse proceeding under [§ 6–510(e)] § 6–507(E) of this
subtitle, the mediator or Board shall consider:

1. The ability of the exclusive representative to communicate
with the public school employees it represents;

2. The legal obligations of the exclusive representative to the
public school employees;

3. Applicable State, federal, and local laws;

4. Any stipulations of the parties;

5. The interests and welfare of the public school employees
and the financial condition of the public school employer;

6. The structure, time, and manner of access of an exclusive
representative to new employee processing in comparable public school employers,
including the access provisions in other memoranda of understanding or collective
bargaining agreements; and

7. Any other facts routinely considered in establishing the
structure, time, and manner of access of an exclusive representative to new employee
processing.

(3) (i) A request to negotiate under paragraph (2) of this subsection
made between July 1, 2018, and the expiration date of an existing collective bargaining
agreement between the parties shall reopen the existing collective bargaining agreement
only for the purpose of negotiating the access of the exclusive representative to the public
school employer’s new employee processing.

(ii) Either party may elect to negotiate a separate agreement on the
access of the exclusive representative to the public school employer’s new employee
processing in lieu of reopening the existing collective bargaining agreement.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) This section does not prohibit a public school employer and an exclusive
representative from negotiating access to new employee processing that varies from the
requirements of this section.

(c) Nothing in this section shall abrogate existing collective bargaining
agreements between public school employers and exclusive representatives.

~~6–507.~~

(c) (3) A public school employer may not negotiate the school calendar[, the
maximum number of students assigned to a class,] or any matter that is precluded by
~~applicable~~ ~~statutory~~ ~~law.~~

9.5–703.

(c) (2) All elections shall be conducted by the [State Labor] PUBLIC
EMPLOYEE Relations Board and subject to the requirements and limitations of [Title 3,
Subtitle 4 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article] TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(3) The [State Labor] PUBLIC EMPLOYEE Relations Board may not
conduct an election for an exclusive representative if an election or certification of an
exclusive representative has taken place within the preceding 2 years.

16–701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Agreement” means a written contract between a public employer and an
employee organization.

(c) “Arbitration” means a procedure by which parties involved in a grievance
submit their differences to an impartial third party for a final and binding decision.

(d) “Board” means the [State Higher Education Labor] PUBLIC EMPLOYEE
Relations Board.

(e) “Collective bargaining” has the meaning stated in § 3–101(c) § 3–101(D) of
the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(f) “Confidential employee” [means a public employee whose unrestricted access
to personnel, budgetary, or fiscal data subject to use by the public employer in collective
bargaining, or whose close, continuing working relationship with those responsible for
negotiating on behalf of the public employer, would make the employee’s membership in an
employee organization as a rank and file employee incompatible with the employee’s

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

duties] HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–101 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
~~ARTICLE.~~

(g) “Employee organization” [means a labor organization of public employees that
has as one of its primary purposes representing those employees in collective bargaining]
HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–101 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(h) “Exclusive representative” [means an employee organization that has been
certified by the Board as representing the employees of a bargaining unit] HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 21–101 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(i) “Fact–finding” means a process conducted by the Board that includes:

(1) The identification of the major issues in an impasse;

(2) The review of the positions of the parties; and

(3) A resolution of factual differences by an impartial individual or panel.

(j) (1) “Faculty” means employees whose assignments involve academic
responsibilities, including teachers and department heads.

(2) “Faculty” does not include officers, supervisory employees, confidential
employees, part–time faculty, or student assistants.

(k) “Grievance” means a dispute concerning the application or interpretation of
the terms of a collective bargaining agreement.

(l) “Impasse” means a failure by a public employer and an exclusive
representative to achieve agreement in the course of negotiations.

(m) “Officer” means the president, a vice president, a dean, or any other similar
official of the community college as appointed by the board of community college trustees.

(n) “Part–time faculty” means employees whose assignments involve academic
responsibilities, including teachers, counselors, and department heads, who are designated
with part–time faculty status by the president of the community college.

(o) (1) “Public employee” means an employee employed by a public employer.

(2) “Public employee” includes faculty and part–time faculty at the
Baltimore City Community College.

(3) “Public employee” does not include:

(i) Officers;
– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Supervisory or confidential employees; or

(iii) Student assistants.

(p) (1) “Public employer” means the board of community college trustees for a
community college.

(2) “Public employer” includes the Board of Trustees of Baltimore City
Community College for the purposes of collective bargaining with faculty and part–time
faculty.

[(q) (1) “Showing of interest form” means a written statement from a public
employee who wishes to be represented by a petitioning employee organization for the
purpose of collective bargaining.

(2) “Showing of interest form” includes:

(i) A union authorization card; and

(ii) A union membership card.

(r) “Strike” means, in concerted action with others for the purpose of inducing,
influencing, or coercing a change in the wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of
employment, a public employee’s:

(1) Refusal to report for duty;

(2) Willful absence from the position;

(3) Stoppage of work; or

(4) Abstinence in whole or in part from the proper performance of the
duties of employment.

(s) “Supervisory employee” means a public employee who has full–time and
exclusive authority to act on behalf of a public employer to:

(1) Hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign,
reward, or discipline other employees; or

(2) Adjust employee grievances.]

16–702.

(a) It is the intent of the General Assembly that:

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(1) The State promote harmonious and cooperative relationships with the
public employees of the community college system by encouraging collective bargaining
practices, protecting the rights of public employees to associate, organize, and vote for their
own exclusive representatives, and recognizing the dignity of labor for all employees of the
community college system; and

(2) A delay in implementation of this subtitle shall be to ensure that
community colleges are granted sufficient time to plan for potential negotiations and may
not be used to plan for, or engage in, activities that would discourage or otherwise coerce
employees seeking to hold an election.

(b) This subtitle shall apply:

(1) Beginning on September 1, 2022, to:

(i) Anne Arundel Community College;

(ii) Community College of Baltimore County;

(iii) Frederick Community College;

(iv) Harford Community College;

(v) Howard Community College;

(vi) Montgomery College;

(vii) Prince George’s Community College; and

(viii) College of Southern Maryland;

(2) Beginning on September 1, 2023, to:

(i) Allegany College of Maryland;

(ii) Carroll Community College;

(iii) Cecil College;

(iv) Chesapeake College;

(v) Garrett College;

(vi) Hagerstown Community College; and

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(vii) Wor–Wic Community College; and

(3) Beginning October 1, 2024, Baltimore City Community College.

(C) PUBLIC EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC EMPLOYERS, AND EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVES ARE SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 21 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

16–703.

[(a) The Board shall conduct an election for an exclusive representative of a
bargaining unit if:

(1) A valid petition is submitted in accordance with § 16–704 of this
subtitle; and

(2) The bargaining unit involved in the petition is determined to be an
appropriate bargaining unit under subsections (b) and (c) of this section.

(b) (1) Except as provided in this subtitle, the Board shall determine the
appropriateness of each bargaining unit.

(2) If there is not a dispute about the appropriateness of the bargaining
unit, the Board shall issue an order defining an appropriate bargaining unit.

(3) If there is a dispute about the appropriateness of the bargaining unit,
the Board shall:

(i) Conduct a public hearing, receiving written and oral testimony;
and

(ii) Issue an order defining the appropriate bargaining unit.

(c)] There may be no more than four bargaining units at each community college
including:

(1) One unit reserved for full–time faculty;

(2) One unit reserved for part–time faculty; and

(3) Two units reserved for eligible nonexempt employees, as defined in the
federal Fair Labor Standards Act.

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

[(d) The Board may not require the bargaining units at a community college to
conform to the requirements of this section if the bargaining units were in existence before
September 1, 2022.]

16–708.

(a) [A public employer has the right to:

(1) Determine how the statutory mandate and goals of the community
college, including the functions and programs of the community college, its overall budget,
and its organizational structure, are to be carried out; and

(2) Direct college personnel.

(b) A public employee has the right to:

(1) Organize;

(2) Form, join, or assist any employee organization;

(3) Bargain collectively through an exclusive representative;

(4) Engage in other lawful concerted activity for the purpose of collective
bargaining; and

(5) Refrain from engaging in the activities listed under this subsection.

(c)] A public employee or group of public employees has the right at any time to:

(1) Present a grievance arising under the terms of the agreement to the
public employer; and

(2) Have the grievance adjusted without the intervention of the exclusive
representative.

[(d)] (B) The exclusive representative has the right to be present during any
meeting involving the presentation or adjustment of a grievance.

[(e)] (C) (1) A public employer shall hear a grievance and participate in the
adjustment of the grievance.

(2) The adjustment of a grievance may not be inconsistent with the terms
of the collective bargaining agreement then in effect.

(3) A public employer shall give prompt notice of any adjustment of a
grievance to the exclusive representative.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(f) A public employer and an employee organization may not interfere with,
intimidate, restrain, coerce, or discriminate against a public employee because the
employee exercises rights granted under this section.]

Article – Health – General

15–903.

(c) (2) All elections shall be conducted by the [State Labor] PUBLIC
EMPLOYEE Relations Board and subject to the requirements and limitations of [Title 3,
Subtitle 4 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article] TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(3) The [State Labor] PUBLIC EMPLOYEE Relations Board may not
conduct an election for an exclusive representative if an election or certification of an
exclusive representative has taken place within the preceding 2 years.

Article – State Government

TITLE 21. PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RELATIONS.

SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.

21–101.

(A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RELATIONS BOARD.

(C) “CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE” INCLUDES AN INDIVIDUAL WHOSE
~~EMPLOYMENT~~ ~~RESPONSIBILITIES~~ ~~REQUIRE~~ ~~KNOWLEDGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PUBLIC~~
EMPLOYER’S POSTURE IN THE COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION PROCESS MEANS AN
EMPLOYEE WHO:

(1) ACTS IN A CONFIDENTIAL CAPACITY AND FORMULATES AND
EFFECTUATES A PUBLIC EMPLOYER’S POLICIES THAT RELATE TO COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING WITH PUBLIC EMPLOYEES; OR

(2) HAS ACCESS TO CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION NOT GENERALLY
~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FORMULATION~~ ~~AND~~
EFFECTUATION OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYER’S POLICIES THAT RELATE TO COLLECTIVE
~~BARGAINING.~~

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(D) (C) UNLESS SPECIFICALLY PROVIDED OTHERWISE, “DAY” MEANS A
CALENDAR DAY.

(E) (D) “EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION” MEANS A LABOR ORGANIZATION IN
WHICH PUBLIC EMPLOYEES PARTICIPATE AND THAT HAS AS ONE OF ITS PRIMARY
PURPOSES REPRESENTING PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.

(F) (E) “EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION THAT HAS BEEN CERTIFIED BY THE BOARD AS AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE UNDER SUBTITLE 4 OF THIS TITLE.

(G) (F) “LOCKOUT” MEANS ACTION TAKEN BY A PUBLIC EMPLOYER TO:

(1) INTERRUPT OR PREVENT THE CONTINUITY OF THE EMPLOYEES’
USUAL WORK FOR THE PURPOSE AND WITH THE INTENT OF COERCING THE
EMPLOYEES INTO RELINQUISHING RIGHTS GUARANTEED BY THIS TITLE; OR

(2) BRING ECONOMIC PRESSURE ON EMPLOYEES FOR THE PURPOSE
OF SECURING THE AGREEMENT OF THEIR EXECUTIVE REPRESENTATIVE TO
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT TERMS.

(H) (G) “PUBLIC EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) HOLDS A POSITION BY APPOINTMENT OR EMPLOYMENT IN THE
SERVICE OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYER WITH COLLECTIVE BARGAINING RIGHTS UNDER
TITLE 3 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE OR TITLE 6, SUBTITLE
4 OR 5 OR TITLE 16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE; AND

(2) IS NOT A CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE.

~~(H)~~ ~~(I)~~ (H) “PUBLIC EMPLOYER” MEANS:

(1) THE STATE, INCLUDING ANY UNIT, DEPARTMENT, OR
INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE;

(2) A COMMUNITY COLLEGE LISTED UNDER § 16–702(B) OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE; AND

(3) A COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION OR THE BALTIMORE CITY
BOARD OF SCHOOL COMMISSIONERS.

(I) “PUBLIC EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) HOLDS A POSITION BY APPOINTMENT OR EMPLOYMENT IN THE
~~SERVICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~EMPLOYER~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~COLLECTIVE~~ ~~BARGAINING~~ ~~RIGHTS~~ ~~UNDER~~
TITLE 3 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE, TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 4
OR 5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE OR TITLE 16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE; AND

(2) IS NOT A CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE.

(J) (I)(1) “SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM” MEANS A WRITTEN STATEMENT
FROM A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE WHO WISHES TO BE REPRESENTED BY A PETITIONING
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.

(2) “SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM” INCLUDES:

(I) A UNION AUTHORIZATION CARD; OR

(II) A UNION MEMBERSHIP CARD.

(K) “STRIKE” MEANS ANY CONCERTED WORK STOPPAGE TO INDUCE,
INFLUENCE, COERCE, OR ENFORCE DEMANDS FOR A CHANGE IN WAGES, HOURS,
TERMS, OR OTHER CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT INCLUDING:

(1) REFUSAL TO REPORT FOR DUTY;

(2) WILLFUL ABSENCE FROM A POSITION;

(3) SLOWDOWN OF WORK; OR

(4) ABSTINENCE IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE PROPER
PERFORMANCE OF THE DUTIES OF EMPLOYMENT.

(J) (1) “STRIKE” MEANS ANY CONCERTED ACTION TO IMPEDE THE FULL
AND PROPER PERFORMANCE OF EMPLOYMENT DUTIES IN ORDER TO INDUCE,
INFLUENCE, COERCE, OR ENFORCE DEMANDS FOR A CHANGE IN WAGES, HOURS,
TERMS, OR OTHER CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.

(2) “STRIKE” INCLUDES A TOTAL OR PARTIAL:

(I) REFUSAL OR FAILURE TO REPORT TO WORK;

(II) REFUSAL OR FAILURE TO PERFORM EMPLOYMENT DUTIES;

(III) WITHDRAWAL FROM WORK;

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(IV) WORK STOPPAGE; OR

(V) WORK SLOWDOWN.

21–102.

(A) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT IT IS THE PUBLIC
POLICY OF THE STATE TO ENCOURAGE AND PROTECT THE EXERCISE BY PUBLIC
SECTOR EMPLOYEES OF THE FULL FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION,
SELF–ORGANIZATION, AND DESIGNATION OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THEIR OWN
CHOOSING, FOR THE PURPOSE OF NEGOTIATING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF
THEIR EMPLOYMENT OR OTHER MUTUAL AID OR PROTECTION.

(B) FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF THE RIGHTS DESCRIBED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AND TO PROMOTE LABOR PEACE AND THE
ORDERLY AND CONSTRUCTIVE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN ALL PUBLIC EMPLOYERS
AND THEIR EMPLOYEES, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY HAS DETERMINED THAT THE
OVERALL POLICY MAY BEST BE ACCOMPLISHED BY:

(1) GRANTING TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES THE RIGHT TO ORGANIZE AND
CHOOSE FREELY THEIR REPRESENTATIVES;

(2) REQUIRING PUBLIC EMPLOYERS TO NEGOTIATE AND BARGAIN
WITH EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS REPRESENTING PUBLIC EMPLOYEES AND TO
ENTER INTO WRITTEN AGREEMENTS EVIDENCING THE RESULT OF THE BARGAINING;
AND

(3) ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES TO PROVIDE FOR THE PROTECTION
OF THE RIGHTS OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES, THE PUBLIC EMPLOYERS, AND THE PUBLIC
AT LARGE.

(C) THE LAW OF THE STATE WITH RESPECT TO THE LABOR RIGHTS OF
PUBLIC SECTOR EMPLOYEES IS INTENDED TO FOLLOW THE RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES
UNDER THE FEDERAL NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS ACT.

21–103.

DECISIONS OF THE FEDERAL NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD SHALL
MAY BE AFFORDED PERSUASIVE WEIGHT IN ANY INTERPRETATION OF THIS TITLE.

SUBTITLE 2. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC EMPLOYERS, AND
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES.

21–201.
– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) EMPLOYEES OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYER HAVE THE RIGHT TO:

(1) ENGAGE IN CONCERTED ACTIVITIES FOR THE PURPOSES OF
MUTUAL AID OR PROTECTION; AND

(2) REFRAIN FROM ANY OR ALL ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED UNDER ITEM
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) PUBLIC EMPLOYEES HAVE THE RIGHT TO:

(1) FORM, JOIN AND PARTICIPATE IN, OR TO REFRAIN FROM
FORMING, JOINING, OR PARTICIPATING IN, ANY EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OF
THEIR OWN CHOOSING;

(2) BE REPRESENTED BY EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS, TO NEGOTIATE
COLLECTIVELY WITH THEIR PUBLIC EMPLOYERS IN THE DETERMINATION OF THEIR
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT, AND THE ADMINISTRATION OF
GRIEVANCES ARISING THEREUNDER; AND

(3) BE FAIRLY REPRESENTED BY THEIR EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE, IF ANY, IN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.

(C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION MAY ESTABLISH REASONABLE:

(1) RESTRICTIONS AS TO WHO MAY JOIN; AND

(2) PROVISIONS FOR THE DISMISSAL OF INDIVIDUALS FROM
MEMBERSHIP.

(D) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION MAY NOT ESTABLISH RESTRICTIONS AND
PROVISIONS UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION THAT DISCRIMINATE WITH
REGARD TO THE TERMS OR CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP BECAUSE OF:

(1) AGE;

(2) ANCESTRY;

(3) COLOR;

(4) CREED;

(5) GENDER IDENTITY;

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(6) MARITAL STATUS;

(7) MENTAL OR PHYSICAL DISABILITY;

(8) NATIONAL ORIGIN;

(9) RACE;

(10) RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION, BELIEF, OR OPINION;

(11) SEX; OR

(12) SEXUAL ORIENTATION.

21–202.

A PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL EXTEND TO AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE THE
RIGHT TO:

(1) REPRESENT PUBLIC EMPLOYEES IN:

(I) NEGOTIATIONS NOTWITHSTANDING THE EXISTENCE OF AN
AGREEMENT WITH AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION THAT IS NO LONGER CERTIFIED OR
RECOGNIZED; AND

(II) THE SETTLEMENT OF GRIEVANCES;

(2) (I) ON REQUEST, INFORMATION FROM A PUBLIC EMPLOYER
RELEVANT TO THE ADMINISTRATION AND NEGOTIATION OF AN AGREEMENT OR THE
PROPER PERFORMANCE OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION’S DUTIES AS THE
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ REPRESENTATIVE; AND

(II) HAVE THE INFORMATION REQUESTED UNDER ITEM (I) OF
THIS ITEM MADE AVAILABLE AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE, BUT NOT LATER THAN 30
DAYS AFTER THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER RECEIVES THE REQUEST; AND

(3) COMMUNICATE WITH ITS MEMBERS AND ELECTED OFFICIALS, IN
A MANNER AND AT TIMES AT ITS DISCRETION, CONCERNING ISSUES RELEVANT TO
THE ADMINISTRATION AND NEGOTIATION OF AN AGREEMENT.

21–203.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) ON WRITTEN REQUEST OF AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE FOR EACH
EMPLOYEE IN THE BARGAINING UNIT REPRESENTED BY THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE, THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER, AS APPROPRIATE, SHALL PROVIDE THE
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE WITH THE EMPLOYEE’S:

(1) NAME;

(2) POSITION CLASSIFICATION;

(3) UNIT;

(4) HOME AND WORK SITE ADDRESSES WHERE THE EMPLOYEE
RECEIVES INTEROFFICE OR UNITED STATES MAIL;

(5) HOME AND WORK SITE TELEPHONE NUMBERS;

(6) WORK E–MAIL ADDRESS; AND

(7) POSITION IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.

(B) THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER, AS APPROPRIATE, SHALL PROVIDE THE
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE WITH THE REQUESTED INFORMATION IN A
SEARCHABLE AND ANALYZABLE ELECTRONIC FORMAT.

(C) NAMES OR LISTS OF EMPLOYEES PROVIDED TO THE BOARD IN
CONNECTION WITH AN ELECTION UNDER THIS TITLE ARE NOT SUBJECT TO
DISCLOSURE IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 4 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL CONSIDER THE
INFORMATION THAT IT RECEIVES UNDER THIS SECTION AS CONFIDENTIAL AND MAY
NOT RELEASE THE INFORMATION TO ANY PERSON.

(2) AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY AUTHORIZE THIRD PARTY
CONTRACTORS TO USE THE INFORMATION THAT IT RECEIVES UNDER THIS SECTION,
AS DIRECTED BY THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE, TO CARRY OUT THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE’S STATUTORY DUTIES UNDER THIS TITLE.

(3) AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OR AN AUTHORIZED THIRD
PARTY CONTRACTOR MAY USE THE INFORMATION THAT IT RECEIVES UNDER THIS
SECTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF MAINTAINING OR INCREASING EMPLOYEE
MEMBERSHIP IN AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(4) ON WRITTEN REQUEST OF AN EMPLOYEE, AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE SHALL WITHHOLD FURTHER COMMUNICATION WITH THE
EMPLOYEE UNLESS OTHERWISE REQUIRED BY LAW OR THE WRITTEN REQUEST IS
REVOKED BY THE EMPLOYEE.

21–204.

(A) A EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A PUBLIC
EMPLOYER HAS THE RIGHT TO:

(1) DETERMINE HOW THE STATUTORY MANDATE AND GOALS OF THE
PUBLIC EMPLOYER, INCLUDING THE FUNCTIONS AND PROGRAMS OF THE PUBLIC
EMPLOYER, ITS OVERALL BUDGET, AND ITS ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE, ARE TO
BE CARRIED OUT; AND

(2) DIRECT EMPLOYEES OF THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER.

(B) THE STATE, THROUGH ITS APPROPRIATE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES,
HAS THE RIGHT TO:

(1) (I) DETERMINE THE MISSION, BUDGET, ORGANIZATION,
NUMBERS, TYPES AND GRADES OF EMPLOYEES ASSIGNED, THE WORK PROJECTS,
TOURS OF DUTY, METHODS, MEANS, AND PERSONNEL BY WHICH ITS OPERATIONS
ARE TO BE CONDUCTED, TECHNOLOGY NEEDED, INTERNAL SECURITY PRACTICES,
AND RELOCATION OF ITS FACILITIES; AND

(II) MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS;

(2) DETERMINE THE:

(I) SERVICES TO BE RENDERED, OPERATIONS TO BE
PERFORMED, AND TECHNOLOGY TO BE USED; AND

(II) OVERALL METHODS, PROCESSES, MEANS, AND CLASSES OF
WORK OR PERSONNEL BY WHICH GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS ARE TO BE
CONDUCTED;

(3) HIRE, DIRECT, SUPERVISE, AND ASSIGN EMPLOYEES;

(4) (I) PROMOTE, DEMOTE, DISCIPLINE, DISCHARGE, RETAIN, AND
LAY OFF EMPLOYEES; AND

– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) TERMINATE EMPLOYMENT BECAUSE OF LACK OF FUNDS,
LACK OF WORK, UNDER CONDITIONS WHERE THE EMPLOYER DETERMINES
CONTINUED WORK WOULD BE INEFFICIENT OR NONPRODUCTIVE, OR FOR OTHER
LEGITIMATE REASONS;

(5) SET THE QUALIFICATIONS OF EMPLOYEES FOR APPOINTMENT AND
PROMOTION, AND SET STANDARDS OF CONDUCT;

(6) ADOPT STATE OR DEPARTMENT RULES, REGULATIONS, OR
PROCEDURES;

(7) PROVIDE A SYSTEM OF MERIT EMPLOYMENT ACCORDING TO THE
STANDARD OF BUSINESS EFFICIENCY; AND

(8) TAKE ACTIONS NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED IN THIS SECTION TO
CARRY OUT THE MISSION OF THE EMPLOYER.

21–205.

(A) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER IS PROHIBITED FROM ENGAGING IN A LOCKOUT.

(B) PUBLIC EMPLOYEES ARE PROHIBITED FROM ENGAGING IN A STRIKE.

(C) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER OR AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION MAY NOT
INTERFERE WITH, INTIMIDATE, RESTRAIN, COERCE, OR DISCRIMINATE AGAINST A
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE BECAUSE THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE EXERCISES RIGHTS GRANTED
UNDER THIS TITLE.

21–206.

(A) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER AND ITS OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, AGENTS, OR
REPRESENTATIVES ARE PROHIBITED FROM ENGAGING IN ANY UNFAIR LABOR
PRACTICE, INCLUDING:

(1) INTERFERING WITH, RESTRAINING, OR COERCING EMPLOYEES IN
THE EXERCISE OF THEIR RIGHTS UNDER THIS TITLE;

(2) DOMINATING, INTERFERING WITH, CONTRIBUTING FINANCIAL OR
OTHER SUPPORT TO, OR ASSISTING IN THE FORMATION, EXISTENCE, OR
ADMINISTRATION OF ANY EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION;

(3) GRANTING ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE TO EMPLOYEES TO ATTEND
EMPLOYER SPONSORED OR SUPPORTED MEETINGS OR EVENTS RELATING TO AN

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

ELECTION UNDER SUBTITLE 4 OF THIS TITLE, UNLESS THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER
GRANTS EMPLOYEES AT LEAST THE SAME AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE TO
ATTEND LABOR ORGANIZATION SPONSORED OR SUPPORTED MEETINGS OR
EMPLOYEE MEETINGS;

(4) DISCRIMINATING IN HIRING, TENURE, OR ANY TERM OR
CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT TO ENCOURAGE OR DISCOURAGE MEMBERSHIP IN AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION;

(5) DISCHARGING OR DISCRIMINATING AGAINST AN EMPLOYEE
BECAUSE OF THE SIGNING OR FILING OF AN AFFIDAVIT, PETITION, OR COMPLAINT,
OR GIVING INFORMATION OR TESTIMONY IN CONNECTION WITH MATTERS UNDER
THIS TITLE;

(6) FAILING TO PROVIDE ALL EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS INVOLVED
IN AN ELECTION THE SAME RIGHTS OF ACCESS AS REQUIRED BY THE BOARD
THROUGH REGULATION;

(7) ENGAGING IN SURVEILLANCE OF UNION ACTIVITIES;

(8) REFUSING TO BARGAIN IN GOOD FAITH;

(9) FAILING TO MEET AN ESTABLISHED NEGOTIATION DEADLINE,
UNLESS A WRITTEN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER AND THE
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE PROVIDES OTHERWISE;

(10) ENGAGING IN A LOCKOUT; OR

(11) SPENDING PUBLIC MONEY TO CONTRACT WITH, USING PUBLIC
RESOURCES TO CONTRACT WITH, OR PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO AN INDIVIDUAL OR
GROUP FOR A NEGATIVE CAMPAIGN AGAINST EFFORTS BY EMPLOYEES OF A PUBLIC
EMPLOYER OR AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO:

(I) GAIN OR RETAIN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING RIGHTS; OR

(II) CERTIFY AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(B) EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS AND THEIR AGENTS OR REPRESENTATIVES
ARE PROHIBITED FROM ENGAGING IN ANY UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE, INCLUDING:

(1) INTERFERING WITH, RESTRAINING, OR COERCING EMPLOYEES IN
THE EXERCISE OF THEIR RIGHTS UNDER THIS TITLE;

– 29 –
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) CAUSING OR ATTEMPTING TO CAUSE A PUBLIC EMPLOYER TO
DISCRIMINATE IN HIRING, TENURE, OR ANY TERM OR CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT
TO ENCOURAGE OR DISCOURAGE MEMBERSHIP IN AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION;

(3) ENGAGING IN, INDUCING, OR ENCOURAGING ANY PERSON TO
ENGAGE IN A STRIKE, AS DEFINED IN § 21–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(4) INTERFERING WITH THE STATUTORY DUTIES OF THE STATE OR A
PUBLIC EMPLOYER;

(5) REFUSING TO BARGAIN IN GOOD FAITH; OR

(6) NOT FAIRLY REPRESENTING EMPLOYEES IN COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING OR IN ANY OTHER MATTER IN WHICH THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
HAS THE DUTY OF FAIR REPRESENTATION.

21–207.

(A) EACH EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE HAS THE RIGHT TO COMMUNICATE
WITH THE EMPLOYEES THAT IT REPRESENTS.

(B) (1) PUBLIC EMPLOYERS SHALL ALLOW AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE TO:

(I) MEET WITH A NEW EMPLOYEE IN A BARGAINING UNIT
REPRESENTED BY THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE WITHIN THE FIRST FULL PAY
PERIOD OF THE NEW EMPLOYEE’S START DATE; OR

(II) ATTEND AND PARTICIPATE IN A NEW EMPLOYEE PROGRAM
THAT INCLUDES ONE OR MORE EMPLOYEES WHO ARE IN A BARGAINING UNIT
REPRESENTED BY THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE.

(2) THE NEW EMPLOYEE PROGRAM DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1)(II)
OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE A NEW EMPLOYEE ORIENTATION, TRAINING, OR OTHER
PROGRAM THAT THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER AND AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE
NEGOTIATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 4 OR 5 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE, TITLE 16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, OR TITLE 3 OF THE
STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE.

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL BE ALLOWED AT LEAST 30 MINUTES TO
MEET WITH THE NEW EMPLOYEE OR TO COLLECTIVELY ADDRESS ALL NEW
EMPLOYEES IN ATTENDANCE DURING A NEW EMPLOYEE PROGRAM.

– 30 –
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(4) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A MEETING BETWEEN THE NEW EMPLOYEE AND THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE SHALL BE IN PERSON.

(II) AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY CHOOSE TO MEET
WITH A NEW EMPLOYEE BY VIDEO OR SIMILAR TECHNOLOGY IF PUBLIC HEALTH
CONCERNS NECESSITATE THAT A MEETING BE CONDUCTED REMOTELY.

(5) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER AND AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY
NEGOTIATE A PERIOD OF TIME THAT IS MORE THAN 30 MINUTES IN ACCORDANCE
WITH TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 4 OR 5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, TITLE 16, SUBTITLE
7 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, OR TITLE 3 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND
PENSIONS ARTICLE.

(6) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER:

(I) SHALL ENCOURAGE AN EMPLOYEE TO MEET WITH THE
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OR ATTEND THE PORTION OF A NEW EMPLOYEE
PROGRAM DESIGNATED FOR AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE TO ADDRESS NEW
EMPLOYEES; AND

(II) MAY NOT REQUIRE AN EMPLOYEE TO MEET WITH AN
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OR ATTEND THE PORTION OF A NEW EMPLOYEE
PROGRAM DESIGNATED FOR AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE TO ADDRESS NEW
EMPLOYEES IF THE EMPLOYEE OBJECTS TO ATTENDING.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
AND SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL
PROVIDE THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE AT LEAST 10 DAYS’ NOTICE OF THE
START DATE OF A NEW EMPLOYEE IN A BARGAINING UNIT REPRESENTED BY THE
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE.

(2) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER MAY PROVIDE THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE WITH LESS THAN 10 DAYS’ NOTICE IF THERE IS AN URGENT NEED
CRITICAL TO THE EMPLOYER THAT WAS NOT REASONABLY FORESEEABLE.

(3) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) BE PROVIDED ELECTRONICALLY TO THE LOCAL PRESIDENT
OR EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE DESIGNEE WITHIN 5 DAYS OF THE EMPLOYEE’S
FIRST CHECK–IN;

– 31 –
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
INCLUDE THE NEW EMPLOYEE’S NAME, UNIT, AND ALL EMPLOYEE IDENTIFICATION
NUMBERS, INCLUDING WORKDAY NUMBERS;

(III) EXCLUDE THE NEW EMPLOYEE’S SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBER; AND

(IV) BE CONSIDERED CONFIDENTIAL BY AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(4) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY NOT DISCLOSE THE
INFORMATION IN A NOTICE.

(II) THE EXECUTIVE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY
AUTHORIZE A THIRD–PARTY CONTRACTOR TO USE THE INFORMATION IN A NOTICE,
AS DIRECTED BY THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE, TO FULFILL THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE’S STATUTORY DUTIES.

21–208.

AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION CERTIFIED AS THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE SHALL:

(1) SERVE AS THE SOLE AND EXCLUSIVE BARGAINING AGENT FOR ALL
EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT;

(2) REPRESENT FAIRLY AND WITHOUT DISCRIMINATION ALL
EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT, WHETHER OR NOT THE EMPLOYEES ARE
MEMBERS OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR ARE PAYING DUES OR OTHER
CONTRIBUTIONS TO IT OR PARTICIPATING IN ITS AFFAIRS; AND

(3) PROMPTLY FILE WITH THE BOARD ALL CHANGES AND
AMENDMENTS TO THE ORGANIZATION’S GOVERNING DOCUMENTS.

21–209.

(A) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION IS ENTITLED TO MEMBERSHIP DUES
DEDUCTION, ON PRESENTATION BY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OF:

(1) DUES DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION CARDS;

(2) ELECTRONIC MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION; OR

– 32 –
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(3) OTHER METHOD BY WHICH AN EMPLOYEE HAS MANIFESTED
ASSENT FOR MEMBERSHIP DUES DEDUCTION.

(B) (1) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL COMMENCE MAKING DUES
DEDUCTIONS AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE, BUT NOT LATER THAN 30 DAYS AFTER
RECEIVING THE PROOF PRESENTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL TRANSMIT MEMBERSHIP DUES TO
THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DEDUCTIONS ARE
MADE.

(3) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL ACCEPT AN AUTHORIZATION TO
DEDUCT FROM THE SALARY OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE AN AMOUNT FOR THE PAYMENT
OF DUES IN ANY FORMAT AUTHORIZED UNDER § 21–106 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW
ARTICLE.

(C) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE AN EMPLOYEE TO
BECOME A MEMBER OF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.

(D) (1) THE RIGHT OF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO MEMBERSHIP
DUES DEDUCTION SHALL REMAIN IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT UNTIL:

(I) AN EMPLOYEE REVOKES MEMBERSHIP IN ACCORDANCE
WITH A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT OR THE MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION;

(II) THE EMPLOYEE CANCELS MEMBERSHIP DUES DEDUCTION
UNDER § 2–403 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE; OR

(III) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
EMPLOYEE IS NO LONGER EMPLOYED BY THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER.

(2) IF WITHIN A PERIOD OF 1 YEAR, THE EMPLOYEE IS EMPLOYED BY
THE SAME PUBLIC EMPLOYER IN A POSITION REPRESENTED BY THE SAME
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE, THE RIGHT TO MEMBERSHIP DUES DEDUCTION
SHALL BE AUTOMATICALLY REINSTATED.

(E) IF THE EMPLOYEE WHO HAS CONSENTED TO DUES DEDUCTION IS
EITHER REMOVED FROM A PUBLIC EMPLOYER’S PAYROLL OR OTHERWISE PLACED
ON AN INVOLUNTARY OR VOLUNTARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE, WHETHER PAID OR
UNPAID, THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE’S MEMBERSHIP DUES DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION
SHALL:

(1) REMAIN EFFECTIVE; AND

– 33 –
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) BE CONTINUED ON THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE’S RETURN TO THE
PAYROLL OR RESTORATION TO ACTIVE EMPLOYMENT FROM A LEAVE OF ABSENCE.

(F) IF AN AUTHORIZATION FOR A PUBLIC EMPLOYER TO MAKE
MEMBERSHIP DUES DEDUCTION WAS IN EFFECT ON JUNE 30, 2023:

(1) THE RIGHT OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO MEMBERSHIP
DUES DEDUCTION SHALL CONTINUE UNLESS THE RIGHT IS TERMINATED UNDER
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(2) THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO
PRESENT NEW AUTHORIZATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

21–210.

(A) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER OR ITS OFFICERS, OR AN AGENT OF THE PUBLIC
EMPLOYER, MAY NOT SPEND PUBLIC MONEY, USE PUBLIC RESOURCES, OR PROVIDE
ASSISTANCE TO AN INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP FOR A NEGATIVE CAMPAIGN AGAINST
EFFORTS BY EMPLOYEES OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYER OR AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
TO:

(1) GAIN OR RETAIN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING RIGHTS; OR

(2) CERTIFY AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(B) (1) WITHIN 7 DAYS AFTER A VALID ELECTION HAS BEEN SCHEDULED
UNDER SUBTITLE 4 OF THIS TITLE, THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL ALLOW PUBLIC
EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS TO ACCESS THE EMPLOYER’S
PROPERTY AND FACILITIES, INCLUDING GROUNDS, ROOMS, BULLETIN BOARDS,
INTEROFFICE MAIL, AND OTHER COMMON AREAS FOR CAMPAIGN ACTIVITIES FOR
THE ELECTION.

(2) THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER MAY NOT:

(I) LIMIT THE AMOUNT OF TIME A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE HAS
ACCESS TO THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER’S PROPERTY AND FACILITIES DURING AN
ELECTION UNDER THIS SECTION; OR

(II) ALTER OR REVISE EXISTING RULES OR REGULATIONS TO
UNFAIRLY LIMIT OR PROHIBIT PUBLIC EMPLOYEES OR EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS
FROM EXERCISING THEIR RIGHTS UNDER THIS TITLE.

– 34 –
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(3) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO ALLOW CAMPAIGN
ACTIVITIES TO INTERFERE WITH A PUBLIC EMPLOYER’S OPERATIONS.

SUBTITLE 3. PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RELATIONS BOARD.

21–301.

THERE IS A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RELATIONS BOARD ESTABLISHED AS AN
INDEPENDENT UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

21–302.

(A) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING FIVE MEMBERS:

(1) A CHAIR APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH THE ADVICE AND
CONSENT OF THE SENATE, REPRESENTING THE PUBLIC;

(2) TWO MEMBERS CHOSEN FROM A LIST OF CANDIDATES SUBMITTED
BY EACH EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH DUE
REGARD FOR ANY CANDIDATES WHO HAVE MAJORITY OR PLURALITY SUPPORT
FROM EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES, WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE
SENATE; AND

(3) TWO MEMBERS CHOSEN FROM A LIST OF CANDIDATES SUBMITTED
BY PUBLIC EMPLOYERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH THE ADVICE AND
CONSENT OF THE SENATE.

(B) EACH MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) MUST HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF AND EXPERIENCE WITH LABOR LAW,
LABOR MEDIATION, OR LABOR NEGOTIATIONS;

(2) MAY NOT BE OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYER,
OR OF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION; AND

(3) MUST BE KNOWN FOR OBJECTIVE AND INDEPENDENT JUDGMENT.

(C) BEFORE TAKING OFFICE, EACH MEMBER SHALL TAKE THE OATH
REQUIRED BY ARTICLE I, § 9 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

(D) (1) THE TERM OF A MEMBER IS 6 YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS REQUIRED BY THE
TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD ON JULY 1, 2023.

– 35 –
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) A VACANCY SHALL BE FILLED FOR AN UNEXPIRED TERM IN THE
SAME MANNER AS AN ORIGINAL APPOINTMENT.

(4) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(5) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
ONLY FOR THE REST OF THE TERM AND UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND
QUALIFIES.

(E) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE A MEMBER ONLY FOR INCOMPETENCE OR
MISCONDUCT.

(F) IN MAKING APPOINTMENTS TO THE BOARD, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
ENSURE, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THAT THE RATIO OF MALE TO FEMALE
MEMBERS AND THE RACIAL MAKEUP OF THE BOARD IS REFLECTIVE OF THE
GENERAL POPULATION OF THE STATE.

21–303.

(A) (1) A MAJORITY OF THE VOTING MEMBERS SHALL CONSTITUTE A
QUORUM FOR:

(I) THE TRANSACTION OF ANY BUSINESS; OR

(II) THE EXERCISE OF ANY POWER OR THE PERFORMANCE OF
ANY DUTY AUTHORIZED OR IMPOSED BY LAW.

(2) FORMAL ACTION MAY NOT BE TAKEN BY THE BOARD WITHOUT
THE APPROVAL OF A MAJORITY OF THE VOTING MEMBERS OF THE BOARD.

(B) THE BOARD SHALL SET THE TIMES AND PLACES OF ITS MEETINGS, BUT
SHALL MEET AT LEAST ONCE PER MONTH.

(C) (1) AN APPOINTED MEMBER OF THE BOARD IS ENTITLED TO:

(I) THE COMPENSATION PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET;
AND

(II) REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE STANDARD
STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

– 36 –
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(2) THE CHAIR OF THE BOARD SHALL GIVE FULL TIME TO THE DUTIES
OF CHAIR AND IS ENTITLED TO A SALARY AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

21–304.

(A) (1) THE BOARD SHALL APPOINT AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
BOARD.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR:

(I) IS RESPONSIBLE TO AND SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
BOARD;

(II) MUST HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF AND EXPERIENCE WITH LABOR
ISSUES; AND

(III) IS ENTITLED TO THE SALARY PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL PERFORM THE DUTIES THAT THE
BOARD ASSIGNS, INCLUDING:

(1) OPERATING THE OFFICE OF THE BOARD; AND

(2) KEEPING THE OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE BOARD.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY HIRE ANY STAFF NECESSARY TO
CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

21–305.

(A) THE BOARD SHALL APPOINT:

(1) A DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR EXECUTIVE BRANCH LABOR
RELATIONS;

(2) A DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL LABOR RELATIONS;
AND

(3) A DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR PUBLIC HIGHER EDUCATION LABOR
RELATIONS.

(B) THE DEPUTY DIRECTORS:

– 37 –
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ARE RESPONSIBLE TO AND SERVE AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
BOARD;

(2) MUST HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF AND EXPERIENCE WITH LABOR
ISSUES AND THE SUBJECT MATTER AREA ASSOCIATED WITH THEIR POSITIONS; AND

(3) ARE ENTITLED TO THE SALARY PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

21–306.

(A) THE BOARD IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ADMINISTERING AND ENFORCING
PROVISIONS OF:

(1) THIS TITLE;

(2) TITLE 6, SUBTITLE SUBTITLES 4 OR AND 5 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE;

(3) TITLE 16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE; AND

(4) TITLE 3 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE.

(B) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER POWERS OR DUTIES PROVIDED FOR
ELSEWHERE IN THIS TITLE, TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 4 OR 5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE,
TITLE 16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, AND TITLE 3 OF THE STATE
PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE, THE BOARD MAY:

(1) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR, SUPERVISE THE CONDUCT OF, AND
RESOLVE DISPUTES ABOUT ELECTIONS FOR EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES;

(2) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR AND RESOLVE DISPUTES ABOUT
PETITIONS FOR BARGAINING UNIT CLARIFICATION;

(3) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR AND RESOLVE DISPUTES ABOUT
PETITIONS AND ELECTIONS FOR DECERTIFICATION OF AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE;

(4) INVESTIGATE AND TAKE APPROPRIATE ACTION IN RESPONSE TO
COMPLAINTS OF UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES, INCLUDING STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS;

(5) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR AND RESOLVE DISPUTES ABOUT
THE NEGOTIABILITY OF BARGAINING SUBJECTS;

– 38 –
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(6) ON APPLICATION BY AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION OR PUBLIC EMPLOYER, DETERMINE THAT THE APPLICANT SHALL BE
DESIGNATED AS A JOINT PUBLIC EMPLOYER OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES IN AN
EMPLOYER–EMPLOYEE BARGAINING UNIT DETERMINED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBTITLE 4 OF THIS TITLE WHEN SUCH DETERMINATION WOULD BEST EFFECTUATE
THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(7) RESOLVE MATTERS AS PROVIDED IN §§ 6–408, 6–510, AND 16–711
§§ 6–406, 6–507, AND 16–707 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(C) THE BOARD SHALL HAVE BROAD DISCRETION TO TAKE AND ORDER
REMEDIAL ACTIONS WHEN IT FINDS THAT A PARTY HAS COMMITTED AN UNFAIR
LABOR PRACTICE, INCLUDING THE RESTORATION OF ANY RIGHT, PAY, STATUS, OR
BENEFIT LOST BY A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE OR GROUP OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES, DUE TO
VIOLATIONS OF THIS TITLE.

(D) TO ENFORCE THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE BOARD MAY:

(1) ISSUE SUBPOENAS; AND

(2) ADMINISTER OATHS AND AFFIRMATIONS, EXAMINE WITNESSES,
AND RECEIVE EVIDENCE.

(E) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT AND ENFORCE REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND
POLICIES TO CARRY OUT THIS TITLE.

(2) THE BOARD MAY NOT ADOPT ANY REGULATION, GUIDELINE, OR
POLICY THAT:

(I) UNNECESSARILY DELAYS THE RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES
OVER ELECTIONS, UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES, OR ANY OTHER MATTER UNDER THIS
TITLE; OR

(II) RESTRICTS OR WEAKENS THE PROTECTIONS PROVIDED TO
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS UNDER THIS TITLE OR UNDER
REGULATIONS.

21–307.

(A) (1) IF A PARTY HAS BEEN CHARGED WITH ENGAGING IN OR HAS
ENGAGED IN AN UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE, THE APPROPRIATE DEPUTY DIRECTOR
SHALL INVESTIGATE THE CHARGE.

– 39 –
END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IF THE BOARD, THROUGH THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR’S
INVESTIGATION, FINDS THAT PROBABLE CAUSE EXISTS TO SUPPORT THE CHARGE
OF AN UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE, THE BOARD SHALL:

(I) ISSUE A COMPLAINT AGAINST THE PARTY STATING THE
CHARGES; AND

(II) NOT LESS THAN 15 DAYS AFTER ISSUING THE COMPLAINT,
ISSUE A NOTICE OF A HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD OR THE OFFICE OF
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.

(B) THE BOARD MAY NOT ISSUE A COMPLAINT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2)(I)
OF THIS SECTION IF THE UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE OCCURRED MORE THAN 6
MONTHS BEFORE THE FILING OF THE CHARGE.

(C) (1) THE DEPUTY DIRECTORS SHALL ENDEAVOR AT ALL TIMES TO
SEEK INFORMAL RESOLUTION OF CHARGES OR COMPLAINTS.

(2) THE BOARD AND THE APPROPRIATE DEPUTY DIRECTOR SHALL
MAKE ALL PRACTICAL AND REASONABLE EFFORTS TO RESOLVE CHARGES AND
COMPLAINTS OF UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES IN A SWIFT MANNER.

(D) FOR THE PURPOSES OF EXAMINATION AND THE RIGHT TO COPY, THE
BOARD AND THE DEPUTY DIRECTORS SHALL AT ALL REASONABLE TIMES HAVE
ACCESS TO EVIDENCE OF A PERSON BEING INVESTIGATED OR PROCEEDED AGAINST
THAT RELATES TO A MATTER UNDER INVESTIGATION OR IN QUESTION UNDER THIS
SECTION.

(E) (1) IF THERE IS A CHARGE OF AN UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE
RESULTING FROM A PARTY’S CONDUCT IN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND THAT IS
ALLEGED TO HAVE AN EFFECT ON THE COURSE OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING:

(I) THE APPROPRIATE DEPUTY DIRECTOR SHALL DETERMINE
WHETHER THERE IS PROBABLE CAUSE FOR THE BOARD TO ISSUE A COMPLAINT;

(II) IF THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR DETERMINES THERE IS
PROBABLE CAUSE, THE BOARD SHALL ISSUE A COMPLAINT WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER
THE FILING OF THE CHARGE; AND

(III) IF A COMPLAINT IS ISSUED, THE BOARD SHALL RESOLVE
THE COMPLAINT AND ISSUE A FINAL DECISION WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE FILING
OF THE CHARGE.

– 40 –
END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(2) THE BOARD MAY ACCELERATE THE TIME TO RESOLVE CHARGES
AND COMPLAINTS IN EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY
THE BOARD.

(F) (1) THE APPROPRIATE DEPUTY DIRECTOR SHALL PROSECUTE ANY
CHARGE FOR WHICH THE BOARD HAS ISSUED A COMPLAINT IN A HEARING BEFORE
PROVIDE RELEVANT INFORMATION GATHERED IN THE INVESTIGATION OF A CHARGE
OR COMPLAINT OF UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES TO THE BOARD OR AND THE OFFICE
OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.

(2) (G) THE CHARGING PARTY HAS THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN
ANY HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD OR THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE
HEARINGS.

(G) (H) THE BOARD SHALL ACCEPT DOCUMENTS FILED BY E–MAIL.

21–308.

(A) IF A PERSON FAILS TO COMPLY WITH AN ORDER ISSUED BY THE BOARD,
A MEMBER OF THE BOARD MAY PETITION THE CIRCUIT COURT TO ORDER THE
PERSON TO COMPLY WITH THE BOARD’S ORDER.

(B) THE BOARD MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO POST BOND IN AN ACTION
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

21–309.

(A) THE BOARD IS NOT BOUND BY ANY PRIOR REGULATION, ORDER,
ACTION, OPINION, OR DECISION OR ACTION OF THE STATE LABOR RELATIONS
BOARD, THE PUBLIC SCHOOL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, OR THE STATE HIGHER
EDUCATION LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, EXCEPT FOR DECISIONS REGARDING UNIT
COMPOSITION UNDER § 21–401(C) § 21–403(C) OF THIS TITLE.

(B) THE BOARD IS BOUND BY PRIOR OPINIONS AND DECISIONS OF A LABOR
BOARD LISTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(B) (C) A PRIOR ORDER, ACTION, OPINION, OR DECISION OR ACTION OF A
LABOR BOARD LISTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION OR ANY OTHER
BODY MAY BE CONSIDERED FOR ITS PERSUASIVE VALUE.

(C) (D) THE BOARD SHALL BE BOUND BY JUDICIAL ORDERS REGARDING
THE SCOPE OF BARGAINING UNDER TITLE 6, SUBTITLES 4 AND 5 OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE.

– 41 –
END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SUBTITLE 4. ELECTIONS AND CERTIFICATION OF EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES.

21–401.

(A) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, THE BOARD
SHALL CONDUCT AN ELECTION FOR AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF A
BARGAINING UNIT IF:

(1) A VALID PETITION IS FILED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 21–402 OF
THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) THE BARGAINING UNIT INVOLVED IN THE PETITION IS
DETERMINED TO BE AN APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT UNDER § 21–403 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY NOT CONDUCT AN ELECTION FOR AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE OF A BARGAINING UNIT IF THE BOARD HAS CONDUCTED AN
ELECTION OR CERTIFIED AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE FOR THAT BARGAINING
UNIT WITHIN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12 MONTHS.

(C) (1) AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OR A BARGAINING UNIT IN
EXISTENCE ON JUNE 30, 2023:

(I) SHALL CONTINUE WITHOUT THE REQUIREMENT OF AN
ELECTION AND CERTIFICATION UNTIL A QUESTION CONCERNING REPRESENTATION
IS RAISED UNDER THIS TITLE; OR

(II) UNTIL THE BOARD FINDS THE UNIT NOT TO BE
APPROPRIATE AFTER CHALLENGE BY THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER, A MEMBER OF THE
UNIT, OR AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.

(2) (I) THE APPROPRIATENESS OF THE UNIT MAY NOT BE
CHALLENGED UNTIL THE EXPIRATION OF ANY COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT IN EFFECT ON JUNE 30, 2023.

(II) THE BOARD MAY NOT MODIFY ANY BARGAINING UNIT
DETERMINED UNDER EXISTING LAW.

21–402.

(A) A PETITION FOR THE ELECTION OF AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF
A BARGAINING UNIT MAY BE FILED WITH THE BOARD BY:

– 42 –
END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(1) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SEEKING CERTIFICATION AS AN
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE; OR

(2) AN EMPLOYEE, A GROUP OF EMPLOYEES, OR AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION SEEKING A NEW ELECTION TO DETERMINE AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(B) A PETITION SHALL:

(1) CONTAIN THE INFORMATION THE BOARD REQUIRES; AND

(2) BE ACCOMPANIED BY A SHOWING OF INTEREST FORMS FROM 30%
OF THE EMPLOYEES IN THE APPROPRIATE UNIT INDICATING THEIR DESIRE TO BE
EXCLUSIVELY REPRESENTED BY THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE NAMED IN THE
PETITION FOR THE PURPOSE OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.

(C) IF THE BOARD DETERMINES THAT A REQUIRED SHOWING OF INTEREST
IS NOT ADEQUATE, THE BOARD:

(1) SHALL ALLOW AT A MINIMUM AN ADDITIONAL 30 DAYS FOR THE
PETITIONER TO SUBMIT ADDITIONAL SHOWING OF INTEREST FORMS AFTER THE
PETITIONER IS NOTIFIED OF THE DETERMINATION; AND

(2) MAY, FOR GOOD CAUSE, PROVIDE ADDITIONAL TIME TO THE
PETITIONER TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL FORMS.

(D) IF A PETITION IS SUPPORTED BY MORE THAN 50% OF THE PUBLIC
EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT, THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL
IMMEDIATELY RECOGNIZE THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE AND AFFORD TO THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE AND ITS
MEMBERS ALL RIGHTS DUE UNDER THIS TITLE.

(E) (1) A PETITION FILED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL INCLUDE SHOWING OF INTEREST FORMS PROVIDED TO THE BOARD FROM AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.

(2) THE BOARD SHALL ACCEPT A SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM
WHETHER OR NOT THE SIGNATURES ON THE FORM ARE ELECTRONIC OR
HANDWRITTEN.

(3) (I) FOR AN ELECTION THAT IS CONDUCTED TO DETERMINE
WHETHER AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHOULD REPRESENT A UNIT, A
SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM IS VALID IF THE SIGNATURES WERE COLLECTED

– 43 –
END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

WITHIN THE 18–MONTH PERIOD IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE DATE ON WHICH A
PETITION FOR THE ELECTION IS FILED.

(II) FOR AN ELECTION THAT IS CONDUCTED TO DETERMINE
WHETHER AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHOULD NO LONGER REPRESENT A
UNIT, A SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM IS VALID IF THE SIGNATURES WERE
COLLECTED WITHIN THE 90–DAY 9–MONTH PERIOD IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE
DATE ON WHICH THE PETITION FOR ELECTION IS FILED.

(4) A SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM MAY BE USED BY A PUBLIC
EMPLOYEE FOR EACH PUBLIC EMPLOYER THAT EMPLOYS THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PUBLIC
EMPLOYER SHALL PROVIDE TO THE BOARD AND THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AN
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES IN EACH BARGAINING UNIT WITHIN 2
DAYS AFTER A PETITION FOR AN ELECTION IS FILED.

(2) THE LIST REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) INCLUDE FOR EACH PUBLIC EMPLOYEE ON THE PAYROLL
FOR THE LAST PAY PERIOD BEFORE A PETITION FOR ELECTION IS FILED, THE
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE’S:

1. NAME;

2. POSITION CLASSIFICATION;

3. HOME AND WORK SITE ADDRESSES WHERE THE
EMPLOYEE RECEIVES INTEROFFICE OR UNITED STATES MAIL;

4. HOME AND WORK SITE TELEPHONE NUMBERS;

5. PERSONAL CELL PHONE NUMBER; AND

6. WORK E–MAIL ADDRESS; AND

(II) IDENTIFY EACH PUBLIC EMPLOYEE THAT SHOULD BE
EXCLUDED AS AN ELIGIBLE VOTER WITH A STATEMENT EXPLAINING THE REASON
FOR THE EXCLUSION.

(3) A PUBLIC EMPLOYER MAY NOT CHALLENGE THE ELIGIBILITY OF
A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE’S VOTE IN AN ELECTION IF THE EMPLOYER FAILS TO EXPLAIN

– 44 –
END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

AS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION THE REASON FOR
EXCLUDING A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(4) ON APPLICATION BY A PUBLIC EMPLOYER OR AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION, THE BOARD MAY DETERMINE THAT A PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL BE
DESIGNATED AS A JOINT PUBLIC EMPLOYER OF A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE WITHIN A
BARGAINING UNIT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE WHEN THE DESIGNATION WOULD BEST
EFFECTUATE THE PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE.

21–403.

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS TITLE, TITLE 6,
SUBTITLE 4 OR 5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, TITLE 16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE, OR TITLE 3 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE, THE BOARD SHALL DETERMINE THE APPROPRIATENESS OF EACH
BARGAINING UNIT.

(2) IF THERE IS NO DISPUTE ABOUT THE APPROPRIATENESS OF THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BARGAINING UNIT, THE BOARD SHALL ISSUE AN ORDER
DEFINING AN APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT.

(3) IF THERE IS A DISPUTE ABOUT THE APPROPRIATENESS OF THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BARGAINING UNIT, THE BOARD SHALL:

(I) CONDUCT A HEARING; AND

(II) ISSUE AN ORDER DEFINING AN APPROPRIATE BARGAINING
UNIT.

(B) IF THE APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT AS DETERMINED BY THE
BOARD DIFFERS FROM THE BARGAINING UNIT DESCRIBED IN THE PETITION, THE
BOARD MAY:

(1) DISMISS THE PETITION; OR

(2) DIRECT AN ELECTION IN THE APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT IF
AT LEAST 30% OF THE SIGNATURES INCLUDED IN THE PETITION ARE OF EMPLOYEES
IN THE APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT.

(C) A BARGAINING UNIT MAY CONSIST ONLY OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.

21–404.

– 45 –
END OF PAGE 45

START OF PAGE 46
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

EACH EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION THAT SEEKS CERTIFICATION AS AN
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL FILE WITH THE BOARD:

(1) A COPY OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION’S GOVERNING
DOCUMENTS THAT:

(I) GIVE INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN
ACTIVITIES OF THE ORGANIZATION;

(II) REQUIRE PERIODIC ELECTIONS BY SECRET BALLOT THAT
ARE CONDUCTED WITH RECOGNIZED SAFEGUARDS TO ENSURE THE EQUAL RIGHTS
OF ALL MEMBERS TO NOMINATE, SEEK OFFICE, AND VOTE IN THE ELECTIONS; AND

(III) DIRECT FULL AND ACCURATE ACCOUNTING OF ALL INCOME
AND EXPENSES USING STANDARD ACCOUNTING METHODS; AND

(2) A CERTIFICATION THAT THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION ACCEPTS
MEMBERS WITHOUT REGARD TO ANY CHARACTERISTIC LISTED IN § 21–201(D) OF
THIS TITLE.

21–405.

(A) (1) WITHIN 5 DAYS AFTER DETERMINING THAT A VALID PETITION HAS
BEEN SUBMITTED UNDER § 21–402 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE BOARD SHALL NOTIFY
INTERESTED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS OF THE PENDING ELECTION PETITION.

(2) WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER DETERMINING THAT A VALID PETITION
HAS BEEN SUBMITTED UNDER § 21–402 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER,
AS APPROPRIATE, SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE TO ALL INTERESTED EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATIONS REASONABLE AND EQUIVALENT MEANS TO COMMUNICATE BY MAIL
AND IN PERSON WITH EACH EMPLOYEE IN THE APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT FOR
THE PURPOSE OF SOLICITING THE EMPLOYEE’S VOTE IN AN ELECTION HELD UNDER
THIS SECTION.

(B) AN ELECTION SHALL BE HELD IN A BARGAINING UNIT WITHIN 90 DAYS
AFTER THE FILING OF A VALID PETITION FOR ELECTION IN THE BARGAINING UNIT
IN ACCORDANCE WITH GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED BY THE BOARD.

(C) (1) (I) THE BOARD SHALL CONDUCT THE ELECTION:

1. BY SECRET BALLOT; AND

– 46 –
END OF PAGE 46

START OF PAGE 47
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

2. SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, IN WHOLE OR IN PART BY IN–PERSON VOTING, MAIL, OR AN
ELECTRONIC VOTING SYSTEM.

(II) THE BOARD MAY DESIGNATE THE TIME PERIOD FOR
IN–PERSON VOTING UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH ONLY AFTER
CONSULTING WITH THE PUBLIC EMPLOYER AND EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS ON THE
BALLOT.

(III) 1. THE BOARD SHALL ALLOW AT LEAST 10 DAYS OF
VOTING FOR AN ELECTION CONDUCTED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, UNLESS AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION ON THE BALLOT REQUESTS AN
EXTENSION.

2. IF THE VOTING SYSTEM IS INOPERABLE, THE BOARD
MAY EXTEND THE TIME PERIOD FOR VOTING.

(2) (I) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION ON A BALLOT MAY REQUEST
A PREFERRED METHOD OF VOTING AT THE TIME A PETITION FOR ELECTION IS FILED
WITH THE BOARD.

(II) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE BOARD SHALL DESIGNATE THE METHOD OF VOTING BASED ON
THE REQUESTS OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS ON THE BALLOT.

(III) IF THERE IS A DISPUTE BETWEEN TWO OR MORE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATIONS ON THE BALLOT OVER THE METHOD OF VOTING, THE BOARD MAY
DESIGNATE THE METHOD OF VOTING.

(3) THE BOARD SHALL PLACE THE FOLLOWING CHOICES ON THE
BALLOT:

(I) THE NAME OF THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE, IF ANY;

(II) THE NAME OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION DESIGNATED
IN THE PETITION FILED UNDER § 21–402 OF THIS SUBTITLE WITH RESPECT TO AN
APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT;

(III) THE NAME OF EACH EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
DESIGNATED IN A PETITION FILED WITH THE BOARD, WITHIN 15 DAYS OF NOTICE OF
THE PENDING ELECTION PETITION, THAT INCLUDES THE SIGNATURES OF AT LEAST
10% OF THE EMPLOYEES IN THE APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT; AND

(IV) A PROVISION FOR “NO EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE”.
– 47 –
END OF PAGE 47

START OF PAGE 48
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) IF NONE OF THE CHOICES ON A BALLOT RECEIVES A MAJORITY OF THE
VOTES CAST IN AN ELECTION, THE BOARD SHALL CONDUCT A RUNOFF ELECTION
BETWEEN THE CHOICES THAT RECEIVED THE TWO HIGHEST NUMBER OF VOTES IN
THE ELECTION.

21–406.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
BOARD SHALL CERTIFY AS EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION RECEIVING THE VOTES IN AN ELECTION FROM A MAJORITY OF THE
EMPLOYEES VOTING IN THE ELECTION.

(B) AFTER NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A HEARING, THE BOARD MAY
DENY OR REVOKE CERTIFICATION AS EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION FOR WILLFUL FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THIS TITLE.

(C) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
BOARD SHALL CERTIFY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE WITHOUT AN ELECTION IF:

(1) A PETITION FOR AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE HAS BEEN
FILED FOR A BARGAINING UNIT;

(2) THE BOARD FINDS THAT A MAJORITY OF THE EMPLOYEES IN THE
BARGAINING UNIT HAVE SIGNED VALID AUTHORIZATIONS DESIGNATING THE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS THEIR EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE; AND

(3) NO OTHER EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION IS CURRENTLY CERTIFIED
OR RECOGNIZED AS THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BARGAINING UNIT.

21–407.

NAMES OR LISTS OF EMPLOYEES PROVIDED TO THE BOARD IN CONNECTION
WITH AN ELECTION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE ARE NOT SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 4 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE.

SUBTITLE 5. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.

21–501.

(A) REPRESENTATIVES OF PUBLIC EMPLOYERS AND EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVES SHALL MEET AT REASONABLE TIMES AND ENGAGE IN

– 48 –
END OF PAGE 48

START OF PAGE 49
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING IN GOOD FAITH AND TO CONCLUDE A WRITTEN
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING OR OTHER NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 4 OR 5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, TITLE
16, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, OR TITLE 3 OF THE STATE
PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE.

(B) EACH NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT BETWEEN A PUBLIC EMPLOYER AND
~~AN~~ ~~EXCLUSIVE~~ ~~REPRESENTATIVE~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~CONTAIN~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROCEDURE~~ ~~BY~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~A~~
~~DISPUTE~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERMS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~APPLICATIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~NEGOTIATED~~
~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~RESOLVED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~AN~~ ~~IMPARTIAL~~ ~~ARBITER~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROCEEDING~~
~~WHICH~~ ~~BINDS~~ ~~BOTH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~EMPLOYER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EMPLOYEE~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~TO~~
THE RESULT.

~~21–502.~~

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS EXCLUSIVE
~~REPRESENTATIVES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~REPRESENT~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~ENTITLED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~USE~~ ~~THE~~
GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED UNDER:

(1) TITLES 11 AND 12 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS
~~ARTICLE;~~

(2) TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE;

(3) § 14–302, § 14–408, OR § 16–510 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE; OR

(4) § 2–103.4(D) OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

(B) IF MEMBERS OF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION REPRESENTATIVE
~~REPRESENTS~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~ENTITLED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RAISE~~ ~~GRIEVANCES~~ ~~OF~~
~~PUBLIC~~ ~~EMPLOYER~~ ~~ACTIONS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GRIEVANCE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~APPEAL~~ ~~PROCEDURES~~
ESTABLISHED UNDER A PROVISION OF LAW LISTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES SHALL SERVE AS THE
~~PROCEDURE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESOLUTION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~DISPUTES~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERMS~~ ~~AND~~
APPLICATION OF MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING, NEGOTIATED AGREEMENTS,
OR OTHER FINAL WRITTEN AGREEMENTS, TO WHICH EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS
ARE THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE IS A PARTY.

(C) AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY GRIEVE ALLEGED VIOLATIONS
OF A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING, NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT, OR OTHER
FINAL WRITTEN AGREEMENT, AS THE REAL PARTY IN INTEREST UNDER A
~~GRIEVANCE~~ ~~PROCEDURE~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROVISION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~LISTED~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

– 49 –
END OF PAGE 49

START OF PAGE 50
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS SHALL HAVE
~~JURISDICTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RESOLVE~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~DISPUTE~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~MEMORANDUM~~ ~~OF~~
UNDERSTANDING, NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT, OR OTHER FINAL WRITTEN
AGREEMENT, WHEN GRIEVED THROUGH A GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE CITED IN
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

SUBTITLE 6. SHORT TITLE.

21–601.

THIS TITLE MAY BE CITED AS THE MARYLAND PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
ACT.

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

3–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means[:

(1) with regard to any matter relating to employees of any of the units of
State government described in § 3–102(a)(1)(i) through (iv) and (vi) through (xii) of this
subtitle and employees described in § 3–102(a)(2) and (3) of this subtitle, the State Labor
Relations Board; and

(2) with regard to any matter relating to employees of any State institution
of higher education described in § 3–102(a)(1)(v) of this subtitle, the State Higher Education
Labor Relations Board] THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RELATIONS BOARD.

(c) “Chancellor” has the meaning stated in § 12–101 of the Education Article.

(d) “Collective bargaining” means:

(1) good faith negotiations by authorized representatives of employees and
their employer with the intention of:

(i) 1. reaching an agreement about wages, hours, and other
terms and conditions of employment; and

2. incorporating the terms of the agreement in a written
memorandum of understanding or other written understanding; or

(ii) clarifying terms and conditions of employment;

– 50 –
END OF PAGE 50

START OF PAGE 51
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(2) administration of terms and conditions of employment; or

(3) the voluntary adjustment of a dispute or disagreement between
authorized representatives of employees and their employer that arises under a
memorandum of understanding or other written understanding.

(e) “Employee organization” [means a labor or other organization in which State
employees participate and that has as one of its primary purposes representing employees]
HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–101 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(f) “Exclusive representative” [means an employee organization that has been
certified by the Board as an exclusive representative under Subtitle 4 of this title] HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 21–101 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(g) (1) “Faculty at the Maryland School for the Deaf” means employees who
have been granted the following status by the Board of Trustees of the Maryland School for
the Deaf:

(i) after–school program counselors;

(ii) American Sign Language specialists;

(iii) athletic trainers;

(iv) behavior specialists;

(v) clerical aides;

(vi) dorm counselors;

(vii) employment specialists;

(viii) instructional technology resource specialists;

(ix) librarians;

(x) literacy and reading specialists;

(xi) occupational therapists;

(xii) orientation and mobility specialists;

(xiii) physical therapists;

(xiv) school counselors;

– 51 –
END OF PAGE 51

START OF PAGE 52
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(xv) school IEP coordinators;

(xvi) school nurses;

(xvii) school social workers;

(xviii) speech–language pathologists;

(xix) student support specialists;

(xx) teachers;

(xxi) teacher aides;

(xxii) transition coordinators; and

(xxiii) work–to–learn specialists.

(2) “Faculty at the Maryland School for the Deaf” does not include officers
or supervisory employees at the Maryland School for the Deaf.

(h) “President” means:

(1) with regard to a constituent institution, as defined in § 12–101 of the
Education Article, the president of the constituent institution;

(2) with regard to a center or institute, as those terms are defined in §
12–101 of the Education Article, the president of the center or institute;

(3) with regard to the University System of Maryland Office, the
Chancellor of the University System of Maryland; and

(4) with regard to Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of
Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College, the president of the institution.

(i) “System institution” means:

(1) a constituent institution, as defined in § 12–101 of the Education
Article;

(2) a center or institute, as those terms are defined in § 12–101 of the
Education Article; and

(3) the University System of Maryland Office.

3–102.

– 52 –
END OF PAGE 52

START OF PAGE 53
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(C) EMPLOYEES, EMPLOYERS, AND EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES
SUBJECT TO THIS TITLE ARE SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 21 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(D) (1) SUBJECT TO TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, A BARGAINING UNIT SHALL CONSIST ONLY OF EMPLOYEES DEFINED IN
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE SECRETARY AND NOT SPECIFICALLY EXCLUDED BY
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) (I) EACH SYSTEM INSTITUTION, MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY,
ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF MARYLAND, AND BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
SHALL HAVE SEPARATE BARGAINING UNITS.

(II) APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNITS SHALL CONSIST OF:

1. ALL ELIGIBLE NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEES, AS
DESCRIBED IN THE FEDERAL FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT, EXCEPT ELIGIBLE
SWORN POLICE OFFICERS;

2. ALL ELIGIBLE EXEMPT EMPLOYEES, AS DESCRIBED IN
THE FEDERAL FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT; AND

3. ALL ELIGIBLE SWORN POLICE OFFICERS.

(3) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE SECRETARY OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE SHALL HAVE THE
AUTHORITY TO ASSIGN CLASSIFICATION TITLES AND POSITIONS TO BARGAINING
UNITS AS APPROPRIATE.

(II) THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES SHALL
ASSIGN CLASSIFICATION TITLES AND POSITIONS TO BARGAINING UNITS AT THE
FOLLOWING INSTITUTIONS:

1. AT A SYSTEM INSTITUTION, THE PRESIDENT OF THE
SYSTEM INSTITUTION; AND

2. AT MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, ST. MARY’S
COLLEGE OF MARYLAND, OR BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE, THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE INSTITUTION.

(4) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW:

– 53 –
END OF PAGE 53

START OF PAGE 54
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) MARYLAND TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY POLICE
OFFICERS AT THE RANK OF FIRST SERGEANT AND BELOW SHALL HAVE A SEPARATE
BARGAINING UNIT; AND

(II) FACULTY AT THE MARYLAND SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF
SHALL HAVE A SEPARATE BARGAINING UNIT.

3–501.

(e) (1) [Negotiations] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, NEGOTIATIONS for a memorandum of understanding shall be considered
closed sessions under § 3–305 of the General Provisions Article.

(2) AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED A
PUBLIC BODY UNDER § 3–101 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE.

3–502.

(a) Collective bargaining shall include all matters relating to:

(1) wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment; and

(2) the time and manner of access to a new employee program [as required
under § 3–307 of this title] IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 21–207 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(b) [(1) Collective bargaining may include negotiations relating to the right of
an employee organization to receive service fees from nonmembers.

(2) An employee whose religious beliefs are opposed to joining or financially
supporting any collective bargaining organization is:

(i) not required to pay a service fee; and

(ii) required to pay an amount of money as determined in collective
bargaining negotiations, not to exceed any service fee negotiated under paragraph (1) of
this subsection, to any charitable organization exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code and to furnish written proof of the payment to:

1. A. the Department;

B. in the case of an employee of the Maryland Environmental
Service, the Board of Directors of the Service; or

– 54 –
END OF PAGE 54

START OF PAGE 55
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

C. in the case of an employee of an institution of higher
education specified in § 3–102(a)(1)(v) of this title, the President of the institution or the
President’s designee; and

2. the exclusive representative.

(c)] Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the representatives of the
State, the Maryland Environmental Service, a system institution, Morgan State
University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College:

(1) [shall] MAY not be required to negotiate over any matter that is
inconsistent with applicable law; and

(2) may negotiate and reach agreement with regard to any such matter
only if it is understood that the agreement with respect to such matter cannot become
effective unless the applicable law is amended by the General Assembly.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the members of
the Public Employee Relations Board shall expire as follows:

(1) one member appointed under § 21–302(a)(2) of the State Government
Article, as enacted by Section 3 of this Act, and one member appointed under § 21–302(a)(3)
of the State Government Article, as enacted by Section 3 of this Act, on June 30, 2025;

(2) one member appointed under § 21–302(a)(2) of the State Government
Article, as enacted by Section 3 of this Act, and one member appointed under § 21–302(a)(3)
of the State Government Article, as enacted by Section 3 of this Act, on June 30, 2029; and

(3) the chair appointed under § 21–302(a)(1) of the State Government
Article, as enacted by Section 4 of this Act, on June 30, 2027.

SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Public Employee Relations Board shall be the successor to the State Labor
Relations Board, State Higher Education Labor Relations Board, and Public School Labor
Relations Board, and shall have all powers and duties granted by law to those boards.

(b) Any investigation, litigation, or other action pending before the State Labor
Relations Board, State Higher Education Labor Relations Board, and Public School Labor
Relations Board on June 30, 2023 shall continue before the Public Employee Relations
Board.

SECTION 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other

– 55 –
END OF PAGE 55

START OF PAGE 56
Ch. 114 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared severable.

SECTION 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 56 –
END OF PAGE 56