START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 963 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 963 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Sales - Data Collection - County Funding 
 
 
This bill modifies provisions that require the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) to obtain specified tax sale information through an annual survey of the 
counties. Specifically, the bill (1) prohibits disbursement or the authorization of 
disbursement of specified funding to counties that have not provided required information 
and (2) requires the survey data obtained by SDAT to be for the second immediately 
preceding taxable year rather than the preceding taxable year. The bill only applies 
prospectively and SDAT may not withhold any funding from a county because the county 
failed to provide any information required on a tax sale survey before the bill’s effective 
date. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SDAT is required to issue a report each year that includes an analysis and 
summary of the information collected through an annual tax sale survey of each county. 
Each county must provide SDAT all specified information on the form that SDAT 
provides. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 963/ Page 2 
For each category of properties specified in statute, SDAT must obtain the following data 
from the counties for the preceding taxable year:  (1) the total number of properties; (2) the 
total lien amount for all properties; (3) the average lien amount for all properties; and (4) for 
each of those three data categories, disaggregated data for properties that are owned by a 
homeowner. 
 
The categories of properties for which the data must be obtained are:   
 
 
properties that are advertised for sale; 
 
properties offered for sale; 
 
propertied offered for sale that are subject to liens for water or sewer services only; 
 
properties offered for sale that are sold; 
 
properties for which there is no private purchaser and the county obtains the tax sale 
certificate; 
 
properties that are redeemed before foreclosure; 
 
properties that are subject to foreclosure by the county; and 
 
properties for which the right of redemption has been foreclosed by a private holder 
of a tax sale certificate. 
 
SDAT must also obtain the following information concerning each county’s tax sale 
process for the preceding taxable year: 
 
 
each type of charge that the county collects through its tax sale process, including 
property taxes, water and sewer charges, environmental charges, and any other local 
government charges; 
 
the length of time the tax on a property is required to be overdue before the county 
begins the process to sell the property at a tax sale; 
 
how frequently the county conducts a tax sale and the time of year when the tax sale 
occurs; 
 
whether the county conducts tax sales on behalf of municipalities in the county and, 
if applicable, which municipalities; 
 
the rate of interest the county charges on overdue property taxes; 
 
the rate of redemption interest a property owner is required to pay to redeem a 
property after a tax sale; 
 
the minimum threshold amount of unpaid taxes on a residential property that will 
cause the county to put the property in tax sale; 
 
regarding bid balance money in excess of the amount required for the payment of 
taxes, interest, penalties, and costs of the sale of a property, (1) the total aggregate 
amount of all bid balance money held by the county in a special fund pending 
distribution to property owners; (2) the total aggregate amount of bid balance money 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 963/ Page 3 
distributed to property owners; and (3) the total aggregate amount of bid balance 
money transferred to the county; 
 
whether the county has established a county tax sale ombudsman; and 
 
a copy of a specified separate insert required to be mailed to property owners.  
 
Pursuant to uncodified language under Chapter 440 of 2020, SDAT must collaborate with 
counties to obtain disaggregated data on properties that are owner-occupied and are subject 
to the tax sale process. SDAT must use the list of properties that have an approved 
application for the homestead property tax credit to help counties identify owner-occupied 
properties that are subject to the tax sale process.  
 
SDAT must collaborate with counties and the Administrative Office of the Courts to obtain 
data on properties for which the right of redemption has been foreclosed by a private holder 
of a tax sale certificate.  
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on SDAT’s website, 
along with the office’s most recent annual report, which contains data on tax sales in the 
State. The office was established in 2020, pursuant to Chapter 730 of 2019. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3