START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 997 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 997 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Consumption Permits 
 
 
This bill alters how an individual on the licensed premises of either a beer and wine 
consumption (BWC) permit holder or a beer, wine, and liquor consumption (BWLC) 
permit holder may consume alcoholic beverages. The bill specifies that an individual 
covered by a BWC permit may choose to consume either (1) a single serving consisting of 
12 total ounces of beer or 6 total ounces of wine or (2) three individual servings of beer or 
wine in any combination, each consisting of up to 2 ounces of beer or 1 ounce of wine. 
Similarly, an individual who is covered by a BWLC permit may elect to consume (1) a 
single serving consisting of 12 total ounces of beer, 6 total ounces of wine, or 
1.5 total ounces of liquor (which may be mixed with other nonalcoholic beverages) or 
(2) three individual servings of beer, wine, or liquor in any combination, each consisting 
of up to 2 ounces of beer, 1 ounce of wine, or 0.5 ounces of liquor (which may be mixed 
with other nonalcoholic beverages). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Frederick County’s operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Frederick County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to 
issue a BWC or a BWLC to holders of Class A licenses in Frederick County. The annual 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 997/ Page 2 
fee for the BWC permit is $200, and the annual fee for a BWLC permit is $400. Renewal 
of a BWC or BWLC permit may be made when the permit holder’s Class A license is 
renewed.  
 
Under either a BWC or BWLC permit, the consumption of alcoholic beverages may only 
take place on the licensed premises of the permit holder. An individual covered by a 
BWC permit may consume a maximum of 12 total ounces of beer or 6 total ounces of wine, 
while an individual covered by a BWLC permit may consume a maximum of 12 total 
ounces of beer, 6 total ounces of wine, or 1.5 total ounces of liquor (which may be mixed 
with nonalcoholic beverages). BWC and BWLC permit holders are prohibited from 
allowing an open container to be taken from their licensed premises and from serving open 
alcoholic beverages from a drive-through window.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2