START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

Chapter 100

(House Bill 982)

AN ACT concerning

State Employees – Programs and Scholarships for Human Services Careers and
Probation Agents and State Contributions to Supplemental Retirement Plans

FOR the purpose of establishing the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers to
encourage collaboration between the Department of Human Services and certain
local school systems to assist students in establishing careers in certain positions in
the Department of Human Services located in certain counties; requiring the
Department of Human Services and certain local school systems to take certain
actions regarding the Pilot Program; altering the eligibility criteria for the Maryland
Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers and the Maryland Police
Officers Scholarship Program to include probation agents who work for the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; altering the names of and
the annual appropriations to the Repayment Program and the Scholarship Program;
establishing the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship to provide
tuition assistance to students pursuing a credential or degree that is necessary to
work in or further a career in certain positions in the Department of Human Services
located in certain counties; requiring the State to make certain employer
contributions for State employees participating in certain supplemental retirement
plans under certain circumstances; requiring the Maryland Higher Education
Commission to make certain scholarship awards in fiscal year 2024; and generally
relating to the establishment of programs and scholarships for human services
careers and probation agents employed by the State, and State contributions to the
supplemental retirement plans of State employees.

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 2–303
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–132; and 18–3901 through 18–3904 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle
39. Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–3701, 18–3702, and 18–3704 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle
37. Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Probation Agents”; and 18–3801 through 18–3804, 18–3806, and 18–3807 to
be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 38. Maryland Police Officers and
Probation Agents Scholarship Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 32–101, 32–203(c), and 32–204
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 32–205(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

2–303.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CAREER” MEANS AN OCCUPATION THAT PROVIDES
OPPORTUNITIES FOR UPWARD MOBILITY AND PROFESSIONAL PROGRESS.

(3) “ELIGIBLE COUNTY” MEANS:

(I) BALTIMORE CITY;

(II) BALTIMORE COUNTY; OR

(III) PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(4) “ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM” MEANS:

(I) THE BALTIMORE CITY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM;

(II) THE BALTIMORE COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(III) THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(5) “NEEDED POSITION” MEANS THE FOLLOWING POSITIONS IN THE
DEPARTMENT IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY:

~~(I)~~ ~~CASEWORKER;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~SPECIALIST;~~

~~(III)~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~INVESTMENT~~ ~~SPECIALIST;~~

(IV) FAMILY SUPPORT WORKER; AND

~~(V)~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~SVS~~ ~~CASEWORKER.~~

(6) (5) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR
HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(7) (6) “SERVICE OBLIGATION” MEANS TO WORK IN A NEEDED
TARGETED POSITION FOR A MINIMUM OF 5 YEARS DURING THE 8–YEAR PERIOD
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION.

(7) “TARGETED POSITIONS” MEANS THE FOLLOWING POSITIONS IN
THE DEPARTMENT IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY:

(I) CHILD SUPPORT SPECIALIST SERIES;

(II) FAMILY INVESTMENT SPECIALIST SERIES;

(III) FAMILY SUPPORT WORKER SERIES;

(IV) FAMILY SVS CASEWORKER SERIES; AND

(V) SOCIAL WORKER SERIES.

(B) (1) THERE IS A PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS.

(2) THE PILOT PROGRAM SHALL BEGIN ON JULY 1, 2023, AND END
ON JUNE 30, 2028.

(2) (3) (2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO:

(I) ENCOURAGE COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE
DEPARTMENT AND ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO ASSIST STUDENTS IN

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ESTABLISHING CAREERS IN NEEDED TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT;
AND

(II) ASSIST CURRENT EMPLOYEES OF THE DEPARTMENT AND
EMPLOYEES IN TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT TO ESTABLISH CAREERS
IN TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(3) (4) (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL WORK WITH ELIGIBLE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 7–132 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE REGARDING THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(C) (1) IN HIRING FOR NEEDED TARGETED POSITIONS, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL PRIORITIZE APPLICANTS WHO:

(I) GRADUATED FROM A HIGH SCHOOL IN AN ELIGIBLE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM; AND

(II) PARTICIPATED IN THE PILOT PROGRAM THROUGH THE
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM OR AS AN EMPLOYEE OF THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) IF AN APPLICANT WHO MEETS THE CRITERIA DESCRIBED IN
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS HIRED TO FILL A NEEDED TARGETED
POSITION IN THE DEPARTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL AWARD A ONE–TIME
STIPEND OF $500 TO THE EMPLOYEE.

(D) (1) IF THE DEPARTMENT HIRES AN APPLICANT WHO GRADUATED
FROM A HIGH SCHOOL IN AN ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM TO FILL A ~~NEEDED~~
TARGETED POSITION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ASSIGN TO THE NEW EMPLOYEE A
MENTOR WHO WORKS IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(I) SOLICIT APPLICATIONS FROM EMPLOYEES TO SERVE AS
MENTORS TO NEW EMPLOYEES HIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION;

(II) SELECT QUALIFIED EMPLOYEES TO SERVE AS MENTORS
BASED ON CRITERIA DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(III) NEGOTIATE MENTOR COMPENSATION WITH EACH
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE.

(2) (3) A MENTOR ASSIGNED TO A NEW EMPLOYEE SHALL:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(I) SERVE AS AN EXPERT RESOURCE ON THE DEPARTMENT FOR
THE EMPLOYEE; AND

(II) BE COMPENSATED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR SERVING AS A
MENTOR.

(4) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CREATE A SUPPORT SYSTEM NETWORK
FOR THE EMPLOYEES WHO WANT TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(E) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE TO EMPLOYEES AND OTHER
INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS OUTSIDE THE DEPARTMENT INFORMATION REGARDING
THE CAREER OPPORTUNITIES THAT ARE AVAILABLE IN ~~NEEDED~~ TARGETED
POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE INFORMATION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE QUALIFICATIONS NECESSARY FOR EACH NEEDED
TARGETED POSITION;

(II) THE SALARY RANGE FOR EACH NEEDED TARGETED
POSITION;

(III) CONTACT INFORMATION FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO CAN HELP
EMPLOYEES OBTAIN THE QUALIFICATIONS NECESSARY FOR A ~~NEEDED~~ TARGETED
POSITION; AND

(IV) A DESCRIPTION OF AND CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE
PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS SCHOLARSHIP ESTABLISHED
UNDER § 18–3902 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL AUTHORIZE AN EMPLOYEE TO WORK IN A
~~NEEDED~~ ~~POSITION~~ ~~BEFORE~~ ~~OBTAINING~~ ~~A~~ ~~NECESSARY~~ ~~CREDENTIAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~DEGREE~~ ~~IF~~
THE EMPLOYEE:

(1) IS PURSUING THE CREDENTIAL OR DEGREE THAT IS NECESSARY
TO WORK IN THE NEEDED POSITION; AND

(2) PLEDGES TO CONTINUE WORKING IN THE NEEDED POSITION IN
THE DEPARTMENT AFTER OBTAINING THE NECESSARY CREDENTIAL OR DEGREE.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COLLABORATION WITH A SCHOLARSHIP
RECIPIENT, SHALL DEVELOP A WORK SCHEDULE THAT ENABLES THE SCHOLARSHIP
RECIPIENT TO MAINTAIN A COURSE LOAD ~~IN~~ ~~LINE~~ CONSISTENT WITH THE INTENT
OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) IF AN EMPLOYEE OBTAINS A NECESSARY CREDENTIAL OR DEGREE TO
WORK IN A NEEDED TARGETED POSITION IN THE DEPARTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL AWARD A ONE–TIME STIPEND OF $500 TO THE EMPLOYEE.

(H) THIS SECTION SHALL REMAIN EFFECTIVE FOR A PERIOD OF 5 YEARS
AND, AT THE END OF JUNE 30, 2028, THIS SECTION, WITH NO FURTHER ACTION
REQUIRED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, SHALL BE ABROGATED AND OF NO
FURTHER FORCE AND EFFECT.

(I) (H) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO ALTER THE
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR ANY OF THE TARGETED POSITIONS INCLUDED IN
THIS SECTION.

(I) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLABORATE WITH THE ELIGIBLE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE PILOT
PROGRAM, INCLUDING:

(1) ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY EACH ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM TO ASSIST STUDENTS IN ESTABLISHING CAREERS IN TARGETED POSITIONS
IN THE DEPARTMENT;

(2) THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS PARTICIPATING IN THE PILOT
PROGRAM FROM EACH ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM AND IN THE DEPARTMENT;
AND

(3) THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS AWARDED A SCHOLARSHIP FROM
THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS SCHOLARSHIP
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 18–3902 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(J) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A
REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM
IN ACCOMPLISHING THE GOALS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IN INCREASING
EMPLOYMENT IN TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT.

Article – Education

7–132.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CAREER” MEANS AN OCCUPATION THAT PROVIDES
OPPORTUNITIES FOR UPWARD MOBILITY AND PROFESSIONAL PROGRESS.

(3) “ELIGIBLE COUNTY” MEANS:

(I) BALTIMORE CITY;

(II) BALTIMORE COUNTY; OR

(III) PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(4) “ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM” MEANS:

(I) THE BALTIMORE CITY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM;

(II) THE BALTIMORE COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM; OR

(III) THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(5) “NEEDED POSITIONS” MEANS THE FOLLOWING POSITIONS IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY:

~~(I)~~ ~~CASEWORKER;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~SPECIALIST;~~

~~(III)~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~INVESTMENT~~ ~~SPECIALIST;~~

(IV) FAMILY SUPPORT WORKER; AND

~~(V)~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~SVS~~ ~~CASEWORKER.~~

(6) (5) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR
HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–303 OF THE HUMAN
SERVICES ARTICLE.

(7) (6) “SCHOLARSHIP” MEANS THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN
SERVICES CAREERS SCHOLARSHIP ESTABLISHED UNDER § 18–3902 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) “TARGETED POSITIONS” MEANS THE FOLLOWING POSITIONS IN
THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY:

(I) CHILD SUPPORT SPECIALIST SERIES;

(II) FAMILY INVESTMENT SPECIALIST SERIES;

(III) FAMILY SUPPORT WORKER SERIES;

(IV) FAMILY SVS CASEWORKER SERIES; AND

(V) SOCIAL WORKER SERIES.

(B) (1) UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM, ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL COLLABORATE TO ASSIST
STUDENTS IN ESTABLISHING CAREERS IN ~~NEEDED~~ TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES.

(2) EACH ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL ENTER INTO A
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
FOR THE PILOT PROGRAM THAT SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) CLEAR GOALS FOR THE PILOT PROGRAM AND ACTIONABLE
ITEMS TO MEET THOSE GOALS, INCLUDING IDENTIFYING SPECIFIC SCHOOLS OR
NUMBERS OF STUDENTS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(II) A COMMITMENT TO PUBLICIZE THE PILOT PROGRAM,
INCLUDING THE AVAILABILITY OF:

1. STIPENDS FOR STUDENTS HIRED TO WORK IN
NEEDED TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES AFTER
GRADUATION FROM A HIGH SCHOOL IN AN ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM; AND

2. THE SCHOLARSHIP.

(C) EACH ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL:

(1) IDENTIFY STUDENTS WHO MAY BE INTERESTED IN WORKING FOR
THE STATE AFTER GRADUATING FROM HIGH SCHOOL;

(2) PUBLICIZE THE PILOT PROGRAM, INCLUDING EMPHASIZING THE
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES AND BENEFITS;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(3) WORK WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES TO
DEVELOP INTERNSHIP OPPORTUNITIES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
AND PROVIDE COURSE CREDIT TO STUDENTS PARTICIPATING IN THE INTERNSHIPS;

(4) SCHEDULE AT LEAST ONE CAREER DAY EACH SEMESTER FOR
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES TO PRESENT TO
STUDENTS IN THE SCHOOL SYSTEM INFORMATION ABOUT CAREER OPPORTUNITIES
IN NEEDED TARGETED POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES AND
THE NECESSARY QUALIFICATIONS;

(5) WORK WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES TO
IDENTIFY THE KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS NECESSARY FOR ~~NEEDED~~ TARGETED
POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES AND INCORPORATE
TEACHING THE KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS INTO THE CURRICULUM OF A REQUIRED
COURSE; AND

(6) INCLUDE THE DISCUSSION OF CAREER OPPORTUNITIES AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES AS PART OF THE INDIVIDUALIZED CAREER
COUNSELING SERVICES IN THE CAREER COUNSELING PROGRAM FOR MIDDLE AND
HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–127 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL ASSIST AN ELIGIBLE
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION.

(E) IF A STUDENT IS HIRED TO WORK IN A NEEDED TARGETED POSITION IN
THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES AFTER GRADUATION FROM A HIGH
SCHOOL IN AN ELIGIBLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM, THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN
SERVICES SHALL AWARD A ONE–TIME STIPEND OF $500 TO THE EMPLOYEE.

Subtitle 37. Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers AND
PROBATION AGENTS.

18–3701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Eligible employment” means to work as [a police]:

(1) A POLICE officer in the State for at least 2 years; OR

(2) A PAROLE AND PROBATION AGENT, SUPERVISOR, OR REGIONAL
DIRECTOR IN THE STATE FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) “Higher education loan” means a loan that is obtained for tuition for
undergraduate study [leading to a degree in criminal law, criminology, or criminal justice].

(d) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the Public Safety Article.

(E) “PROBATION AGENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL SERVING AS A PAROLE
AND PROBATION AGENT, SUPERVISOR, OR REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR FOR THE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

[(e)] (F) “Program” means the Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program
for Police Officers AND PROBATION AGENTS.

18–3702.

(a) There is a Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers
AND PROBATION AGENTS in the State.

(b) The Office shall distribute funds from the Program to assist in the repayment
of a higher education loan owed by a police officer OR PROBATION AGENT who:

(1) Receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a
public college or university in the State;

(2) Obtains eligible employment; and

(3) Satisfies any other criteria established by the Office.

18–3704.

The Governor shall include [an annual] IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
appropriation of at least [$1,500,000 in the State budget] $5,000,000 for the Program.

Subtitle 38. Maryland Police Officers AND PROBATION AGENTS Scholarship Program.

18–3801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Eligible institution” means a public senior higher education institution in the
State.

(c) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the Public Safety Article.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(D) “PROBATION AGENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL SERVING AS A PAROLE
AND PROBATION AGENT, SUPERVISOR, OR REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR FOR THE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

[(d)] (E) “Service obligation” means to work as a police officer OR PROBATION
AGENT in the State not less than 5 years during the 8–year period after graduation.

18–3802.

(a) There is a Maryland Police Officers AND PROBATION AGENTS Scholarship
Program.

(b) The purpose of the program is to provide tuition assistance for students WHO
ARE:

(1) Attending AN ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION AND ENROLLED IN a degree
program that would further the student’s [career in law enforcement at an eligible
institution with the] intent to [be] BECOME a police officer OR PROBATION AGENT after
graduation; or

(2) [Who are currently] EMPLOYED AS A police [officers attending]
OFFICER OR PROBATION AGENT, ATTENDING AN ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION, AND
ENROLLED IN a degree program that would further the police officer’s OR PROBATION
OFFICER’S career [in law enforcement at an eligible institution].

(c) The Office shall publicize the availability of the Maryland Police Officers AND
PROBATION AGENTS Scholarship.

18–3803.

(a) [The] EACH YEAR, THE Office shall [annually] select eligible students and
offer a scholarship to each student selected to be used at an eligible institution of the
student’s choice.

(b) A recipient of the Maryland Police Officers AND PROBATION AGENTS
Scholarship shall:

(1) Be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a Maryland high
school;

(2) Be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible institution
as a full–time or part–time undergraduate or graduate student pursuing a course of study
or program that would further the recipient’s career [in law enforcement];

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion of
the recipient’s required studies; and

(4) Satisfy any additional criteria the Commission may establish.

(c) A current police officer OR PROBATION AGENT shall be eligible for a
Maryland Police Officers AND PROBATION AGENTS Scholarship if they meet the
eligibility criteria under subsection (b) of this section.

18–3804.

The recipient of a Maryland Police Officers AND PROBATION AGENTS Scholarship
shall repay the Commission the funds received as set forth in § 18–112 of this title if the
recipient does not:

(1) Satisfy the degree requirements of the eligible course of study or
program or fulfill other requirements as provided in this subtitle; or

(2) Perform the service obligation to work as a police officer OR
PROBATION AGENT for at least 5 years during the 8–year period after graduation.

18–3806.

The Governor shall [annually] include in the ANNUAL budget bill an appropriation
of at least [$8,500,000] $5,000,000 to the Commission to award scholarships under this
subtitle, and the Commission shall use:

(1) [$6,000,000] $2,500,000 for scholarships to students intending to
become police officers OR PROBATION AGENTS after graduation; and

(2) $2,500,000 for scholarships for existing police officers OR PROBATION
AGENTS to attend an eligible institution and remain a police officer OR PROBATION
AGENT after graduation.

18–3807.

The Office shall:

(1) Publicize the availability of Maryland Police Officers AND PROBATION
AGENTS Scholarships; and

(2) To the extent practicable, award scholarships under this subtitle in a
manner that reflects ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity.

SUBTITLE 39. PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS SCHOLARSHIP.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

18–3901.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ELIGIBLE COUNTY” MEANS:

(1) BALTIMORE CITY;

(2) BALTIMORE COUNTY; OR

(3) PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(C) “ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION” MEANS A PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION
INSTITUTION IN THE STATE.

(D) “NEEDED POSITIONS” MEANS THE FOLLOWING POSITIONS IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY:

~~(1)~~ ~~CASEWORKER;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~CHILD~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~SPECIALIST;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~INVESTMENT~~ ~~SPECIALIST;~~

(4) FAMILY SUPPORT WORKER; AND

~~(5)~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~SVS~~ ~~CASEWORKER.~~

(E) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN
SERVICES CAREERS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–303 OF THE HUMAN SERVICES
~~ARTICLE.~~

(F) (D) “SCHOLARSHIP” MEANS THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN
SERVICES CAREERS SCHOLARSHIP ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(G) (E) (1) “SERVICE OBLIGATION” MEANS TO WORK IN A NEEDED
TARGETED POSITION FOR A MINIMUM OF 5 YEARS DURING THE 8–YEAR PERIOD
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION.

(2) “SERVICE OBLIGATION” INCLUDES WORK IN A TARGETED
POSITION WHILE A STUDENT IS ATTENDING AN ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) “TARGETED POSITIONS” MEANS THE FOLLOWING POSITIONS IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY:

(1) CHILD SUPPORT SPECIALIST SERIES;

(2) FAMILY INVESTMENT SPECIALIST SERIES;

(3) FAMILY SUPPORT WORKER SERIES;

(4) FAMILY SVS CASEWORKER SERIES; AND

(5) SOCIAL WORKER SERIES.

18–3902.

(A) THERE IS A PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS
SCHOLARSHIP.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE SCHOLARSHIP IS TO PROVIDE TUITION
ASSISTANCE TO STUDENTS WHO ARE ENROLLED IN A PROGRAM AT AN ELIGIBLE
INSTITUTION THAT WILL ENABLE THE STUDENT TO OBTAIN A CREDENTIAL OR
DEGREE THAT IS NECESSARY TO WORK IN OR FURTHER A CAREER IN A ~~NEEDED~~
TARGETED POSITION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES.

(C) A SCHOLARSHIP RECIPIENT SHALL:

(1) BE A MARYLAND RESIDENT OR A GRADUATE OF A MARYLAND
HIGH SCHOOL;

(2) BE ACCEPTED FOR ADMISSION OR CURRENTLY ENROLLED AT AN
ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION IN A PROGRAM THAT WILL ENABLE THE RECIPIENT TO
OBTAIN A CREDENTIAL OR DEGREE THAT IS NECESSARY TO WORK IN OR FURTHER A
CAREER IN A NEEDED TARGETED POSITION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN
SERVICES;

(3) SIGN A LETTER OF INTENT TO PERFORM THE SERVICE
OBLIGATION ON COMPLETION OF THE RECIPIENT’S REQUIRED STUDIES;

(4) MAINTAIN A CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT AVERAGE OF AT LEAST
2.5 ON A 4.0 SCALE OR ITS EQUIVALENT; AND

(5) SATISFY ANY ADDITIONAL CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY THE
OFFICE OR THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(D) THE ANNUAL SCHOLARSHIP AWARD SHALL BE 100% OF THE
EQUIVALENT ANNUAL TUITION AND MANDATORY FEES AT THE ELIGIBLE
INSTITUTION.

18–3903.

(A) (1) EACH YEAR THE OFFICE SHALL WORK WITH THE DEPARTMENT
OF HUMAN SERVICES TO AWARD SCHOLARSHIPS TO STUDENTS TO BE USED AT AN
ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION.

(2) THE OFFICE AND THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL
PUBLICIZE THE AVAILABILITY OF THE SCHOLARSHIP, INCLUDING PROVIDING
INFORMATION ON THE SCHOLARSHIP TO EVERY EMPLOYEE IN A NEEDED TARGETED
POSITION.

(B) (1) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL:

(I) (1) (I) IDENTIFY AND SELECT ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS; AND

(II) (2) (II) DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF SCHOLARSHIP
AWARDS.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL PRIORITIZE
SELECTING APPLICANTS FOR A SCHOLARSHIP WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE PILOT
PROGRAM FOR HUMAN SERVICES CAREERS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–303 OF THE
HUMAN SERVICES ARTICLE.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL PRIORITIZE
SELECTING SCHOLARSHIP APPLICANTS WHO HAVE PARTICIPATED IN THE PILOT
~~PROGRAM.~~

(C) THE OFFICE SHALL:

(1) AWARD SCHOLARSHIPS TO APPLICANTS SELECTED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES IN THE AMOUNTS DETERMINED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES; AND

(2) PROVIDE OVERSIGHT RELATED TO THE SERVICE OBLIGATION OF
THE SCHOLARSHIP.

(D) A SCHOLARSHIP RECIPIENT SHALL REPAY THE OFFICE THE FUNDS
RECEIVED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AS SET FORTH IN § 18–112 OF THIS TITLE IF THE
RECIPIENT DOES NOT:

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) SATISFY THE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ELIGIBLE COURSE
OF STUDY OR PROGRAM OR FULFILL OTHER REQUIREMENTS AS PROVIDED IN THIS
SUBTITLE; OR

(2) PERFORM THE SERVICE OBLIGATION AFTER GRADUATION.

18–3904.

FUNDING FOR THE SCHOLARSHIP SHALL BE AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

32–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) (1) “Eligible employee” means a member of the Employees’ Pension System
or the Employees’ Retirement System who is subject to Selection C (Combination Formula)
as provided in § 22–221 of this article, other than:

(i) an employee of a participating governmental unit or a former
participating governmental unit that has withdrawn; or

(ii) a member of the Employees’ Pension System who transferred
from the Employees’ Retirement System after April 1, 1998.

(2) “Eligible employee” includes:

(i) a member of the Employees’ Pension System who contributes to
a State supplemental plan authorized by an employing institution as defined in § 30–101
of this article; or

(ii) a member of the Employees’ Pension System who is an employee
of the Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority.

(c) “Optional Defined Contribution System” means the system established under
§ 32–201 of this title.

(d) “Participating employee” means an eligible employee who participates in the
Optional Defined Contribution System.

(e) (1) “State supplemental plan” means a plan qualified under the Internal
Revenue Code and:

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 100

(i) administered by the Supplemental Board; or

(ii) authorized for eligible employees by an employing institution as
defined in § 30–101 of this article.

(2) “State supplemental plan” includes:

(i) a salary reduction plan qualified under § 401(k) of the Internal
Revenue Code;

(ii) a tax sheltered annuity plan qualified under § 403(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code;

(iii) a deferred compensation plan qualified under § 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code; or

(iv) a plan qualified under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.

(f) “Supplemental Board” means the State Board of Trustees of the Maryland
Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans established under §
35–201 of this article.

32–203.

(c) A participating employee’s interest in the plans under the Optional Defined
Contribution System:

(1) shall immediately be 100% vested;

(2) shall be held in trust for the exclusive benefit of the participating
employee, except as otherwise required under § 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code for
investments held under a plan that qualifies under § 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code;
and

(3) may be distributed only at the times, in the manner, to the extent, and
to the individuals that allow the plans to maintain their tax qualified status under the
Internal Revenue Code.

32–204.

The participating employee contributions shall be made as payrolls are paid by
payroll deduction or by a reduction in salary in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code
and as provided by the applicable State supplemental plan.

32–205.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 100 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) [For] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, FOR each
participating employee who makes contributions under § 32–204 of this subtitle, [to the
extent funds are provided in the State budget,] the State [may] SHALL contribute to the
applicable State supplemental plan employer contributions an amount equal to the lesser
of the participating employee’s contributions or $600 per fiscal year.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF A
PARTICIPATING EMPLOYEE WHO MAKES CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER § 32–204 OF THIS
SUBTITLE PROVIDES DOCUMENTATION TO THE STATE OF THE AMOUNT THE
EMPLOYEE PAID TOWARD THE EMPLOYEE’S HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENT LOAN
PAYMENTS DURING THE CURRENT FISCAL YEAR, THE STATE SHALL CONTRIBUTE TO
THE APPLICABLE STATE SUPPLEMENTAL PLAN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS AN
AMOUNT EQUAL TO THE LESSER OF THE PARTICIPATING EMPLOYEE’S HIGHER
EDUCATION STUDENT LOAN PAYMENTS OR $600 PER CURRENT FISCAL YEAR.

(3) A PARTICIPATING EMPLOYEE MAY NOT RECEIVE A STATE
CONTRIBUTION UNDER PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION DURING THE
SAME FISCAL YEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Higher Education Commission shall work with the Department
of Human Services to award Scholarships from the Pilot Program for Human Services
Careers Scholarship established under § 18–3902 of the Education Article, as enacted by
Section 1 of this Act, in fiscal year 2024.

(b) The Maryland Higher Education Commission:

(1) may not delay making Scholarship awards under subsection (a) of this
section because of required updates to the Maryland College Aid Processing System; and

(2) shall consider the use of paper applications to make Scholarship awards
in fiscal year 2024.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023. ~~It~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~5~~ ~~years~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~
~~2028,~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~
~~and~~ ~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18