START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 562

Chapter 562

(House Bill 914)

AN ACT concerning

Public Service Commission – Judicial Review – Proceedings

FOR the purpose of clarifying that a certain proceeding for judicial review of a final decision
or order by the Public Service Commission may be instituted in a circuit court for a
county in which the public service company that is a party to the proceeding provides
service or in the Circuit Court for Baltimore City; and generally relating to
proceedings for judicial review of a final decision or order by the Public Service
Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 3–202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 3–204
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

3–202.

(a) Except for the staff of the Commission, a party or person in interest, including
the People’s Counsel, that is dissatisfied by a final decision or order of the Commission may
seek judicial review of the decision or order as provided in this subtitle.

(b) The Secretary of Natural Resources may seek judicial review under this
subtitle of a final decision or order of the Commission made under §§ 7–201 through 7–204,
§ 7–207, or § 7–208 of this article that relates to the environmental aspects of power plant
siting.

(c) The Secretary of the Environment may seek judicial review of a final decision
or order of the Commission made under §§ 7–205 and 7–206 of this article.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 562 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) If the Motor Vehicle Administration suspends or revokes the registration of a
motor vehicle carrier in accordance with an order of the Commission, only the order of the
Commission is subject to review under this section.

3–204.

(a) A proceeding for review under § 3–202 of this subtitle shall be instituted in:

(1) the circuit court [in equity] for any county in which the public service
company [involved] THAT WAS A PARTY in the proceeding [operates] PROVIDES
SERVICE; or

(2) the Circuit Court [in equity] for Baltimore City.

(b) If more than one proceeding to review an order or final decision of the
Commission is instituted, on motion of any party, the court may transfer the proceeding to
another court that has jurisdiction.

(c) If a rehearing by the Commission is applied for, a proceeding for judicial
review may be filed after service of the decision of the Commission that denies the
rehearing.

(d) The Commission may be a party to an appeal made under this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2