START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 909 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 909 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, 
and Home Inspectors - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date for the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, 
Appraisal Management Companies, and Home Inspectors within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MDL) by three years to July 1, 2026. The bill also requires an independent 
evaluation of the commission. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. In FY 2024 only, special fund expenditures increase 
by between $50,000 and $75,000 to hire a consultant for the required evaluation. Special 
fund revenues and expenditures for the commission are otherwise maintained from 
FY 2024 through 2026. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDL must hire a consultant to conduct an independent evaluation to 
determine if the commission is adhering to the most recent Uniform Standards of 
Professional Appraisal Practice’s diversity, equity, and inclusion guidelines in its 
regulation of real estate appraisers and appraisal management companies in the State. 
 
The evaluation must be conducted in consultation with the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) in the Department of Legislative Services. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 909/ Page 2 
The report must be (1) completed for consideration by the committees of jurisdiction during 
the 2024 legislative session and (2) submitted by MDL, as specified, by January 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapter 594 of 1990 established the commission (formerly 
the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers) to implement and administer a real estate 
appraiser licensing and certification program that complies with federal law. Commission 
authority was later expanded to include home inspectors (2001) and appraisal management 
companies (2011). 
 
Federal law requires all states to implement an appraisal licensing program in accordance 
with federal requirements. The commission fulfills that requirement. 
 
The commission is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program 
Evaluation Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by OPEGA within DLS 
prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed 
by specified entities or by legislation. The commission is scheduled to terminate 
July 1, 2023; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. 
Accordingly, the commission requires reauthorizing legislation. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDL advised for a prior introduction of the bill that an exact 
estimate of the cost to hire the independent consultant cannot be determined. However, the 
department assumed the cost to total between $50,000 and $75,000. Any such cost is 
assumed to be incurred in fiscal 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 213 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 827 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 909/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3