START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 916 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 916 
(Baltimore City Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Violation Procedures and Fines 
 
 
This bill alters the revocation and suspension procedures of the Baltimore City Board of 
License Commissioners by permitting the board to make an offer of compromise, as 
specified, to a license holder of an alleged violation instead of conducting a hearing. The 
bill alters the maximum fines for certain violations of Title 12 of the Alcoholic Beverages 
Article. The board must adopt regulations to implement the bill. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in Baltimore City revenues from monetary penalties for 
the offer of compromise and maximum fines imposed for certain offenses, under the bill, 
as discussed below; otherwise, implementation of the bill can be handled with existing 
resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill alters the revocation and suspension procedures that apply to 
Baltimore City pursuant to § 4-603 of the Alcoholic Beverages Article, by adding the offer 
of compromise to the revocation and suspension procedures:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 916/ Page 2 
Revocation and Suspension Procedures 
 
When the board notifies a license holder of a violation alleged against the license and gives 
notice for the license holder to appear for a hearing, the board may offer as a compromise, 
on a form provided by the board, a monetary penalty if the license holder agrees to:   
 
 
voluntarily waive the right to a hearing under § 4-603 of the Alcoholic Beverages 
Article; 
 
admit to the facts of the violation as alleged; 
 
take the corrective action prescribed in the offer made by the board; and 
 
accept the monetary penalty offered. 
 
Board Action on a License Holder’s Acceptance of the Offer of Compromise 
 
If an offer of compromise is accepted by a license holder, as specified, the board must:   
 
 
keep a record of the initial violation alleged against the license holder or the licensed 
establishment; 
 
issue a written finding that the offer of compromise does not impair the promotion 
of the peace or safety of the community; 
 
as soon as practicable, state the license holder’s acceptance of the offer of 
compromise on the record at a hearing of the board; and 
 
post the result of the board’s decision in a place accessible by the public. 
 
License Holder Does Not Accept the Offer of Compromise 
 
If a license holder does not accept the offer of compromise made by the board, as specified, 
the license holder may accept service of notice of the complaint from the board and inform 
the board of its intent to exercise the right to hearing under § 4-603 of the Alcoholic 
Beverages Article.  
 
The bill makes a technical change to § 4-606 of the Alcoholic Beverages Article that is 
nonsubstantive. 
 
Maximum Fine for Certain Violations 
 
Except as specified, a license holder whose violation is cause for suspension of a license is 
subject to a maximum fine of $20,000 for each subsequent offense. The bill also specifies 
that a license holder is subject to the maximum fine of $20,000 for the offense of 
publicizing, selling tickets for, organizing, operating, producing, facilitating, or staging a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 916/ Page 3 
pub crawl with the knowledge or a reason to know that a pub crawl promoter’s permit is 
required under the law and has not been obtained. 
 
Current Law:  A local licensing board may revoke or suspend a license in accordance 
with Title 4, Subtitle 6 of the Alcoholic Beverages Article. Generally, revocation or 
suspension procedures may be started by a local licensing board on its own initiative; on 
the complaint of a peace officer; on the complaint of the mayor and council of a 
municipality, if a license holder is located in a municipality within a county; or on the 
written complaint of at least 10 residents, real estate owners, or voters of the precinct in 
which the licensed premises is located. A license holder against whom proceedings are 
brought is entitled to a hearing on the charges in the complaint and must receive notice of 
the hearing at least 10 days before the hearing date. 
 
Except as specified, a license holder whose violation is cause for suspension of a license is 
subject to a maximum fine of $3,000 for each subsequent offense. A license holder is 
subject to the maximum fine of $3,000 for the offense of publicizing, selling tickets for, 
organizing, operating, producing, facilitating, or staging a pub crawl with the knowledge 
or a reason to know that a pub crawl promoter’s permit is required under the law and has 
not been obtained. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Potential increase in Baltimore City revenues due to the added 
revocation and suspension procedure of an offer of compromise instead of a hearing, under 
the bill. To the extent a license holder agrees to an offer of compromise for an alleged 
violation, rather than exercising the right to a hearing, collection of monetary penalties may 
increase. Also, the increase in a maximum fine that may be imposed by the board for certain 
offenses may increase revenues. Department of Legislative Services estimates that the 
procedural requirements under the bill for the offer of compromise can be handled with the 
board’s existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 847 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 916/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4