START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 570

Chapter 570

(House Bill 910)

AN ACT concerning

Energy Storage – Targets and Maryland Energy Storage Program –
Establishment

FOR the purpose of requiring the Public Service Commission to establish certain targets
for the deployment of new energy storage devices in the State; requiring the
Commission to establish and implement the Maryland Energy Storage Program to
meet certain energy storage goals and develop a certain energy storage system in the
State; and generally relating to energy storage in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, ~~without~~ with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–216(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–216.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Energy storage systems provide benefits to the electric grid and utility
customers by: enabling the transition to a clean grid with diversified renewable resources;
creating system efficiencies that can reduce costs and save money for utilities and
ratepayers; bolstering grid reliability and resilience; improving system capabilities to
withstand shocks and stressors; and promoting economic development and job creation in
Maryland communities; now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

7–216.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Energy storage device” means a resource capable of absorbing
electrical energy, storing it for a period of time, and delivering the energy for use at a later
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 570 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

time as needed, regardless of where the resource is located on the electric distribution
system.

(ii) “Energy storage device” includes all types of electric storage
technologies, regardless of their size, storage medium, or operational purpose, INCLUDING:

1. THERMAL STORAGE;

2. ELECTROCHEMICAL STORAGE;

3. VIRTUAL POWER PLANTS; AND

4. HYDROGEN–BASED STORAGE.

(3) “Investor–owned electric company” means an electric company that is
not a municipal electric utility or an electric cooperative.

7–216.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ENERGY STORAGE DEVICE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–216 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) “DELIVERY YEAR” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN THE PJM
INTERCONNECTION GLOSSARY.

(4) “INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 7–216 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(5) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENERGY STORAGE
PROGRAM.

(B) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH TARGETS FOR THE
COST–EFFECTIVE DEPLOYMENT OF NEW ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES IN THE STATE
OF AT LEAST WITH A GOAL OF ACHIEVING:

(1) (I) 750 MEGAWATT–HOURS MEGAWATTS OF CUMULATIVE
ENERGY STORAGE CAPACITY BY THE END OF DELIVERY YEAR 2027;

(2) (II) 1,500 MEGAWATT–HOURS MEGAWATTS OF CUMULATIVE
ENERGY STORAGE CAPACITY BY THE END OF DELIVERY YEAR 2030; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 570

(3) (III) 3,000 MEGAWATT–HOURS MEGAWATTS OF CUMULATIVE
ENERGY STORAGE CAPACITY BY THE END OF DELIVERY YEAR 2033.

(2) IF A TARGET SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
CANNOT BE MET COST EFFECTIVELY, THE TARGET SHALL BE REDUCED TO THE
MAXIMUM COST–EFFECTIVE AMOUNT OF ENERGY STORAGE, MEASURED IN
MEGAWATTS, THAT CAN BE DEPLOYED BY THE END OF THE DELIVERY YEAR FOR THE
TARGET.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH THE MARYLAND ENERGY
STORAGE PROGRAM.

(2) THE PROGRAM SHALL BE IMPLEMENTED NO LATER THAN JULY 1,
~~2024~~ 2025.

(3) THE PROGRAM SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT MECHANISMS TO REACH A
MINIMUM OF 3,000 MEGAWATTS OF ENERGY STORAGE, OR THE MAXIMUM
COST–EFFECTIVE AMOUNT OF ENERGY STORAGE THAT CAN BE DEPLOYED, BY THE
END OF DELIVERY YEAR 2033;.

(4) THE PROGRAM MAY INCLUDE:

(II) (I) A SYSTEM OF ENERGY STORAGE CREDITS AND
MARKET–BASED INCENTIVES DESIGNED TO:

1. DEVELOP A ROBUST ENERGY STORAGE MARKET IN
THE STATE; AND

2. DEPLOY ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES IN A
COST–EFFECTIVE MANNER;

(III) POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENTS THAT ARE
COMPETITIVELY BID BY INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANIES TO INITIATE
~~CONTRACTS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ENERGY~~ ~~STORAGE~~ ~~DEVICES~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~CREDITS~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~ENERGY~~
STORAGE PROJECTS UNDER § 7–216 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) A REQUIREMENT THAT INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANIES:

1. INSTALL OR CONTRACT FOR ENERGY STORAGE
DEVICES; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 570 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. CONTRACT FOR CREDITS FROM AN ENERGY STORAGE
PROJECT UNDER § 7–216 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(IV) (III) A REQUIREMENT THAT PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS
MAKE REASONABLE EFFORTS TO APPLY FOR ALL APPLICABLE STATE AND FEDERAL
GRANTS, REBATES, TAX CREDITS, LOAN GUARANTEES, AND OTHER SIMILAR
BENEFITS AS THE BENEFITS BECOME AVAILABLE; OR

(IV) ANY OTHER MECHANISM OR POLICY THAT THE COMMISSION
DETERMINES IS APPROPRIATE TO ACHIEVE THE GOAL OF A ROBUST,
COST–EFFECTIVE ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM IN THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 31,
2023, the Commission shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257
of the State Government Article, on pending designs for the Maryland Energy Storage
Program and any additional statutory changes required to fully implement an effective
Maryland Energy Storage Program to meet the minimum targets for the deployment of new
energy storage devices under § 7–216.1 of the Public Utilities Article, as enacted by Section
1 of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4