START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 988 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 988 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program - Modifications 
 
 
This bill modifies the Family and Medical Leave Insurance (FAMLI) Program by altering 
key administrative deadlines, technical definitions, and components of the program’s 
administration. The start dates for required contributions and benefit payments are delayed 
by one year to October 1, 2024, and January 1, 2026, respectively. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) is required to reimburse certain service providers for some 
or all of the employer share of FAMLI contributions on at least a quarterly basis, as 
specified. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No substantive effect in FY 2023. General fund expenditures for MDL 
administrative costs decrease in FY 2024 and increase in FY 2025. General fund 
expenditures increase by $25.6 million in FY 2025 and by at least $35.5 million annually 
thereafter for provider reimbursements. State expenditures (all funds) decrease by 
$28.7 million in FY 2024 and by $10.0 million in FY 2025 due to the delay in required 
contributions. Net special fund revenues and expenditures for the FAMLI Fund decrease 
as shown below due to the delay in contributions and benefit payments, offset in part due 
to program changes with continuous effects. Overall costs to administer the FAMLI 
program under current law and the bill are assumed to be generally comparable, although 
costs may rise somewhat with claims volume if the bill incentivizes additional claims. This 
bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
(-) 
$25.6 
$35.5 
$37.1 
$38.7 
SF Expenditure 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
- 
- 
GF/SF/FF/HE Exp. 
($28.7) 
($10.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
NonBud Exp. 
(-) 
(-) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$28.7 
($15.6) 
($35.5) 
($37.1) 
($38.7) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 988/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures for employer contributions are delayed by one year until 
October 1, 2024, but the overall effect on expenditures cannot be determined, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In addition to various minor, technical, and conforming changes to the 
FAMLI Program and its administrative processes, the bill’s significant changes include:   
 
 
the program’s start dates for contributions and benefit payments are delayed by 
one year, to October 1, 2024, and January 1, 2026, respectively; 
 
the Secretary of Labor must set the initial total rate of contribution by 
October 1, 2023, which applies from October 1,2024, through June 30, 2026, and 
may not exceed 1.2% of an employee’s wages (as under current law, the rate applies 
to all wages up to and including the Social Security wage base); 
 
the employer/employee contribution split is set at 50%/50%, rather than being 
determined by the Secretary of Labor after study every two years; 
 
an individual is no longer required to exhaust all forms of employer-provided leave 
that is not required under law before receiving FAMLI benefits, although an 
employer can require that FAMLI benefits be coordinated with other benefits or 
leave, as specified;  
 
an individual and an employer may agree to use paid leave and FAMLI benefits to 
replace up to 100% of the individual’s average weekly wage during the 
FAMLI leave period; 
 
MDH is required to reimburse certain service providers for some or all of the 
employer share of FAMLI contributions on at least a quarterly basis, as detailed 
further below (previously this was similar intent language); and 
 
the Secretary of Labor must conduct a cost analysis every year, instead of every 
two years, to determine the appropriate total rate of contribution to the FAMLI Fund 
for the following 12-month period beginning July 1, and report the information as 
specified. 
 
Other changes include increasing specificity in certain reports, explicitly defining wages 
for purposes of the program, altering the required process for sending checks for benefit 
payments to align with standard State practices, and altering claim notification 
requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 988/ Page 3 
Provider Reimbursements for Employer Share of FAMLI Contributions 
 
At least quarterly, MDH must reimburse each:   
 
 
community provider that is required to be licensed or certified under Title 7 of the 
Health – General Article for 100% of the employer FAMLI contribution for 
employees who manage or provide services under that title; 
 
community provider that is required to be licensed or certified under Title 7.5 of the 
Health – General Article for a percentage of the employer FAMLI contribution for 
employees who manage or provide services under that title that is equal to the 
percentage of revenue that is attributable to federal and State Medicaid funding and 
any other State funding received by the provider for the services during the period 
covered by the reimbursement; or 
 
provider, as defined in § 16-201.4 of the Health – General Article, for a percentage 
of the FAMLI employer contribution for employees who manage or provide 
specified related services that is equal to the percentage of revenue attributable to 
federal and State Medicaid funding and any other State funding received by the 
provider for the services during the period covered by the reimbursement. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 48 of 2022 established the FAMLI Program, to be administered 
by the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). The program provides up to 12 weeks of 
benefits to a covered individual who is taking leave from employment due to caring for 
certain family members, the individual’s own serious health condition, or a qualifying 
exigency arising out of a family member’s military deployment. The weekly benefit is 
based on an individual’s average weekly wage and is indexed to inflation. Required 
contributions to the program, which are shared between employers and employees, are also 
based on employee wages. 
 
The Act also establishes the FAMLI Fund, which is a special fund administered by the 
Secretary of Labor consisting of employee, employer, and self-employed individual 
contributions and other specified sources of funds. Funds must be used to pay FAMLI 
benefits and may be used to pay for public education on the FAMLI Program and any other 
costs associated with the initial implementation and ongoing administration of the FAMLI 
Program. 
 
MDL must establish the new program using general funds until monies from required 
contributions become available. Employer and employee contributions to the program 
begin October 1, 2023, and claims for benefits begin January 1, 2025. 
 
The Act specified the General Assembly’s intent that the State pay the required FAMLI 
employer contribution for specified community providers. The Act also specified the 
General Assembly’s intent that the State pay the covered employees’ required FAMLI 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 988/ Page 4 
contribution through June 30, 2026, for employees who earn an hourly wage of less than 
$15.00 per hour. 
 
For additional information on the program, see the Appendix – Family and Medical 
Leave Insurance Program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program and Fund 
 
State revenues and expenditures associated with the FAMLI Program and Fund are 
generally delayed by one year, including general fund expenditures necessary for start-up 
costs. Holding other factors constant, special fund revenues for the FAMLI Fund decrease 
in fiscal 2024 and 2025 and special fund expenditures decrease from fiscal 2024 through 
2026 to reflect the delay’s effects on administrative costs and programmatic activity. 
Independent from the delay, special fund revenues and expenditures for the FAMLI Fund 
may increase due to other changes in the bill, although likely not substantially enough to 
outweigh the effect of the delay. 
 
 
Administrative Costs 
 
Overall costs for MDL to administer the FAMLI Program under current law and the bill 
are assumed to be generally comparable, although the bill delays start up by approximately 
one year, which affects the timing of general fund expenditures, and overall administrative 
costs may increase somewhat with claims volume if the bill incentivizes additional claims. 
In any case, administrative costs are small in comparison to overall employer contributions 
and benefit payments once the FAMLI Program is operational. 
 
Generally, a one-year delay reduces administrative expenditures from fiscal 2024 through 
2026, before realigning with what would be expected under current law beginning in 
fiscal 2027. Ultimately, the magnitude of the effect will depend on how MDL proceeds 
with program administration; however, general funds for start-up expenses are required for 
an additional year, at a minimum, since contribution revenues are delayed by one year, 
from October 1, 2023, to October 1, 2024. Accordingly, general fund expenditures decrease 
in fiscal 2024 and increase in fiscal 2025. 
 
As described in a study procured by the Department of Legislative Services, administrative 
costs are expected to range from about $50.0 million to about $70.0 million annually, 
depending on the administrative model, once the program is fully staffed and operational. 
Start-up costs are highly dependent on the administrative model, but they are about 
$65.0 million in the two years preceding benefit payments for insourced and co-sourced 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 988/ Page 5 
models, or about $19.0 million in the two years preceding benefit payments for an 
outsourced model. 
 
The fiscal 2023 budget includes $10.0 million in general funds for FAMLI implementation, 
which became available in January 2023. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly appropriates the estimated remaining amount of those funds, 
$9.3 million, as special funds but does not include any further funding for the FAMLI 
Program; a deficiency appropriation may be required in the fiscal 2025 budget if the 
remaining funding is insufficient in fiscal 2024.  
 
 
Programmatic Revenues and Expenditures 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for the FAMLI Fund from contributions and 
benefit payments are delayed by one year, beginning instead in fiscal 2025 and 2026, 
respectively. Holding other factors constant, special fund revenues for the FAMLI Fund 
decrease in fiscal 2024 and 2025 and special fund expenditures decrease in fiscal 2025 and 
2026 to reflect the delay. 
 
Independent from the delays, an individual is no longer required to exhaust all forms of 
employer-provided leave that is not required under law before receiving FAMLI benefits 
and has the option to use FAMLI benefits along with existing paid leave to replace up to 
100% of the individual’s average weekly wage. These additional flexibilities may increase 
the use of FAMLI benefits and, thus, increase special fund expenditures for the 
FAMLI Fund beginning in fiscal 2026 when benefit payments begin. If benefit payments 
are sufficiently higher than under current law, the Secretary of Labor may set a higher total 
contribution rate in order to maintain fund solvency. This would increase annual special 
fund revenues for the FAMLI Fund from current projections as early as fiscal 2025 if the 
first rate is set in anticipation of additional benefit payments. Still, these effects are unlikely 
to outweigh the effect of the delay, so net increases potentially begin in fiscal 2026 for 
revenues and fiscal 2027 for expenditures. 
 
Provider Reimbursements and State Employer Share of Required Contributions 
 
Requiring MDH to reimburse specified service providers for the employer share of FAMLI 
contributions (rather than specifying similar intent) increases general fund expenditures 
beginning in fiscal 2025. Despite repeated requests, MDH did not provide any information 
on the fiscal or operational effect of these requirements. Therefore, the following estimate 
is based solely on a study conducted by Milliman Inc. under Chapter 48. The study assumes 
a total contribution rate of 0.91% and the 50%/50% employer/employee contribution split 
in the bill, but it does not account for the additional limitations on certain provider 
reimbursements or changes to benefits under the bill. Additionally, to the extent the 
contribution rate set by the Secretary of Labor differs from this projection, or MDH 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 988/ Page 6 
requires additional staff or administrative expenditures, State expenditures also differ. 
Therefore, the estimates shown in Exhibit 1 should be viewed as preliminary. 
 
The change in the cost to the State, as an employer, once contributions begin cannot be 
determined because the employer/employee contribution split and the total rate of 
contribution are set by the Secretary of Labor under current law. However, costs decrease 
in fiscal 2024, and likely decrease in fiscal 2025, due to the one-year delay in contributions 
under the bill. For purposes of this estimate, holding other factors constant, the delay 
reduces State expenditures (all funds) by $28.7 million in fiscal 2024 and by $10.0 million 
in fiscal 2025. Beginning in fiscal 2026, State expenditures for employer contributions are 
estimated to be at least $41.7 million annually, although those should not be considered 
new costs. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Change in State Expenditures for Employer Contributions  
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Community Provider 
Reimbursements 
$0.0 
$25.6 
$35.5 
$37.1 
$38.7 
State Contribution as an 
Employer 
(28.7) 
(10.0) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net Effect 
($28.7) 
$15.6 
$35.5 
$37.1 
$38.7 
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. Milliman’s estimates, which are used for these 
preliminary provider reimbursement estimates, have been adjusted to fiscal years. State expenditures for 
employer contributions reflect only the one-year delay under the bill; expenditures after the delay continue 
in perpetuity but are not new costs. The effect shown for the State contribution as an employer assumes the 
employer/employee split would have been set at 50%/50% by the Secretary of Labor under current law. 
 
Source:  Milliman, Inc.; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures for employer contributions are delayed by 
one year until October 1, 2024, but the overall effect cannot be determined for the same 
reasons described above for the State government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill makes several significant changes to the FAMLI Program, 
including delaying employer contributions by one year and adding flexibility to FAMLI 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 988/ Page 7 
benefit eligibility for employees. Such changes are likely significant for small businesses, 
particularly those that incentivize additional paid days of leave. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 828 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Milliman, Inc.; Spring Consulting Group; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 17, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 988/ Page 8 
Appendix – Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program 
 
 
Chapter 48 of 2022 established the Family and Medical Leave Insurance (FAMLI) 
Program, to be administered by the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). The program 
provides up to 12 weeks of benefits to a covered individual who is taking leave from 
employment due to caring for certain family members, the individual’s own serious health 
condition, or a qualifying exigency arising out of a family member’s military deployment. 
The weekly benefit is based on an individual’s average weekly wage and is indexed to 
inflation. Required contributions to the program, which are shared between employers and 
employees, are also based on employee wages. 
 
Generally, employers with 15 or more employees must contribute to and participate in the 
program – although employers may instead demonstrate to MDL that they maintain a 
private plan that meets or exceeds the rights, protections, and benefits under the 
State-administered program. 
 
MDL must establish the new program using general funds until monies from required 
contributions become available. Contributions to the program begin October 1, 2023, and 
claims for benefits begin January 1, 2025. 
 
Preparation for Implementation 
 
In preparation for implementation of the FAMLI Program, MDL advises that it is 
participating in monthly meetings with other states that have passed similar laws 
establishing paid family leave programs. During these meetings, MDL has exchanged 
information relating to program administration and has begun coordination with 
counterparts in Washington, DC and Delaware to establish a cooperative relationship 
aimed at enforcing potentially overlapping programs. Such coordination is necessary as 
many workers in the region work in one jurisdiction while living in another. MDL further 
advises that it has begun meeting with interested stakeholders to understand their particular 
concerns and obtain knowledge from their expertise. 
 
As required by Chapter 48, the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with other State agencies 
and relevant stakeholders, conducted a study of the program that focused on the cost of 
maintaining solvency and paying benefits to covered individuals and studied and made 
recommendations on the total rate of contribution and the appropriate cost-sharing formula 
between employers and employees. A related actuarial analysis conducted pursuant to 
Chapter 48 provides additional program-level cost estimates, projects overall cash flows, 
and estimates costs to the State of paying employer contributions for certain community 
providers and employee contributions for employees earning less than $15.00 per hour. 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 988/ Page 9 
Also as required by Chapter 48, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) contracted 
with a consultant, Spring Consulting Group, to study and make recommendations 
regarding the capability and capacity of MDL to implement and administer the 
FAMLI Program, including recommendations regarding additional resources needed by 
MDL to meet future demands of the program. The findings and recommendations can be 
found on the DLS website. 
 
Contributions 
 
Beginning October 1, 2023, each employee, each employer with 15 or more employees, 
and each participating self-employed individual must pay to the Secretary of Labor a 
percentage contribution based on wages, which are established in regulation. The Act 
establishes a process for determining the initial contribution rates of employees and of 
employers with 15 or more employees, as well as a process for reassessing the contributions 
every two years. By June 1, 2023, the Secretary must set the total rate of contribution for 
employees and the percentage of the total contribution rate to be paid by employers with 
15 or more employees. 
 
Benefits 
 
Individuals may submit claims for benefits beginning January 1, 2025. A covered 
individual who is taking leave from employment may submit a claim for intermittent leave, 
or up to 12 weeks of benefits, to (1) care for a newborn child or a child newly placed for 
adoption, foster care, or kinship care with the individual during the first year after the birth, 
adoption, or placement; (2) care for a family member with a serious health condition; 
(3) attend to a serious health condition that results in the individual being unable to perform 
the functions of the individual’s position; (4) care for a next of kin service member; or 
(5) attend to a qualifying exigency arising out of the individual’s family member’s 
deployment, as defined by the Act. 
 
A covered individual may not receive more than 12 weeks of benefits in an application 
year, except under specified circumstances. A covered individual may take eligible leave 
on an intermittent leave schedule under specified conditions. If leave is taken on an 
intermittent leave schedule, an employer may not reduce the total amount of leave to which 
the covered individual is entitled beyond the amount of leave actually taken. 
 
The weekly benefit payable to a covered individual is calculated based on the employee’s 
average weekly wage and ranges from a minimum of $50 to a maximum of $1,000 for the 
12-month period beginning January 1, 2025. Beginning January 1, 2026, the maximum 
weekly benefit must be increased by the annual percentage growth in the Consumer Price 
Index, subject to a determination by the Board of Public Works based on expected 
economic conditions. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 988/ Page 10 
Leave Requirements and Job Protections 
 
Leave taken under the program must run concurrently with leave taken under the federal 
Family and Medical Leave Act. A covered individual must exhaust all employer-provided 
leave that is not required to be provided under law before receiving FAMLI benefits. 
 
If a covered individual is receiving FAMLI benefits or is taking leave, the employer must 
continue any employment health benefits for the time that the covered individual is absent 
from work or receiving FAMLI benefits. Additionally, the employer generally must restore 
the individual to an equivalent position of employment when the employee returns to work. 
Generally, an employer may only terminate an employee on FAMLI leave for cause and 
may only deny restoration of a covered individual’s position in circumstances related to 
economic injury. 
 
Private Employer Plan 
 
An employer may satisfy the Act’s requirements through a private employer plan 
consisting of employer-provided benefits, insurance, or a combination of both, if the plan 
is offered to all eligible employees and at least meets the rights, protections, and benefits 
provided to a covered employee under the program. An employer that provides covered 
employees with a private employer plan approved by MDL, those covered employees are 
exempt from the Act’s required contributions. 
 
Prohibited Acts and Penalties 
 
An individual is disqualified from receiving benefits for one year if the individual willfully 
makes a false statement or misrepresentation regarding a material fact or willfully fails to 
report a material fact to obtain benefits. An employer is subject to a civil penalty of up to 
$1,000 for each occurrence if the employer willfully makes or causes a false statement to 
be made or willfully fails to report a material fact regarding an employee’s claim for 
benefits. In addition, an employer is prohibited from retaliating against an employee who 
exercises their rights under the program. The Act also specifies how the Secretary must 
investigate and enforce the Act, which includes mediation, issuing orders, assessing a civil 
penalty of up to $1,000 for each employee for whom the employer is not in compliance, 
and asking the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the employee. 
 

END OF PAGE 10