START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 976 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 976 
(Delegate Henson, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Workgroup on Mold Standards and Remediation 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup on Mold Standards and Remediation to study 
information on mold assessment and remediation to determine best practices for identifying 
mold, preventing the development of mold within indoor environments, and remediating 
indoor moldy conditions harmful to public health. Specifically, the workgroup must 
(1) study information related to mold standards and remediation practices provided by 
specified industry groups, state governments, and international governments; (2) study the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 2008 Mold Remediation in Schools and 
Commercial Buildings guidelines, as revised and updated; (3) study the extent to which 
climate change may increase mold development within indoor environments; and 
(4) recommend best practices (as noted above). The Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) must provide staff for the workgroup. Workgroup members may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The workgroup must 
report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
October 1, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members and staffing costs for 
MDE are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 976/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  EPA has a host of programs and an extensive list of resources to help states 
address indoor air quality, including mold. Among other things, these resources include a 
guide entitled Mold Remediation in Schools and Commercial Buildings. EPA advises that 
there are no federal standards or threshold limit values for mold or mold spores, which 
means that sampling cannot be used to check a building’s compliance with federal mold 
standards. However, EPA advises that surface sampling may be useful to determine if an 
area has been adequately cleaned or remediated. Similarly, MDE has not developed any 
exposure limit standards for indoor concentrations of mold or mold spores, and there are 
no statewide standards or requirements for conducting mold assessments or remediation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 26, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2