START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 902 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 902 
(Delegates Pruski and Rogers) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Labor and Employment - Workers' Compensation - Hernia 
 
 
This bill establishes that a hernia caused as a result of repetitive trauma may be considered 
an occupational disease that is compensable under workers’ compensation law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
 
Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (Chesapeake) Effect:  The bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect Chesapeake operations or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  If an employee covered under workers’ compensation insurance has 
suffered an accidental personal injury, compensable hernia, or occupational disease, the 
employee is entitled to compensation benefits paid by the employer, its insurer, the 
Subsequent Injury Fund, or the Uninsured Employers’ Fund, as appropriate. Workers’ 
compensation benefits include wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational 
rehabilitation expenses. Wage replacement benefits are calculated based on the covered 
employee’s average weekly wage; medical benefits are generally fully or partially covered, 
depending on how the treatment is related to the personal injury, hernia, or occupational 
disease.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 902/ Page 2 
In order for a hernia to be compensable, the accidental personal injury or strain that caused 
the hernia must be reported to the employer within 45 days after its occurrence. However, 
if a covered employee fails to file a claim for compensation within this time period, the 
claim may still be filed within two years after the date the injury occurred, unless the 
employer or its insurer has been prejudiced by the failure.  
 
Hernias caused as a result of repetitive trauma are not generally compensable under 
workers’ compensation law, as held in the case of Greer v. Montgomery County 246 Md. 
App. 245 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2020). 
 
State/Chesapeake/Local/Small Business Effect:  Chesapeake advises that hernias caused 
as a result of repetitive trauma are a relatively rare issue for workers’ compensation, with 
one of the only notable cases being the aforementioned case of Greer v. Montgomery County. 
Moreover, if an injured employee files for workers’ compensation benefits due to this type 
of hernia, other provisions that govern workers’ compensation, including that the injured 
employee prove or demonstrate that the hernia was work related, apply. 
 
For these reasons, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State, Chesapeake, local, 
or small business expenditures for workers’ compensation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 839 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; Subsequent Injury 
Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2