START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 983 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 983 
(Delegate Allen, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Hunting, Wildlife Conservation, and Outdoor Recreation - Funding, Promotion, 
Management, Licenses, Permits, and Stamps 
 
 
This bill establishes the Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program within 
the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to – in general – increase outdoor recreation 
and stewardship, hunting, and wildlife conservation. The bill also (1) increases fees for 
several hunting licenses, stamps, and permits; (2) establishes a resident and nonresident 
sika deer stamp and related fees; (3) authorizes qualified nonresident college or university 
students to purchase a resident hunting license; and (4) codifies furbearer permit fees. The 
bill also alters Maryland’s recreational use statute, requires DNR to work with the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) to develop a plan to address deer 
overpopulation in the State, requires DNR to establish a cost-share program for farmers to 
plant forage crops under specified circumstances, and establishes a new reporting 
requirement for DNR. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by an estimated $2.3 million annually 
beginning in FY 2024. Special fund expenditures increase correspondingly for staff and 
programmatic purposes in FY 2024 and for programmatic purposes in the out-years. 
Federal fund revenues increase by an estimated $6.8 million beginning in FY 2025 from 
federal matching grant funding. Out-year federal fund expenditures reflect ongoing staff 
costs only; additional federal fund spending cannot be reliably estimated and is therefore 
not reflected in the chart below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
FF Revenue 
$0 
$6,814,900 
$6,814,900 
$6,814,900 
$6,814,900 
SF Expenditure 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
$2,271,600 
FF Expenditure 
$0 
$563,900 
$587,800 
$613,200 
$644,600 
Net Effect 
$0 
$6,250,900 
$6,227,000 
$6,201,600 
$6,170,200  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 983/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect local government operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Maryland’s Recreational Use Statute – Title 5, Subtitle 11 of the Natural Resources Article 
 
Under current law, in order to encourage a landowner to make land, water, and airspace 
above the land and water areas available to the public for any recreational and educational 
purpose, or on a limited entry basis for any hunting recreational purpose, certain protections 
from liability are established in statute for those landowners that do so (referred to by the 
Maryland Court of Special Appeals, in Fagerhus v. Host Marriott Corp., 143 Md. 
App. 525 (2002), as “Maryland’s recreational use statute”). 
 
The bill alters Maryland’s recreational use statute by expressing that it is the intent of the 
General Assembly that nothing in the statute may be construed to (1) require a landowner 
to allow the general public access to the landowner’s land or (2) prohibit a landowner from 
limiting or posting the landowner’s land against entry. The bill also makes stylistic changes 
to related provisions. 
 
Department of Natural Resources Wildlife and Heritage Services 
 
Under current law, DNR’s Wildlife and Heritage Service (WHS), in cooperation with 
DNR’s Natural Resources Police, is responsible for administering and enforcing the 
State’s hunting laws and programs. These responsibilities include setting bag limits; 
establishing seasons; and managing the sale of hunting licenses, permits, and stamps. 
DNR may adopt regulations to enlarge, extend, restrict, or prohibit hunting wildlife. 
 
State Wildlife Management and Protection Fund and Migratory Bird Stamps 
 
Under current law, DNR administers the State Wildlife Management and Protection Fund. 
Proceeds generated from license, permit, stamp, and application fees under State laws 
governing wildlife must be credited to the fund and used for the scientific investigation, 
protection, propagation, and management of wildlife. DNR also receives federal funds for 
the management and protection of wildlife. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 983/ Page 3 
Under current law, in addition to any other requirement, a person hunting migratory game 
birds in the State must purchase a Maryland migratory game bird stamp. Migratory game 
bird stamps may be obtained from any person designated by DNR, and the person issuing 
the stamp retains 75 cents as compensation for issuing the stamp. Migratory game bird 
stamp revenue is deposited into the Wildlife Management and Protection Fund, which must 
be used solely for the following purposes:  (1) migratory game bird projects included in an 
approved State program to create, develop, enhance, maintain, and manage nesting cover, 
winter foods, and other habitat components on public lands to satisfy the habitat 
requirements of a broad range of wintering migratory game birds and native migratory 
game bird species; (2) migratory game bird research, management, and surveys; and (3) up 
to 30% to adopt and implement a program to control phragmites. 
 
The bill modifies the authorized uses of the migratory game bird stamp revenue by 
(1) repealing the authorized use relating to adopting and implementing a program to control 
phragmites on private lands and (2) authorizing the revenue to be used for migratory game 
bird projects that conserve migratory game bird breeding habitats in Canada; the bill 
requires DNR, by December 1 annually, to report to the Maryland General Assembly on 
the effectiveness of any such expenditures from the Wildlife Management and Protection 
Fund. 
 
Hunting Licenses and Stamps, Generally 
 
Under current law, with certain exceptions, a person may not hunt or attempt to hunt during 
open season and in any permitted manner any game birds and mammals in the State without 
a resident or nonresident hunter’s license. Resident and nonresident hunting licenses enable 
the purchaser to hunt all legal game birds and mammals during any appropriate season 
without the purchase of additional stamps, unless the purchaser is hunting migratory game 
birds, wild waterfowl, or deer during bow and arrow season or black powder season, in 
which case specified stamps are required. In general, unless grandfathered by having 
obtained a license prior to July 1, 1977, or hunting with supervision under an apprentice 
hunting license, all hunters must obtain a certificate of competency in firearms and hunter 
safety in order to be eligible for a hunting license. 
 
New Hunting Stamps and Changes to Fees for Hunting Licenses, Stamps, and Permits 
 
Sika Deer Stamp:  Under current law, there are three primary seasons to hunt white-tailed 
deer in Maryland:  deer bow hunting season; deer firearms season; and deer muzzleloader 
season (also known as deer black powder season). There are also separate sika deer 
bow hunting, firearms, and muzzleloader seasons in the State. The bag limits and seasons 
for sika deer are independent from those for white-tailed deer. Under current law, a hunting 
license is required to hunt sika deer. Additionally, as with hunting white-tailed deer, an 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 983/ Page 4 
appropriate archery or muzzleloader stamp may be needed, depending on the type of 
weapon a hunter is using. The bonus antlered deer stamp may not be used to take sika deer. 
 
The bill establishes a resident and a nonresident sika deer stamp, which, unless hunting 
under a deer management permit, must be purchased (in addition to a hunting license and 
any weapon-specific stamps) in order to hunt sika deer. Related fees are established. 
 
Nonresident College and University Students:  Under current law, in order to hunt in the 
State, a nonresident of any age must either purchase a nonresident hunting license or a 
nonresident 3-day hunting license. The bill establishes that a nonresident who is attending 
a college or university in the State is authorized to purchase a resident hunting license if 
the person provides DNR with proof of enrollment at a college or university in the State. 
 
Furbearer Permits and Nonresident Trapping Licenses:  Under current law, a furbearer 
means any coyote, raccoon, bobcat, opossum, beaver, mink, muskrat, otter, fox, skunk, 
fisher, and long-tailed weasel. Subject to certain exceptions, a Maryland resident or 
nonresident must have a furbearer permit to hunt, chase, or trap any furbearer in the State 
or participate in the unarmed chasing of foxes and raccoons in the State. 
 
Further, under current law, an individual furbearer permit enables the purchaser to hunt, 
chase, or trap any furbearer in the State or participate in the unarmed chasing of foxes and 
raccoons. Nonresidents must also obtain a nonresident trapping license to trap furbearers 
in Maryland. A group furbearer permit enables an association or group established for the 
purpose of chasing or hunting furbearers to organize and offer hunting or chasing of 
furbearers to the association or group’s members or guests. The fees for individual and 
group furbearer permits are not established in statute. The bill explicitly establishes fees 
for such permits in statute.  
 
New and Increased Fees:  As mentioned above, the bill establishes fees for resident and 
nonresident sika deer stamps and individual and group furbearer permits. The bill also 
increases the fees for most hunting licenses, stamps, and permits. See Exhibit 1 for a list 
of all fees under current law and the fees proposed under the bill. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 983/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Hunting License, Stamp, and Permit Fees 
Under Current Law and the Bill 
 
Type of Hunting License 
Current Fee 
Fee Under the Bill 
Junior Resident 
$10.50 
$15.00 
Regular 
24.50 
35.00 
Senior Resident  
5.00 
No Change 
Nonresident Regular 
130.00 
160.00 
Nonresident Junior 
65.00 
80.00 
Nonresident 3-day  
45.00 
65.00 
Resident Apprentice 
10.00 
15.00 
Nonresident Apprentice 
20.00 
40.00 
 
 
 
Type of Trapping License 
 
 
Nonresident Trapping 
25.50 
50.00 
Type of Stamp 
 
 
Bow and Arrow  
6.00 
No Change 
Nonresident Bow and Arrow 
25.00 
No Change 
Black Powder 
6.00 
No Change 
Nonresident Black Powder 
25.00 
No Change 
MD Migratory Game Bird 
9.00 
15.00 
Resident Bonus Antlered Deer 
10.00 
No Change 
Nonresident Bonus Antlered 
Deer  
25.00 
No Change 
Resident Sika Deer  
N/A 
10.00 
Nonresident Sika Deer  
N/A 
25.00 
 
 
 
Type of Permit  
Individual Furbearer  
5.00 
No Change 
Group Furbearer  
$10.00 
$50.00 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 983/ Page 6 
Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program 
 
The bill establishes the Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program within 
DNR. The stated purpose of the program is to (1) provide outreach on outdoor recreation 
and stewardship to urban and exurban community leaders, organizations, schools, and 
universities; (2) connect elementary and middle school students, their parents, and 
university students located in suburban and exurban areas to outdoor recreation and 
stewardship opportunities; (3) foster interest in the use of private land and undeveloped 
public land for outdoor recreation; and (4) foster interest in hunting and wildlife 
conservation. DNR, in consultation with program staff, must develop a plan to increase 
engagement of veterans and of communities that historically have not had access to hunting 
and conservation programs in outdoor recreation and stewardship, hunting, and wildlife 
conservation. 
 
The bill also specifies that if DNR receives an increase in federal funds due to the increase 
in hunting license, stamp, and permit fees under the bill, a portion of that increase must be 
used to create eight Position Identification Numbers (PINs) for DNR to hire staff for the 
Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program. 
 
Expanded Purpose of the Heritage Conservation Fund 
 
Under current law, the purpose of DNR’s Heritage Conservation Fund (HCF) is to acquire 
conservation easements or a fee simple or other interests in a number of specified types of 
land, including forestlands, unique ecological areas of the State, any area characterized by 
significant natural beauty, tidal or nontidal wetlands, and lands supporting rare, threatened, 
or endangered plants or animals. The bill expands the purpose of HCF to include acquiring 
conservation easements or a fee simple or other interest in lands that can be used by the 
general public for hunting. 
 
The bill also specifies that if DNR receives an increase in federal funds due to the increase 
in hunting license, stamp, and permit fees under the bill, any portion of that increase may 
be transferred to HCF to acquire conservation easements or fee simple or other interests in 
lands that can be used by the general public for hunting. 
 
Required Plan to Address Deer Overpopulation in the State  
 
The bill requires DNR, in consultation with MDA, by December 1, 2023, to develop a plan 
to address deer overpopulation in the State. Among other things, the plan must include 
(1) the feasibility of implementing a rotational closure hunting strategy on State land; 
(2) any legislative, budgetary, or regulatory changes needed to implement a rotational 
closure hunting strategy on State-owned land and locally owned land; and (3) suitable uses 
for any increased federal funding to the State Wildlife Management and Protection Fund. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 983/ Page 7 
DNR must consult with local governments regarding the feasibility of implementing a 
rotational closure hunting strategy on locally owned land. 
 
Creation and Funding of a Farmer Cost-share Program 
 
The bill specifies that if DNR receives an increase in federal funds due to an increase in 
hunting license, stamp, and permit fees under the bill, a portion of that increase must be 
used for the creation and funding of a farmer cost-share program to provide funding for 
farmers to plant forage crops on private agricultural land to (1) reduce the loss of 
commercial crops due to wildlife foraging and (2) increase forage habitat for wildlife. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues to the Wildlife Management and Protection Fund 
increase by an estimated $2.3 million annually beginning in fiscal 2024. This estimate is 
based on the sale of the applicable hunting licenses, stamps, and permits during the 
2021-2022 hunting season. The information and assumptions used in calculating the 
estimate are stated below:   
 
 
for the hunting licenses, stamps, and permits that are currently sold, sales remain 
constant over time, despite the bill’s changes; 
 
an estimated 10,000 resident sika deer stamps and 3,000 nonresident sika deer 
stamps are sold annually beginning in fiscal 2024; and 
 
authorizing nonresident college and university students to purchase a resident 
hunting license does not materially affect fee revenues. 
 
In addition, federal fund revenues increase significantly beginning in fiscal 2025 from 
federal matching grant funding for conservation related work. DNR advises that federal 
funding is awarded at a 1:3 ratio; for every $1 that WHS receives directly in increased fee 
revenue and spends on eligible conservation related work, WHS receives $3 in federal 
grant funding through the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act. DNR applies for the 
federal grant funding at the end of each fiscal year, so the increase in fee revenues in 
fiscal 2024 drives an increase in federal funds in fiscal 2025. Accordingly, based on the 
estimated increase in fee revenue resulting from the bill, assuming DNR spends the revenue 
(as discussed below) and qualifies for federal matching grant funding, federal fund 
revenues increase by an estimated $6.8 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
State Expenditures:  This analysis assumes that DNR spends the additional special fund 
revenue each year in full in order to be eligible for the additional federal funds discussed 
above. Accordingly, special fund expenditures increase by $2.3 million annually beginning 
in fiscal 2024. An estimate of the increase in DNR’s administrative expenditures, as well 
as a discussion of other anticipated spending, is provided below. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 983/ Page 8 
Administrative Costs 
 
Special fund administrative expenditures increase by $938,068 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
four natural resources biologists and four natural resources technicians to establish and 
implement the new Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, including the purchase of new eight new 
vehicles, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
8.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$532,996 
Vehicle Purchases 
312,288 
Operating Expenses 
    92,784 
Total FY 2024 DNR Admin. Expenditures 
$938,068 
 
Future year administrative expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increase in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Because the bill requires a portion of any increase in federal funds due to the increased 
license, permit, and stamp fees under the bill to be used for the creation of eight PINS for 
DNR to hire staff for the Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program, and 
because the increase in federal funds is estimated to be sufficient to cover DNR’s 
administrative costs beginning in fiscal 2025, it is assumed that federal funds are used to 
cover such costs beginning in fiscal 2025. Thus, federal fund administrative expenditures 
increase by $563,916 in fiscal 2025 and by at least $587,801 annually thereafter. 
 
It is assumed that DNR can implement the farmer cost-share program to provide funding 
for farmers to plant forage crops on private agricultural land without any additional staff. 
 
DNR advises that it already conducts annual reporting regarding sales of migratory bird 
stamps and related programming. Therefore, DNR can fulfill the requirement to report 
annually on the effectiveness of any expenditures from the Wildlife Management and 
Protection Fund for migratory game bird projects with existing budgeted resources. 
DNR also does not anticipate that the repeal of the prohibition against a person hunting 
migratory game birds on Sunday will have a material fiscal or operational impact on the 
State. 
 
DNR advises that it has a statewide deer management plan that accompanies local deer 
management efforts and that it can work with MDA to develop a plan to address deer 
overpopulation with existing budgeted resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 983/ Page 9 
Finally, DNR advises that the expanded authorized uses of HCF largely codifies existing 
practice and does not have a meaningful impact on State finances or operations. 
 
Use of the Additional Fee Revenue and Available Federal Funds 
 
This analysis assumes that DNR spends the available special funds resulting from the bill 
each year in full in order to qualify for the additional federal funds. In addition to covering 
DNR’s administrative costs in fiscal 2024, it is assumed that DNR spends the additional 
fee revenue on qualified wildlife conservation and management projects, including those 
specified under the new Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Outreach Program created 
by the bill. 
 
DNR also spends a portion of the additional federal funds that remain after covering 
administrative costs in the out-years to implement the farmer cost-share program to provide 
funding for farmers to plant forage crops on private agricultural land, as required by the 
bill; however, a reliable estimate of the funding necessary for a viable cost-share program 
cannot be made at this time. 
 
DNR likely also spends additional federal funds that remain after covering administrative 
costs and funding the cost-share program; however, the timing of any such spending is 
unknown and, therefore, has not been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Increasing engagement of communities that historically have not 
had access to hunting and conservation programs, and increasing engagement of veterans 
in outdoor recreation and stewardship, hunting, and wildlife conservation may 
meaningfully benefit small businesses that sell related gear and services. The U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service reports that, in 2011, the average hunter in Maryland spent $49 per 
hunting day on trip-related expenditures. In 2011, the National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, 
and Wildlife Associated Recreation estimated that hunters in Maryland spend more than 
$260 million annually on food, lodging, equipment, and transportation. 
 
Additionally, farms, many of which are small businesses, benefit from cost-share funding 
provided to plant forage crops on private agricultural land to reduce the loss of commercial 
crops due to wildlife foraging and increase forage habitat for wildlife. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 983/ Page 10 
Designated Cross File:  SB 327 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Natural Resources; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10