START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 982 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 982 
(The Speaker) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Employees – Programs and Scholarships for Human Services Careers and 
Probation Agents and State Contributions to Supplemental Retirement Plans 
 
 
This bill (1) establishes the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers; (2) establishes a 
companion Pilot Program Human Services Careers Scholarship; (3) expands both the 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program (LARP) for Police Officers and the 
Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program to include parole and probation agents and 
related personnel; and (4) requires the State to provide a matching contribution to 
employees participating in the State supplemental retirement plans under certain 
circumstances. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $13.5 million beginning in FY 2024 
for staff, one-time costs, the new scholarship and stipends, and general fund portion of the 
State supplemental retirement plan matching contributions. The FY 2024 budget, as passed 
by the General Assembly and contingent on this bill, includes $13.0 million in general 
funds for those purposes and redirects $3.5 million from the police scholarship program to 
the LARP. Special and federal fund expenditures increase due to State matching 
contributions, as explained below. General fund expenditures increase by a further 
indeterminate, but likely minimal, amount for mentors. Special fund revenues increase due 
to fees on supplemental retirement accounts beginning in FY 2024. This bill reduces and 
increases two mandated appropriations by offsetting amounts beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$13.5 
$13.5 
$13.5 
$13.5 
$13.5 
SF Expenditure 
$4.1 
$4.1 
$4.1 
$4.1 
$4.1 
FF Expenditure 
$4.1 
$4.1 
$4.1 
$4.1 
$4.1 
Net Effect 
($21.8) 
($21.7) 
($21.7) 
($21.7) 
($21.7)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 982/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures in Baltimore City, Baltimore County, and 
Prince George’s County may increase to participate in the pilot program, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Pilot Program for Human Services Careers 
 
The stated purposes of the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers are to encourage 
collaboration between the Department of Human Services (DHS) and eligible local school 
systems to assist students in establishing careers in targeted positions within DHS and assist 
current DHS employees and employees in targeted DHS positions to establish careers in 
targeted positions. For the purposes of the pilot program, “career” means an occupation 
that provides opportunities for upward mobility and professional progress. “Targeted 
position” includes social workers, child support specialists, family investment specialists, 
family support workers, and family ‘SVS’ caseworkers. Eligible counties and local school 
systems therein are Baltimore City, Baltimore County, and Prince George’s County. 
 
Nothing in the bill pertaining to the pilot program may be construed to alter the minimum 
qualifications for any targeted position. 
 
Department of Human Services Responsibilities:  DHS must provide information 
(including qualifications, salary range, and contact information) regarding the career 
opportunities available in targeted positions to its employees and other interested 
individuals outside DHS. 
 
In hiring for targeted positions, DHS must prioritize applicants who graduated from a 
high school in an eligible local school system and participated in the pilot program either 
through the local school system or as an employee of the department. If an applicant who 
participated in the program and graduated from an eligible local school system is hired to 
fill a targeted position in DHS, DHS must award a one-time stipend of $500 to the 
employee. Similarly, if an employee obtains a necessary credential or degree to work in a 
targeted position, DHS must award a one-time stipend of $500 to the employee. 
 
Also, if an applicant who participated in the program and graduated from an eligible local 
school system is hired to fill a targeted position in DHS, DHS must assign to that new 
employee a mentor within DHS. Accordingly, DHS must solicit applications from 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 982/ Page 3 
employees to serve as mentors and select those who are qualified to do so, based on criteria 
determined by DHS. The mentor must serve as an expert resource for the new employee 
and be compensated by DHS for serving as a mentor based on rates negotiated with each 
exclusive representative. DHS must create a support system network for the employees 
who want to participate in the pilot program. 
 
DHS must, by December 1, 2028, submit a report to the General Assembly on the 
effectiveness of the pilot program in accomplishing its goals to increase employment in 
targeted positions in DHS. 
 
Eligible Local School System Responsibilities:  Each eligible local school system must 
enter into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with DHS that must include clear goals 
for the program and a commitment to publicize the pilot program, including specified 
information on stipends and scholarships. Further, each eligible school system, with the 
assistance of DHS, must: 
 
 
identify students who may be interested in working for the State after high school 
graduation; 
 
publicize the pilot program; 
 
work with DHS to develop internship opportunities at the department for credit; 
 
schedule at least one career day each semester for representatives of DHS to present 
specified information to students; 
 
work with DHS to identify the knowledge and skills necessary for targeted positions 
and incorporate the knowledge and skills into the curriculum of a required course; 
and 
 
include the discussion of career opportunities at DHS as part of individualized 
career counseling services in the Career Counseling Program for Middle and High 
School Students. 
 
Beginning December 1, 2024, DHS must collaborate with each eligible local school system 
to annually submit a report to the General Assembly on the Pilot Program for Human 
Services Careers, including the activities conducted by the local school systems, the 
number of individuals participating, and the number of individuals awarded a scholarship 
from the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship. 
 
Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship 
 
The Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship provides assistance to students 
enrolled in a program at a public higher education institution in Maryland that will enable 
the student to obtain a credential or degree necessary to work in or further a career in a 
targeted position in DHS, which by definition is for specified positions in Baltimore City, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 982/ Page 4 
Baltimore County, and Prince George’s County. A recipient of the Pilot Program for 
Human Services Careers Scholarship must (1) be a Maryland resident or a graduate of a 
Maryland high school; (2) be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at a public higher 
education institution (either a community college or a senior institution) in the State in a 
program that will enable the recipient to obtain a credential or degree that is necessary to 
work in or further a career in a targeted position within the department; (3) sign a letter of 
intent to perform the service obligation (defined as working in a targeted position for at 
least five years during the eight-year period immediately following high school graduation) 
on completion of the recipient’s required studies (though the service obligation may 
include work in a targeted position while a student is attending an eligible institution); 
(4) maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale or its equivalent; 
and (5) satisfy any additional criteria established by the Office of Student Financial 
Assistance (OSFA) within the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) or DHS. 
 
OSFA and DHS must publicize the availability of the scholarship, including providing 
information on it to every employee in a targeted position. DHS must identify and select 
eligible applicants, prioritizing applicants who participated in the Pilot Program for Human 
Services Careers. DHS must also determine the amount of scholarship awards even though 
the bill specifies that the annual scholarship must be 100% of the equivalent annual tuition 
and mandatory fees at the eligible institution. OSFA must award scholarships to applicants 
selected by DHS in the amounts determined and provide oversight related to the service 
obligation of the scholarship. Also, the bill specifies that funding for the scholarship is as 
provided in the State budget. 
 
As part of the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers, DHS must work in collaboration 
with a scholarship recipient to develop a work schedule that enables the recipient to 
maintain a course load consistent with the intent of the pilot program. A scholarship 
recipient must repay scholarship funds to OSFA if the recipient does not satisfy the degree 
requirements of the eligible course of study or perform the service obligation after 
graduation. 
 
In fiscal 2024, MHEC must work with DHS to award scholarships and may not delay 
making scholarship awards because of required updates to the Maryland College Aid 
Processing System (MDCAPS). Further, MHEC must consider the use of paper 
applications to make scholarship awards in fiscal 2024. 
 
Expansion of the Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers 
 
The bill generally allows parole and probation agents, including supervisors or regional 
administrators for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), to 
qualify for the LARP with eligible employment of at least two years in such a position. 
The bill also renames the Maryland LARP for Police Officers to be the Maryland LARP 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 982/ Page 5 
for Police Officers and Probation Agents. The mandated appropriation for the LARP 
increases by $3.5 million annually, from $1.5 million to $5.0 million. 
 
Expansion of the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program 
 
The bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program to 
include parole and probation agents, including supervisors or regional administrators for 
DPSCS. The bill also renames the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program to be the 
Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program. 
 
The bill makes other conforming changes to allow parole and probation officers to be 
included in the program. For example, the bill repeals language specifying that certain 
eligibility requirements must relate to a program participant’s career in law enforcement; 
instead, it specifies that the degree program must simply further students’ careers broadly 
as police officers or probation agents (as defined in the bill). 
 
The bill reduces the mandated appropriation for the scholarship program by $3.5 million; 
accordingly, the Governor must include $5.0 million, instead of $8.5 million, in the annual 
budget to MHEC for the scholarship program. The bill further reallocates the mandated 
appropriation such that $2.5 million must be used for scholarships to students intending to 
become police officers or probation agents after graduation and $2.5 million must be used 
for existing police officers or probation agents to attend an eligible institution and remain 
a police officer or probation agent after graduation. 
 
State Contribution to State Supplemental Retirement Plans 
 
The State must provide employees participating in the State supplemental retirement plans 
a contribution equal to the lesser of the participating employee’s contributions or $600 per 
fiscal year. A participating employee who makes student loan payments and provides 
documentation to the State of such a payment may also receive a matching contribution of 
$600 or up to the amount of the higher education loan payments per fiscal year, whichever 
is less. An individual may not receive a matching contribution for both student loan 
payments and regular employee retirement plan contributions. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers 
 
Chapter 59 of 2021, the Maryland Police Accountability Act of 2021, established the 
Maryland LARP for Police Officers to assist in the repayment of a higher education loan 
owed by a police officer who meets specified requirements. OSFA must distribute funds 
from the program to assist in the repayment of a “higher education loan” owed by a police 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 982/ Page 6 
officer who (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a public 
college or university in the State; (2) obtains “eligible employment”; and (3) satisfies any 
other criteria established by the office. OSFA must (1) adopt regulations to implement the 
program, which must include a limit on the total amount of assistance provided by the 
office in repaying the loan of an eligible individual, based on the individual’s total income 
and outstanding higher education loan balance and (2) by January 1 each year, report to the 
General Assembly on the implementation of the program. The Governor must include an 
annual appropriation of at least $1.5 million in the State budget for the program. 
 
For the Maryland LARP for Police Officers, “eligible employment” means to work as a 
police officer in the State for at least two years. “Higher education loan” means a loan that 
is obtained for tuition for undergraduate study leading to a degree in criminal law, 
criminology, or criminal justice. 
 
Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program 
 
Chapter 59 of 2021 also established the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program to 
provide tuition assistance for students (1) attending a degree program that would further 
the student’s career in law enforcement at an “eligible institution” with the intent to be a 
police officer after graduation or (2) who are currently police officers attending a degree 
program that would further the police officer’s career in law enforcement at an eligible 
institution. OSFA must (1) publicize the availability of the scholarship; (2) annually select 
eligible students and offer a scholarship to each student selected to be used at an eligible 
institution of the student’s choice; and (3) to the extent practicable, award scholarships 
under the program in a manner that reflects ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity. 
 
A recipient of a scholarship must (1) be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a 
Maryland high school; (2) be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible 
institution as a full-time or part-time undergraduate or graduate student, as specified; 
(3) sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion of the recipient’s 
required studies; and (4) satisfy any additional criteria MHEC may establish. A current 
police officer that meets the eligibility criteria is also eligible for a scholarship. A recipient 
of a scholarship must repay MHEC the funds received if the recipient does not (1) satisfy 
the degree requirements of the course of study or program or fulfill other specified 
requirements or (2) perform the service obligation to work as a police officer for at least 
five years during the eight-year period after graduation. 
 
The annual scholarship award must be 50% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory 
fees of a resident undergraduate student at the eligible institution. The Governor must 
annually include in the budget bill an appropriation of at least $8.5 million to MHEC to 
award scholarships, and MHEC must use (1) $6.0 million for scholarships to students 
intending to become police officers after graduation and (2) $2.5 million for scholarships 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 982/ Page 7 
to existing police officers to attend an eligible institution and remain a police officer after 
graduation. 
 
For the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program, “eligible institution” means a 
public senior (four-year) higher education institution in the State. 
 
State Contribution to State Supplemental Retirement Plans 
 
State employees who participate in defined contribution plans and who are members of the 
Employees’ Pension System were entitled to receive an employer matching contribution 
of up to $600 per year until the State match was suspended for one year in fiscal 2010 and 
then again in fiscal 2011 onward. Prior to fiscal 2011, the State match was suspended in 
fiscal 2004 and 2005 for budgetary reasons and was reinstated for fiscal 2006 with a cap 
of $400 per employee. The match was restored to its maximum level of $600 in fiscal 2007, 
2008, and 2009. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Mandated Appropriations 
 
Net mandated appropriations are not affected as they continue to total $10.0 million. The 
bill increases the mandated appropriation for the expanded Maryland LARP for Police 
Officers and Probation Agents by $3.5 million annually, from $1.5 million to $5.0 million. 
The bill also reduces the mandated appropriation for the expanded Maryland Police 
Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program by $3.5 million, from $8.5 million to 
$5.0 million (with the reduction applied to the scholarships for individuals intending to 
become police officers or probation agents after graduation). Beginning in fiscal 2025, the 
Governor must include appropriations of these amounts in the budget. However, enactment 
of the bill effectuates these changes in fiscal 2024 as well. Specifically, as passed by the 
General Assembly and contingent on enactment of House Bill 982, the fiscal 2024 budget 
(1) reduces the general fund appropriation for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation 
Agents Scholarship Program by $3.5 million, from $8.5 million to $5.0 million and 
(2) increases the general fund appropriation for the Maryland LARP for Police Officers 
and Probation Agents by $3.5 million, from $1.5 million to $5.0 million. Thus, the bill 
essentially results in the redirection of general funds from the scholarship program to the 
LARP beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
Pilot Program for Human Services Careers 
 
DHS can likely enter into MOUs with the three eligible local school systems, alter hiring 
and work authorization practices as specified, provide information to outside parties, create 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 982/ Page 8 
internship opportunities, create a support network for employees, submit required reports 
on program efficacy, and generally administer the pilot program using existing resources. 
 
However, DHS must provide stipends of $500 to specified program participants, and DHS 
estimates that it will need to award stipends to approximately 100 students and employees, 
resulting in approximately $50,000 in general fund expenditures annually. The fiscal 2024 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a $50,000 general fund appropriation 
to DHS for stipends under the pilot program, contingent on enactment of House Bill 982; 
this analysis assumes a continued $50,000 general fund appropriation in fiscal 2025 and 
beyond for stipends. DHS expenditures increase further by an indeterminate, but likely 
minimal, amount to compensate mentors in accordance with negotiated rates. For 
illustrative purposes only and assuming mentors are compensated similarly to program 
participants and receive a set $500 stipend in exchange for agreeing to be mentors, total 
costs to retain 33 mentors (such that each individual mentors three program participants) 
could mean DHS incurs an additional $16,500 in stipend costs. 
 
Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship 
 
For the scholarship, individuals must be a resident of Maryland or a graduate of a Maryland 
high school and eligible institutions are public institutions of higher education in the State. 
Therefore, to the extent additional individuals receive scholarships under the new pilot 
program, expenditures increase by the tuition and fees at the eligible institutions that 
students choose to attend – which depends significantly on whether students attend 
community college or a senior institution. On average, undergraduate in-state tuition and 
fees at University System of Maryland institutions in fiscal 2024 are approximately 
$10,100; whereas the statewide average for tuition and fees at community colleges 
(including the Baltimore City Community College) is much lower (less than one-half that 
amount for fall 2022, or $4,773, for a service-area resident). As discussed above, DHS 
advises that it expects to provide stipends to 100 students and employees participating in 
the program. Should 100 students also receive a scholarship, general fund expenditures for 
MHEC awards could increase by approximately $1.0 million if all students attend senior 
institutions. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$1.0 million for Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarship awards, contingent 
on enactment of House Bill 982; this analysis assumes continued appropriations at that 
level in fiscal 2025 and beyond. 
 
However, given the service obligation requirement to work in a targeted position for a 
five-year period within eight years of high school graduation, many students who 
participate in the pilot program will likely enroll in community college programs as such 
programs may require fewer than four years to complete or allow students to study on a 
part-time basis while working in the targeted position. Therefore, if most students instead 
attend community colleges, such funding likely allows for more than double that number 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 982/ Page 9 
of students to receive awards each year – which allows for ongoing awards to initial 
recipients and new awards to be made. As the program is limited to targeted positions in 
the three jurisdictions, it is unclear whether the available funding will be fully subscribed 
– particularly in the first year or two – with sufficient numbers of applicants. The bill 
requires a scholarship recipient to repay OSFA funds received if the recipient does not 
satisfy the degree requirements or fulfill other requirements or perform the service 
obligation after graduation. This analysis does not account for repayment of scholarships. 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission Administrative Expenditures 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $45,000 in fiscal 2024 for changes to OSFA’s 
MDCAPS – most of this amount ($35,000) is related to establishing the Pilot Program 
Human Services Careers Scholarship; the balance is split equally for changes related to the 
Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation Agents and the Maryland Police Officer 
and Probation Agents Scholarship. 
 
MHEC advises that, to develop an application process, ensure regulatory compliance, 
complete reports related to the program, award applicants, review required documents, and 
track completion of service obligations, OSFA requires one additional regular 
administrative specialist beginning in fiscal 2024. Accordingly, personnel expenditures 
increase by $75,723 in fiscal 2024. This estimate reflects hiring one administrative 
specialist to staff the new scholarship program concurrent with the program’s July 1, 2023 
effective date and consistent with the bill’s directive that MHEC work without delay to 
award scholarships in partnership with DHS. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses; the one-time contractual expenses for 
MDCAPS changes described above bring total administrative expenditures for MHEC to 
$120,723 in fiscal 2024. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$68,049 
MDCAPS Expenses 
45,000 
Operating Expenses 
7,674 
Total MHEC FY 2024 Administrative Expenditures 
$120,723 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual salary increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Using existing resources and the new position described above, MHEC can meet the bill’s 
directives for fiscal 2024 related to the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers 
Scholarship to (1) coordinate with DHS to award scholarships; (2) ensure no delays occur 
in making awards because of required updates to MDCAPS; and (3) consider/make use of 
paper applications as necessary to make those awards in fiscal 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 982/ Page 10 
State Contribution to State Supplemental Retirement Plans 
 
State expenditures increase by an estimated $20.6 million annually beginning in fiscal 2024 
with the requirement that the State provide a $600 matching contribution to State 
employees’ supplemental defined contribution retirement plans. This estimate is based on 
an estimated 46,851 eligible members of the Employees’ Pension System and a per person 
allocation of $440, accounting for the fact that not all eligible members participate in 
defined contributions plans. The cost is assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 20% 
special funds, and 20% federal funds. In fiscal 2009, when the match was suspended, the 
program was budgeted to cost roughly $23 million annually, and program participation has 
not substantially changed since the end of the match. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly includes $12.0 million in general funds, contingent on enactment of 
House Bill 982, for the provision of up to $600 in State matching contributions, which is 
likely sufficient to cover most of the general fund portion of State matching contributions 
estimated above for fiscal 2024 ($12.4 million). 
 
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimates that, as of the fourth quarter of 2021, 
there were approximately 864,700 student loan borrowers in the State with a combined 
balance owed of $36.8 billion. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that, as of July 1, 2021, 
the total resident population of the State was 6.2 million individuals, meaning 
approximately 14% of all residents of the State are student loan borrowers. Assuming a 
similar fraction of State employees are student loan borrowers, approximately 
6,550 individuals may be able to claim a State match for student loan payments. An exact 
estimate of the number of individuals who ultimately will claim a State match for student 
loan payments is unknown. The exact cost for student loan payment matches is, therefore, 
also unknown and depends on the fraction of State employee student loan borrowers who 
have a supplemental defined contribution account, make student loan payments in a given 
year, provide the State with evidence of student loan payment, and do not otherwise make 
contributions to and receive a match for a supplemental defined contribution retirement 
plan. To the extent eligible student loan borrowers receive a State match, State expenditures 
increase further. 
 
The Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) advises that, to the extent the State 
match for supplemental defined contribution retirement plans increases total assets under 
management, MSRP special fund revenues minimally increase. To the extent eligible State 
employee student loan borrowers do not already participate in optional defined contribution 
programs in the State, additional State employees may open new accounts, further 
increasing total assets under management and fee revenues for MSRP. MSRP finances 
operations through a fee imposed on members’ accounts based on a percentage of assets in 
the plans and a flat-rate monthly charge. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 982/ Page 11 
Local Expenditures:  Local school systems in Baltimore City, Baltimore County, and 
Prince George’s County must work with DHS to implement the pilot program. Local 
school systems are likely able to implement much of the pilot program using existing 
resources, including (1) identifying students; (2) publicizing the program; (3) scheduling 
career days as specified; (4) working with DHS to develop internship opportunities for 
credit; and (5) submitting required reports on program activities, participation, and 
scholarships. However, local school system expenditures may increase to work with DHS 
to identify knowledge and skills necessary for targeted positions and incorporate that 
knowledge and skills into the curriculum of a required course. The exact cost to incorporate 
new material into curriculum is unknown and depends on the specific knowledge and skills 
identified by DHS and the local school systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore and 
Prince George’s counties; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plans; Federal Reserve Bank of New York; 
U.S. Census Bureau; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 4, 2023 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11