START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 908 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 908 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Electricity - Community Solar Energy Generating Systems Program and 
Property Taxes 
 
 
This bill makes the Community Solar Energy Generating Systems Pilot Program 
permanent and renames the program accordingly, makes various specified changes to 
program requirements, and requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to convene a 
stakeholder workgroup and alter and/or adopt related regulations. The bill also extends the 
availability of the personal property tax exemption for certain community solar generating 
systems to those approved by PSC through 2025. A full-time position must be established 
at PSC to focus only on implementing and administering the (now permanent) program. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $264,900 in FY 2024. Future 
years reflect annualization, additional consultant expenses in FY 2025, and the elimination 
of one-time costs. Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments 
imposed on public service companies. The effect on electricity prices is discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$264,900 
$297,500 
$206,100 
$215,100 
$226,200 
SF Expenditure 
$264,900 
$297,500 
$206,100 
$215,100 
$226,200 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues potentially decrease beginning in FY 2026, as 
discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 908/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Program Made Permanent 
 
The Community Solar Energy Generating Systems Pilot Program is made permanent 
instead of ending after seven years (but no sooner than December 31, 2024). The name of 
the program is modified accordingly, along with other related conforming changes. 
 
Changes to Program Requirements 
 
The bill makes several changes to program requirements, affecting system requirements, 
project size and location, and customer billing, among others. Changes include, but are not 
limited to: 
 
 
A community solar energy generating system must, in addition to meeting all 
current requirements, serve at least 40% of its kilowatt-hour output to 
“low-to-moderate income (LMI) subscribers” unless the system is wholly owned by 
the subscribers to the system. An LMI subscriber is one that is low-income, 
moderate-income, or resides in a census tract that is an overburdened and 
underserved community, as those terms are further defined. Existing systems with 
different LMI percentage requirements under the pilot program maintain those 
percentages going forward. 
 
“Subscription coordinator” – essentially a person who markets the systems or 
performs various administrative actions – is defined and incorporated into relevant 
provisions. 
 
Project siting requirements are modified by (1) expanding the types of system 
installations exempt from the prohibition against building community solar energy 
generating systems on contiguous parcels of land and (2) establishing a general 
5 megawatt (MW) aggregate capacity limit for all community solar energy 
generating systems on the same or adjacent parcels of land. New exemptions include 
systems located in areas zoned for industrial use and on multilevel parking 
structures. There is also a 10 MW aggregate limit for certain agricultural projects 
and projects serving LMI customers. 
 
A subscriber organization or subscription coordinator may elect for a subscriber or 
a community solar energy generating system represented by the subscriber 
organization or subscription coordinator to participate in consolidated billing. 
Related administrative processes and requirements are specified, including 
authorizing an electric company or electricity supplier to charge a limited fee for 
consolidated billing. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 908/ Page 3 
 
Generally, a subscriber organization or subscription coordinator may not charge a 
subscription rate that is more than the monetary value of the bill credit on a bill 
issued by the electric company to the subscriber (the limit is 90% of the monetary 
bill credit for an LMI subscriber). A similar prohibition is established under 
consolidated billing, although there is no separate LMI limit specified. 
 
The developer of a community solar energy generating system with a generating 
capacity of more than 1 MW must ensure that workers are paid at least the prevailing 
wage rate, unless the system is subject to a project labor agreement, as specified (the 
requirement applies only to projects that have not received a queue position in the 
pilot program before January 1, 2025). 
 
Public Service Commission Regulations, Workgroup, and Position 
 
PSC is required to revise certain pilot program regulations by January 1, 2025, and adopt 
new regulations by July 1, 2025, as specified. PSC must convene a stakeholder workgroup 
to provide recommendations regarding the regulations. PSC must also approve electric 
company tariff modifications that are consistent with the regulations within six months of 
those regulation deadlines. 
 
Among other requirements, revised regulations must:   
 
 
remove all program categories, project generating capacity limits, yearly 
programmatic and electric company specific capacity limits, and sunset dates so that 
the total number and capacity of community solar energy generating systems is 
subject only to the overall statutory limitation (3,000 MWs) for all net metering 
projects; 
 
authorize all community solar energy generating systems, including those 
constructed during the pilot program, to operate and generate subscription credits 
until the solar energy generating system is decommissioned; 
 
allow a subscriber organization or subscription coordinator to verify the income of 
a prospective subscriber for eligibility as an LMI subscriber under the program 
through a variety of methods, including self-attestation and provision of specified 
documentation; and 
 
require all electric companies to use bill credits applied as a reduction in metered 
kilowatt-hours or monetary bill credits that provide not less than the value to the 
subscriber of the credit had it been applied to the subscriber’s bill as a reduction in 
metered kilowatt-hours. 
 
Among other requirements, new PSC regulations must (1) implement consolidated billing 
by electric companies and establish other specified billing/crediting requirements; 
(2) implement data exchange protocols for electric companies, subscriber organizations, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 908/ Page 4 
and subscription coordinators; and (3) impose specific timing requirements for application 
of bill credits to subscriber bills and application of rollover credits. 
 
Relatedly, PSC must also consider and implement methodologies to allow the tenants of 
master-metered residential facilities to participate in the program and benefit directly from 
any associated electric bill savings, although there is no specific requirement to adopt 
regulations. 
 
Finally, the bill requires a position identification number to be created in PSC for a full-time 
position that will focus only on implementing and administering the Community Solar 
Energy Generating Systems Program. 
 
Personal Property Tax Exemption Extended 
 
Under current law, a community solar generating system that meets certain requirements 
and is approved by PSC on or before December 31, 2025, is eligible for a personal property 
tax exemption; however, a local government may not accept an application for the 
exemption after December 31, 2024. The bill removes the limitation on the local 
government accepting applications, effectively extending eligibility by a minimum of 
one year.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Net Metering – Generally 
 
Net energy metering is the measurement of the difference between the electricity that is 
supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by an eligible 
customer-generator and fed back to the electric company over the eligible 
customer-generator’s billing period. PSC must require electric utilities to develop and 
make net metering tariffs available to eligible customer-generators. The generating 
capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may be up to 2 MWs. Eligible 
energy sources are solar, wind, biomass, micro combined heat and power, fuel cell, and 
certain types of hydroelectric. There is a statewide net metered capacity limit of 
3,000 MWs. 
 
Community Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
Chapters 346 and 347 of 2015 required PSC to establish a three-year Community Solar 
Energy 
Generating 
System 
Pilot 
Program, 
subject 
to 
specified 
conditions. 
Chapters 461 and 462 of 2019 extended the pilot program through December 31, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 908/ Page 5 
A community solar energy generating system, as defined in statute, is a system that, in 
addition to other requirements:   
 
 
has a generating capacity that does not exceed 5 MWs as measured by the alternating 
current rating of the system’s inverter; 
 
has at least two subscribers, but no limit to the maximum number of subscribers; 
and 
 
credits its generated electricity, or the value of its generated electricity, to the bills 
of the subscribers to that system through virtual net energy metering. 
 
Subscribers must be in the same electric service territory as the system. Investor-owned 
electric companies must participate in the program; large electric cooperatives and 
municipal utilities may choose to participate. PSC regulations increase authorized capacity 
additions each year. 
 
Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
A community solar energy generating system that is placed in service after June 30, 2022, 
and has been approved by PSC on or before December 31, 2025, is exempt from the county 
and municipal  personal property tax through the life cycle of the system if the system 
(1) provides at least 50% of the energy it produces to low- to moderate-income customers 
at a cost that is at least 20% less than the amount charged by the electric company that 
serves the area where the community solar energy generating system is located and (2) is 
used for agrivoltaics or is installed on a rooftop, brownfield, parking facility canopy, 
landfill, or clean fill. However, the supervisor of a county or a municipality may not accept 
an application from a property owner for the exemption after December 31, 2024. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  PSC advises that it requires additional staff and consultant services 
to implement the bill. Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by 
$264,895 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for a 90-day startup delay. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring two regulatory economists to participate in workgroups, draft regulations, 
and evaluate utility tariffs, among other duties related to general program administration. 
It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, 
and $100,000 for consultant services to provide technical and policy analysis and 
recommendations. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$145,952 
Contractual Services 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    18,943 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$264,895 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 908/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Fiscal 2025 also reflects an 
additional $100,000 in consultant costs. 
 
PSC advises that it may ask for prevailing wage documentation for community solar 
projects that are larger than 2 MW during the Certificate of Public Convenience and 
Necessity process. PSC does not typically have a significant oversight role in projects 
smaller than that, since they are not considered generating stations.  
 
Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public 
service companies. 
 
Local Revenues:  Personal property tax revenues for those local governments that assess 
personal property potentially decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 to the extent that eligible 
community solar energy generating systems apply for and receive a personal property tax 
exemption after the current December 31, 2024 deadline. Eligible systems must be 
approved by PSC on or before December 31, 2025, so the increased period of eligibility to 
apply is at least one year. The effect on any particular local government cannot be estimated 
at this time, although the State Department of Assessments and Taxation advises that no 
systems have applied for or received the exemption as of March 20, 2023. There is no effect 
for any systems that are approved by local governments on or before December 31, 2024, 
as the exemption applies for the lifecycle of the projects. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill makes permanent the Community Solar Energy 
Generating Systems Pilot Program and makes several other changes to overall program 
requirements, many of which offer additional flexibility compared to the pilot program. 
Small businesses benefit from the continuation of the program and the opportunity to build 
more solar capacity under the program going forward. Conversely, some changes may have 
operational effects, increase expenditures, or reduce revenues for small businesses. For 
example, developers of community solar energy generating systems with capacities of 
more than 1 MW must ensure that workers are paid at least the prevailing wage, unless the 
system is subject to a project labor agreement. Additionally, a subscriber organization or 
subscription coordinator, which may be a small business, is generally limited in the amount 
it may charge an LMI subscriber. 
 
Additional Comments (Electricity Prices):  PSC advises that the bill puts upward 
pressure on electricity prices, which are paid by the State government, local governments, 
and small businesses. The amount cannot be determined at this time; the statutory cap on 
statewide net metering capacity has a limiting effect – although that cap has been raised in 
the past. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 908/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 613 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7