START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 917 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 917 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - 46th Alcoholic Beverages District - 
Revisions 
 
 
This bill alters general provisions of the alcoholic beverages laws in Baltimore City and 
various provisions related to the 46th alcoholic beverages district in Baltimore City. The 
bill alters the Charter of Baltimore City to remove the requirement that the Baltimore City 
Downtown Commercial District Management Authority enter into a contract with the 
Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to hire two police officers from BPD to exclusively 
patrol an area, as specified. The bill also extends the expiration of specified licenses until  
July 1, 2024, for the purposes of transfer and/or renewal. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2023, and provisions related to the expiration of specified licenses terminate  
June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2024, to 
the extent the board issues additional Class B BWL (beer, wine, liquor) licenses and 
Class D BWL licenses, as specified, in the 46th alcoholic beverages district, or to the extent 
a new license or a transfer of a license occurs in specified geographic areas as a result of 
the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 917/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:    
 
Requirements for Restaurants 
 
Under current law, to be considered a restaurant, an establishment must have average daily 
receipts from the sale of food that are at least 40% of its total daily receipts (an ingredient 
or garnish used with or mixed with an alcoholic beverage that is prepared and served for 
on-premises consumption is not considered food). The Baltimore City Board of License 
Commissioners may waive the food requirement, as specified, for a restaurant owned and 
operated by a nonprofit organization in the area bounded by South Ellwood Avenue on the 
west, Bank Street on the north, South Bouldin Street on the east, and Fleet Street on the 
south.  
 
For a license that the board has waived the food requirement, as specified, the bill permits 
the board to approve an expansion of the licensed premises onto a noncontiguous property 
with a second separate use permit issued by Baltimore City, if the second separate use 
permit specifically refers to the alcoholic beverages license at the primary location. 
 
License Issuance in the 46th Alcoholic Beverages District 
 
Under current law, in Baltimore City, new licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages may 
not be issued in the 40th, 41st, 43rd, 44th, 45th, or 46th alcoholic beverages districts. 
Currently, in the 46th district, the board may issue a special one-day license.  
 
Class B BWL Licenses 
 
In Baltimore City, a holder of a Class B BWL license may generally sell alcoholic 
beverages from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, seven days a week. The annual 
license fee for a Class B BWL license is $1,320 for a premises with a seating capacity of 
not more than 200 individuals, and $1,800 for a premises with a seating capacity of more 
than 200 individuals. There is an additional annual fee of $500 if the license holder provides 
live entertainment, and an annual fee of $200 if the license holder provides outdoor table 
service. 
 
Under current law, a Class B BWL license may be issued to specified restaurants with 
average daily receipts from the sale of food of at least 51% of the total daily receipts of the 
restaurant. The board may also issue a Class B BWL license: 
 
 
for a restaurant in ward 26, precinct 8; ward 4, precinct 1; or ward 3, precinct 3 that 
has (1) seating for more than 150 individuals; (2) a minimum capital investment of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 917/ Page 3 
$700,000; and (3) average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 65% of the 
total daily receipts of the restaurant;  
 
for a restaurant in ward 4, precinct 1, or ward 22, precinct 1, if the restaurant has 
(1) seating for more than 75 individuals; (2) a minimum capital investment of 
$700,000; (3) average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 65% of the total 
daily receipts of the restaurant; and (4) no sales for off-premises consumption unless 
an off-sale privilege for refillable containers has been issued;  
 
for up to three restaurants in a residential planned unit development for Silo Point 
if each restaurant has (1) a minimum capital investment of $700,000; (2) seating for 
more than 75 individuals; (3) average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 
65% of the total daily receipts of the restaurant; and (4) no sales for off-premises 
consumption unless an off-sale privilege for refillable containers has been issued; 
 
for up to three restaurants in a business planned unit development in ward 24, 
precinct 5, if each restaurant has (1) a minimum capital investment of $700,000; 
(2) seating for more than 75 individuals, but not more than 150 individuals; 
(3) average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 51% of the total daily 
receipts of the restaurant; and (4) no sales for off-premises consumption unless an 
off-sale privilege for refillable containers has been issued; 
 
for a restaurant in the area known as Port Covington, bounded on the north by 
Interstate 95, on the east by the South Locust Point Terminal, and on the south and 
west by the Patapsco River, if the restaurant has (1) seating for more than 
150 individuals; (2) a minimum capital investment of $700,000; and (3) average 
daily receipts from food sales that are at least 60% of the total daily receipts of the 
restaurant; and 
 
for a restaurant in Unit G of 3700 Toone Street in ward 26, precinct 8, if the 
restaurant has (1) seating for at least 75 individuals; (2) a minimum capital 
investment of $700,000; (3) average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 
65% of the total daily receipts of the restaurant; and (4) has executed a memorandum 
of understanding (MOU) with Brewer’s Hill Neighbors, Inc. 
 
The bill authorizes the board to issue a Class B BWL license for a restaurant in: 
 
 
the area bounded on the north by Eastern Avenue, on the east by South Duncan 
Street, on the south by Fleet Street, and on the west by South Chester Street, if the 
restaurant has (1) a physical duckpin bowling alley and (2) a minimum capital 
investment of $500,000, excluding residential improvements. The restaurant is not 
required to have a minimum amount of seating for patrons or a minimum amount 
of food sales to maintain the license. The license may not be transferred from the 
location of its first issuance; 
 
ward 21, precinct 4 in the 1300 block of Warner Street that has (1) average daily 
receipts from food sales that are at least 40% of the total daily receipts of the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 917/ Page 4 
restaurant, unless the license holder offers food truck options on the licensed 
premises, in which case the average daily receipts from food sales may be at least 
20% of the total daily receipts of the restaurant and (2) no sales for off-premises 
consumption; and  
 
ward 1, precinct 4, in the 2700 block of Boston Street that has (1) seating for more 
than 75 individuals; (2) average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 51% 
of the total daily receipts of the restaurant; (3) a minimum capital investment of at 
least $700,000 for restaurant facilities; and (4) executed an MOU with the 
Canton Community Association. The board may issue only one license, which may 
not be used for off-premises sales, except for delivery to a vessel docked at an 
adjacent marina or be transferred from the location of its original issuance. 
 
Class D Beer and Light Wine Licenses and Class D BWL Licenses 
 
Under current law, in Baltimore City, a Class D beer and light wine license authorizes the 
holder to sell beer and light wine, at retail, at the place described in the license, for on-and 
off-premises consumption. The license may not be issued for use by a drugstore. The 
annual license fee is $165. A Class D BWL license authorizes the holder to sell beer, wine, 
and liquor, at the place described in the license, for on-and off-premises consumption. The 
license may not be issued for use by a drugstore. The annual license fee for a Class D BWL 
license is $825. The fee for a transfer of a license is $200, in addition to the costs of 
publication and notice and any hearing fees required.  
 
The bill allows a license holder of a valid Class D beer and light wine license for use in the 
46th alcohol beverages district to apply to the board to convert the license to a Class BWL 
license if the license holder (1) maintains average daily receipts from food sales that are at 
least 51% of its total daily receipts; (2) executes an MOU with relevant local neighborhood 
association as determined by the board; (3) operates a location with not more than 75 seats; 
and (4) pays a special transfer fee of $15,000, in addition to any fees required for a transfer 
of a license; or if the license holder has a license that was originally issued by the board, 
as specified, and pays a transfer fee of $15,000, in addition to any fees required for a 
transfer of a license. If the Class D beer and light wine license is converted to a 
Class D BWL license, the Class D BWL license (1) may not be transferred to a new 
location and (2) is subject to the requirements for converting the license from a 
Class D beer and light wine, as specified. A holder of a license converted, as specified, 
may sell beer, wine, and liquor Monday through Sunday from 6 a.m. until 1 a.m. the 
following day. An application to convert a Class D beer and light wine license is a transfer 
subject to the general provisions in Title 4, Subtitle 3, and the specific provisions applicable 
to Baltimore City in Title 12, Subtitle 17 of the Alcoholic Beverages Article. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 917/ Page 5 
License Transfers 
 
In Baltimore City, a license may not be transferred into or within ward 1, precincts 2 and 
3; ward 2 in its entirety; ward 3, precinct 3; and ward 26, precincts 3 and 10. However, an 
application for a new license or a transfer within the above specified areas is permitted if 
the new license or transfer is for (1) a hotel; (2) an establishment located in a planned unit 
development if the application for the planned unit development was filed or approved 
before December 31, 1995; (3) an establishment located in an area by the Inner Harbor 
East Urban Renewal Plan; or (4) an establishment that has a seating capacity of fewer than 
150 individuals; or average daily receipts from food sales that are at least 51% of the total 
daily receipts of the establishment.  
 
The bill alters the requirement of the exception to the prohibition of transferring a license 
into or within the specified geographic areas above by permitting a new license or transfer 
to an establishment that has a seating capacity of fewer than 150 individuals; average daily 
receipts from food sales that are at least 51% of the total daily receipts of the establishment; 
or a seating capacity of fewer than 200 individuals only if the establishment is within 
ward 3, precinct 3.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 607 (Senator Ferguson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5