START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 920 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 920 
(Delegate Watson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Motor Vehicle Glass Repair or Replacement - Advanced 
Driver Assistance System Recalibration 
 
   
This bill establishes consumer protections related to the repair or replacement of motor 
vehicle glass on motor vehicles equipped with an “advanced driver assistance system” 
(ADAS). Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines an ADAS as an electronic system that uses automated 
technology (including cameras and sensors) to detect nearby obstacles and driver errors to 
assist a driver in the safe operation of a motor vehicle. 
 
A “motor vehicle safety glass facility” means a person that (1) repairs or replaces motor 
vehicle safety glass and (2) provides related recalibration of an ADAS. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 920/ Page 2 
Before repairing (or replacing) motor vehicle glass, if a motor vehicle is equipped with an 
ADAS, a motor vehicle safety glass facility must: 
 
 
inform the customer if the recalibration of an ADAS is required; and 
 
provide the customer with a written statement that the work to be performed on the 
motor vehicle will meet or exceed original equipment manufacturer specifications. 
 
Under the bill, a motor vehicle safety glass facility is not limited to motor vehicle glass, 
tooling, equipment, or repair procedures provided by the vehicle manufacturer. However, 
recalibration of an ADAS performed by a motor vehicle safety glass facility must meet or 
exceed the manufacturer’s specifications.  
 
A motor vehicle safety glass facility is prohibited from charging for services that are not 
performed or successfully completed. 
 
If recalibration of an ADAS is required and is not performed (or successfully completed), 
the repair facility must inform the customer.  
 
Current Law:  Title 14, Subtitle 10 of the Commercial Law Article sets forth 
miscellaneous consumer protection provisions relating to automotive repair facilities. An 
“automotive repair facility” is defined as any person who diagnoses or corrects 
malfunctions of a motor vehicle for financial profit.  
 
An automotive repair facility must provide, upon request, a written estimate containing 
specified information prior to beginning any repair work for which a customer is charged 
more than $50. Such businesses are prohibited from charging the customer without consent 
a price that exceeds the written estimate by more than 10%. Other provisions specify when 
repair delays may be excused and when written estimates are not required. Similar 
requirements apply to repair authorizations.   
 
A repair facility must also prepare an invoice that describes (1) all work done by the facility 
(including all warranty work) and (2) all parts supplied by the facility. The invoice must 
state clearly:  
 
 
if any used, rebuilt, or reconditioned parts have been supplied or if a part of a 
component system supplied is composed of used, rebuilt, or reconditioned parts; 
and 
 
that while a customer’s motor vehicle is on the premises of the repair facility, the 
repair facility may not be responsible for damage to the customer’s vehicle under 
certain circumstances and that the customer should ask a representative of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 920/ Page 3 
facility about the extent of its responsibility, including the extent of the insurance 
coverage of the facility. 
 
The invoice must also contain a specific notice that advises the customer that federal law 
requires manufacturers to make bulletins available describing any defects in their vehicles. 
A signed copy of the invoice must be provided to the customer; the repair facility must also 
retain a copy.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.       
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1460 and SB 428 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 793 (Senator West, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 920/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4