START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 420

Chapter 420

(House Bill 989)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Miniature Golf Course License

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Frederick County
to issue a Class B–MGC (miniature golf course) license to a miniature golf course
under certain circumstances; authorizing a license holder to sell beer, wine, and
liquor for on–premises consumption under certain circumstances; requiring a license
holder to submit a certain report to the Board before a license may be renewed; and
generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Frederick County.

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1009.2
to be Section 20–1009.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 20–1009.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 20–1009.2 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 20–1009.3.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 420 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

20–1009.2.

(A) THERE IS A CLASS B–MGC (MINIATURE GOLF COURSE) BEER, WINE,
AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE BY A MINIATURE GOLF
COURSE THAT:

(1) IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;

(2) HAS A MINIATURE COURSE OF AT LEAST 18 HOLES; AND

(3) HAS ACCOMMODATIONS THAT ARE PREDOMINANTLY DEDICATED
TO MINIATURE GOLF.

(C) AN APPLICANT FOR A CLASS B–MGC (MINIATURE GOLF COURSE) BEER,
WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE SHALL SUBMIT TO THE BOARD A FLOOR PLAN OR
LAYOUT OF THE PROPOSED LICENSED PREMISES THAT ILLUSTRATES THAT THE
PROPOSED LICENSED PREMISES IS PREDOMINANTLY DEDICATED TO MINIATURE
GOLF.

(D) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION:

(1) IF THE LICENSE HOLDER OFFERS FOOD ON–PREMISES AT ALL
TIMES WHEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE BEING SOLD; AND

(2) DURING NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
20–2005 OF THIS TITLE.

(E) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER’S ANNUAL SALES FROM:

(I) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MAY NOT EXCEED 35% OF THE
ANNUAL GROSS SALES OF THE MINIATURE GOLF COURSE;

(II) MINIATURE GOLF GAMES SHALL BE AT LEAST 50% OF THE
ANNUAL GROSS SALES OF THE MINIATURE GOLF COURSE; AND

(III) FOOD SHALL BE AT LEAST 15% OF THE ANNUAL GROSS
SALES OF THE MINIATURE GOLF COURSE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 420

(2) BEFORE THE BOARD MAY RENEW A CLASS B–MGC (MINIATURE
GOLF COURSE) BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE, THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL
PROVIDE THE BOARD WITH AN ANNUAL GROSS SALES REPORT FOR ALCOHOL,
MINIATURE GOLF GAMES, AND FOOD THAT SHOWS THE LICENSE HOLDER HAS MET
THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(F) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $1,500.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3