START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 499

Chapter 499

(House Bill 969)

AN ACT concerning

Public Service Commission – Cybersecurity Staffing and Assessments
(Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Public Service Commission to include on its staff a certain
number of experts in cybersecurity to perform certain duties; requiring the
Commission to establish, in coordination with the Office of Security Management,
cybersecurity standards and best practices for regulated entities, share information
on cybersecurity initiatives and best practices with certain entities, ~~and~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~periodic~~ ~~assessment~~ collect certain certifications, and submit a certain report;
requiring certain public service companies, including certain electric cooperatives, to
adopt and implement certain cybersecurity standards and a zero–trust cybersecurity
approach for certain services, establish certain minimum security standards, and
periodically ~~contract~~ engage with a third party to conduct a certain assessment and
submit certain information to the Commission beginning in a certain year; ~~requiring~~
~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~an~~ ~~evaluation~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date~~ ~~based~~ ~~on~~ ~~certain~~
~~assessments;~~ requiring each public service company to report a cybersecurity incident
to certain entities; requiring the State Chief Information Security Officer, in
consultation with the Commission, to establish a certain reporting process; requiring
the State Security Operations Center to immediately notify certain agencies of a
cybersecurity incident reported under this Act; providing that, for a certain fiscal year,
funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account may be transferred by budget amendment
to the Department of Information Technology for a certain purpose; and generally
relating to cybersecurity standards and assessments for public service companies
and the Public Service Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 5–637
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 1–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 1–101(h–1) and 5–306
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 499 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 2–108(d) and 2–113
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 3.5–301(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Corporations and Associations

5–637.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, this subtitle
applies to the provision of broadband Internet service by a member–regulated cooperative.

(2) A member–regulated cooperative may not, for the sole purpose of
providing broadband Internet service, exercise the power of condemnation under §
5–607(a)(16) of this subtitle.

(b) A member–regulated cooperative is subject to the following provisions of the
Public Utilities Article:

(1) § 5–103;

(2) § 5–201;

(3) § 5–202;

(4) § 5–303;

(5) § 5–304;

(6) § 5–306;

[(6)] (7) § 7–103;

[(7)] (8) § 7–104;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 499

[(8)] (9) § 7–203;

[(9)] (10) § 7–207;

[(10)] (11) § 7–302;

[(11)] (12) Title 7, Subtitle 5, Part I and Part II;

[(12)] (13) Title 7, Subtitle 7; and

[(13)] (14) § 13–101.

Article – Public Utilities

1–101.

(a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

(H–1) “CYBERSECURITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3.5–301 OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

2–108.

(d) (1) The State budget shall provide sufficient money for the Commission to
hire, develop, and organize a staff to perform the functions of the Commission, including
analyzing data submitted to the Commission and participating in proceedings as provided
in § 3–104 of this article.

(2) (i) As the Commission considers necessary, the Commission shall
hire experts including economists, cost of capital experts, rate design experts, accountants,
engineers, transportation specialists, and lawyers.

(ii) To assist in the regulation of intrastate hazardous liquid
pipelines under Title 11, Subtitle 2 of this article, the Commission shall include on its staff
at least one engineer who specializes in the storage of and the transportation of hazardous
liquid materials by pipeline.

(3) THE COMMISSION SHALL INCLUDE ON ITS STAFF ONE OR MORE
EMPLOYEES THAT ARE EXPERTS IN CYBERSECURITY TO:

(I) ADVISE THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMISSION AND THE
COMMISSIONERS ON MEASURES TO IMPROVE OVERSIGHT OF THE CYBERSECURITY
PRACTICES OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 499 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) CONSULT WITH THE OFFICE OF SECURITY MANAGEMENT
ON CYBERSECURITY ISSUES RELATED TO UTILITY REGULATION;

(III) STUDY AND MONITOR CYBERSECURITY BEST PRACTICES
FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND OPERATIONAL TECHNOLOGY;

(IV) ASSIST IN DRAFTING CYBERSECURITY–RELATED
~~REGULATIONS;~~

(V) ASSIST THE COMMISSION IN MONITORING THE MINIMUM
SECURITY STANDARDS DEVELOPED UNDER § 5–306 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(VI) (IV) PARTICIPATE IN BRIEFINGS TO DISCUSS
CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES BASED ON:

1. APPLICABLE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
REGULATORY UTILITY COMMISSIONERS GUIDANCE; AND

2. IMPROVEMENTS TO CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES
RECOMMENDED IN THE CYBERSECURITY ASSESSMENTS REQUIRED UNDER § 5–306
OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(V) CONVENE WORKSHOPS WITH SUPPORT PUBLIC SERVICE
COMPANIES THAT DO NOT MEET MINIMUM SECURITY STANDARDS WITH
REMEDIATING VULNERABILITIES OR ADDRESSING CYBERSECURITY ASSESSMENT
FINDINGS; ~~AND.~~

(VII) PREPARE REPORTS FOR THE COMMISSION TO REVIEW,
INCLUDING REPORTS ON:

1. CYBERSECURITY THREATS AND SOURCES; AND

2. THE EFFICACY OF CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES OF
PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES.

(4) The Commission may retain on a case by case basis additional experts
as required for a particular matter.

[(4)] (5) The lawyers who represent the Commission staff in proceedings
before the Commission shall be appointed by the Commission and shall be organized and
operate independently of the office of General Counsel.

[(5)] (6) (i) As required, the Commission shall hire public utility law
judges.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 499

(ii) Public utility law judges are a separate organizational unit and
shall report directly to the Commission.

[(6)] (7) The Commission shall hire personal staff members for each
commissioner as required to provide advice, draft proposed orders and rulings, and perform
other personal staff functions.

(8) (I) THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(I) 1. COLLABORATE WITH THE OFFICE OF SECURITY
MANAGEMENT TO ESTABLISH CYBERSECURITY STANDARDS AND BEST PRACTICES
FOR REGULATED ENTITIES, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT UTILITY NEEDS AND
CAPABILITIES BASED ON SIZE;

(II) 2. PERIODICALLY SHARE INFORMATION ON
CYBERSECURITY INITIATIVES AND BEST PRACTICES WITH MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC
UTILITIES; AND

(III) 3. BEGINNING ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2023
JANUARY 1, 2025, AND EVERY 2 YEARS THEREAFTER,:

A. EVALUATE COLLECT CERTIFICATIONS OF A PUBLIC
SERVICE COMPANY’S COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS USED IN THE ASSESSMENTS
SUBMITTED CONDUCTED UNDER § 5–306 OF THIS ARTICLE FOR
CYBERSECURITY–RELATED POLICIES AND PROCEDURES, INCLUDING
CYBERSECURITY AND DATA PRIVACY THREAT PROTECTIONS; AND

(IV) B. SUBMIT THE EVALUATION UNDER ITEM (III) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH A REPORT TO THE OFFICE OF SECURITY MANAGEMENT IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT
OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT STATE CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER,
OR THE OFFICER’S DESIGNEE.

(II) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE:

1. A GENERAL OVERVIEW OF CYBERSECURITY
TECHNOLOGY AND POLICIES USED BY PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES IN THE STATE,
GROUPED BY THE FOLLOWING TYPES:

A. INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANIES;

B. ELECTRIC COOPERATIVES;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 499 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

C. MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC COMPANIES;

D. GAS COMPANIES; AND

E. WATER COMPANIES;

2. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVING
CYBERSECURITY TECHNOLOGY AND POLICIES USED BY PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES
IN THE STATE, GROUPED BY THE FOLLOWING TYPES:

A. INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANIES;

B. ELECTRIC COOPERATIVES;

C. MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC COMPANIES;

D. GAS COMPANIES; AND

E. WATER COMPANIES; AND

3. FOR EACH CERTIFICATION COLLECTED:

A. THE NAME OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY;

B. THE DATE OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY’S MOST
RECENT CYBERSECURITY ASSESSMENT;

C. THE CYBERSECURITY FRAMEWORK USED IN THE
CYBERSECURITY ASSESSMENT OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY; AND

D. THE NAME OF THE ENTITY THAT COMPLETED THE
CYBERSECURITY ASSESSMENT.

[(7)] (9) Subject to § 3–104 of this article, the Commission may delegate
to a commissioner or personnel the authority to perform an administrative function
necessary to carry out a duty of the Commission.

[(8)] (10) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph
or otherwise by law, all personnel of the Commission are subject to the provisions of the
State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(ii) The following are in the executive service, management service,
or are special appointments in the State Personnel Management System:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 499

1. each commissioner of the Commission;

2. the Executive Director;

3. the General Counsel and each assistant general counsel;

4. the Executive Secretary;

5. the commissioners’ personal staff members;

6. the chief public utility law judge; and

7. each license hearing officer.

2–113.

(a) (1) The Commission shall:

(i) supervise and regulate the public service companies subject to
the jurisdiction of the Commission to:

1. ensure their operation in the interest of the public; and

2. promote adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of
utility services in the State without unjust discrimination; and

(ii) enforce compliance with the requirements of law by public
service companies, including requirements with respect to financial condition,
capitalization, franchises, plant, manner of operation, rates, and service.

(2) In supervising and regulating public service companies, the
Commission shall consider:

(i) the public safety;

(ii) the economy of the State;

(iii) the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected
workers;

(iv) the conservation of natural resources;

(v) the preservation of environmental quality, including protection
of the global climate from continued short–term and long–term warming based on the best

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 499 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

available scientific information recognized by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change; [and]

(vi) the achievement of the State’s climate commitments for reducing
statewide greenhouse gas emissions, including those specified in Title 2, Subtitle 12 of the
Environment Article; AND

(VII) THE PROTECTION OF A PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY’S
INFRASTRUCTURE AGAINST CYBERSECURITY THREATS.

(b) The powers and duties listed in this title do not limit the scope of the general
powers and duties of the Commission provided for by this division.

5–306.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ZERO–TRUST” MEANS A CYBERSECURITY APPROACH:

(1) FOCUSED ON CYBERSECURITY RESOURCE PROTECTION; AND

(2) BASED ON THE PREMISE THAT TRUST IS NEVER GRANTED
IMPLICITLY BUT MUST BE CONTINUALLY EVALUATED.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY THAT
IS:

(1) A COMMON CARRIER; OR

(2) A TELEPHONE COMPANY.

(C) A PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY SHALL:

(1) ADOPT AND IMPLEMENT CYBERSECURITY STANDARDS THAT ARE
EQUAL TO OR EXCEED STANDARDS ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION;

(2) ADOPT A ZERO–TRUST CYBERSECURITY APPROACH FOR
ON–PREMISES SERVICES AND CLOUD–BASED SERVICES;

(3) ESTABLISH MINIMUM SECURITY STANDARDS FOR EACH
OPERATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVICE BASED ON
THE LEVEL OF SECURITY RISK FOR EACH DEVICE, INCLUDING SECURITY RISKS
ASSOCIATED WITH SUPPLY CHAINS; AND

(4) (I) BEGINNING IN 2024 ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, AND AT
LEAST ONCE ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EVERY OTHER YEAR THEREAFTER, CONTRACT

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 499

~~WITH~~ ENGAGE A THIRD PARTY TO CONDUCT AN ASSESSMENT OF OPERATIONAL
TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVICES BASED ON:

1. THE CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECURITY AGENCY’S CROSS–SECTOR CYBERSECURITY PERFORMANCE GOALS; OR

2. A MORE STRINGENT STANDARD THAT IS BASED ON
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY SECURITY
FRAMEWORKS; AND

(II) SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSION:

1. THE RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF EACH
ASSESSMENT; AND

2. CERTIFICATION OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY’S
COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS USED IN THE ASSESSMENTS UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS
ITEM.

(D) (1) EACH PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY SHALL REPORT, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE PROCESS ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT, INCLUDING AN ATTACK ON A SYSTEM BEING USED BY
THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY, TO THE STATE SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTER IN
THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.

(2) THE STATE CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSION, SHALL ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR A
PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY TO REPORT CYBERSECURITY INCIDENTS UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, INCLUDING ESTABLISHING:

(I) THE CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING THE CIRCUMSTANCES
UNDER WHICH A CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT MUST BE REPORTED;

(II) THE MANNER IN WHICH A CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT MUST
BE REPORTED; AND

(III) THE TIME PERIOD WITHIN WHICH A CYBERSECURITY
INCIDENT MUST BE REPORTED.

(3) THE STATE SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTER SHALL
IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY APPROPRIATE STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES OF A
CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT REPORTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

Article – State Finance and Procurement
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 499 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3.5–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Cybersecurity” means processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024,~~
~~the~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~an~~ ~~evaluation~~ ~~based~~ ~~on~~ ~~assessments~~
~~conducted~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~public~~ ~~service~~ ~~company’s~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~devices~~ ~~conducted~~ ~~under~~
~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ for fiscal year 2024, funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account may be
transferred by budget amendment, in accordance with § 7–310 of the State Finance and
Procurement Article, to the Department of Information Technology for the purpose of adding
additional staffing and operational capacity for the Department to improve State and local
cybersecurity.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
Assembly that the Public Service Commission work with the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency and the Office of Security Management to improve the
Commission’s capacity to implement the provisions of this Act.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10