START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 991 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 991 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Basket of Cheer 
 
   
This bill repeals the restriction that an alcoholic beverages licensee in Frederick County, 
who has been issued a basket of cheer permit, may only provide a basket of cheer 
containing alcoholic beverages, as a prize at a benefit performance, if the alcoholic 
beverages were produced in Maryland. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Frederick County operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Frederick County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to 
issue a basket of cheer permit, at no cost, to a Class C per diem beer and wine (BW) licensee 
or a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) licensee. The permit authorizes the 
licensee to provide, as a prize at a benefit performance, a basket of cheer of alcoholic 
beverages produced in Maryland for off-premises consumption. A basket may contain up 
to 288 ounces of beer and 2.25 liters of wine. For a Class C per diem BWL licensee, a 
basket may also contain up to 2.25 liters of liquor. A licensee may raffle up to 10 baskets 
of cheer per benefit performance; the licensee must obtain the alcoholic beverages 
contained in each basket from a licensed alcoholic beverages retailer. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 991/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2