START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 987 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 987 
(Delegates Valderrama and Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Alcoholic Beverages – Use of Alcoholic Beverages for Educational Purposes 
 
 
This bill authorizes adult students who are not of legal drinking age in the State to “taste” 
alcoholic beverages while participating in educational classes at “qualified institutions of 
higher education” without criminal penalty to the student, instructor, or institution of high 
education, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect State government operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “qualified institution of higher education” means an institution of postsecondary 
education that (1) generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools; (2) awards 
degrees at the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level; and (3) offers courses or 
programs in enology, fermenting, brewing, or hospitality and tourism. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 987/ Page 2 
A “qualified student” means a student who is between18 and 21 years old and enrolled in 
a course or program in enology, fermenting, brewing, or hospitality and tourism offered by 
a qualified institution of higher education. 
 
To “taste” means to draw an alcoholic beverage into the mouth but does not include 
swallowing or otherwise consuming an alcoholic beverage. 
 
Permitted Activity 
 
A qualified student may taste an alcoholic beverage if the qualified student:  (1) tastes the 
alcoholic beverage for educational purposes as part of a course or program in enology, 
fermenting, brewing, or hospitality and tourism that the qualified student is enrolled in at 
a qualified institution of higher education; and only during the dates and times of the 
enology, fermenting, brewing, or hospitality and tourism course or program; and spits the 
alcoholic beverage out after tasting the alcoholic beverage; (2) an authorized instructor 
offers the alcoholic beverage only during the dates and times of the enology, fermenting, 
brewing, or hospitality and tourism course or program; and (3) the alcoholic beverage 
remains under the control of an authorized instructor. 
 
A qualified institution of higher education is not required to obtain a permit or license 
issued to allow qualified students to taste alcoholic beverages if the institution does not 
impose an extra fee or charge for the alcoholic beverage tasted by a student. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual under the age of 21 is prohibited from possessing 
and/or consuming an alcoholic beverage, unless specific circumstances are met. Those 
exceptions include:  (1) consumption during a religious ceremony and (2) being in 
possession of alcohol during the course of employment, as specified. 
 
A person is prohibited from supplying alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of 
age. A person is prohibited from knowingly allowing a minor under 21 years of age to 
possess or consume alcoholic beverages on property that they lease or own. However, these 
prohibitions do not apply if the person providing the alcoholic beverage and the individual 
drinking are members of the same immediate family and the consumption occurs in a 
private residence of the adult or within the curtilage of the residence or the underage 
individual consumes the alcoholic beverage as part of a religious ceremony. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 987/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 672 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts) Office of the Public 
Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3