START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 599

Chapter 599

(House Bill 947)

AN ACT concerning

Charles County – Property Tax – Credit for Volunteer Emergency Responders

FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing body of Charles County to grant, by law, a
tax credit against the property tax imposed on the owner–occupied residence of
certain emergency responders and their surviving spouses; and generally relating to
a property tax credit in Charles County for emergency responders and their
surviving spouses.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–310(l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

9–310.

(L) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “EMERGENCY RESPONDER” MEANS AN
INDIVIDUAL WHO IS AN ACTIVE OR RETIRED VOLUNTEER MEMBER OF A FIRE,
RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES COMPANY IN CHARLES COUNTY.

(2) THE GOVERNING BODY OF CHARLES COUNTY MAY GRANT, BY
LAW, A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE COUNTY PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON
REAL PROPERTY THAT IS OWNED AND OCCUPIED AS THE PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE OF
AN EMERGENCY RESPONDER OR AN UNMARRIED SURVIVING SPOUSE OF A
DECEASED EMERGENCY RESPONDER IF THE FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME OF
THE EMERGENCY RESPONDER OR THE UNMARRIED SURVIVING SPOUSE FOR THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TAXABLE YEAR IS $50,000 $150,000 OR LESS.

(3) THE GOVERNING BODY OF CHARLES COUNTY MAY PROVIDE, BY
LAW, FOR:

(I) THE AMOUNT AND DURATION OF THE TAX CREDIT UNDER
THIS SUBSECTION;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 599 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE CREDIT; AND

(III) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE
CREDIT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2