START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 946 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 946 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Main Street Laurel Development  
PG 404-23 
 
   
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to issue 
up to five Class B-DD (Development District) licenses to restaurants located within 
Main Street Laurel, from Washington Boulevard to 7th Street, between the Patuxent River 
to the north and Prince George Street to the south. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues may increase beginning in FY 2024 to 
the extent Class B-DD alcoholic beverages licenses are issued under the bill. 
Prince George’s County can handle any additional enforcement activity using existing 
budgeted resources.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Prince George’s County, a Class B-DD (Development District) 
seven-day beer, wine, and liquor license may be issued to a restaurant in any single 
designated development district, as specified. The license authorizes the license holder to 
sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $3,025. 
 
Local Revenues:  For each additional Class B-DD license that Prince George’s County 
issues under the bill, county revenues increase by $3,025 from license fees; however, the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 946/ Page 2 
number of additional Class B-DD licenses that might be issued under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2