START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 561

Chapter 561

(House Bill 920)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Motor Vehicle Glass Repair or Replacement – Advanced
Driver Assistance System Recalibration

FOR the purpose of establishing consumer protections related to the repair or replacement
of motor vehicle glass on motor vehicles equipped with an advanced driver assistance
system; and generally relating to consumer protections related to the repair or
replacement of motor vehicle glass on motor vehicles equipped with advanced driver
assistance systems.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxvi)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxvii) and 14–1327
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xxxv) Section 11–210 of the Education Article; [or]

(xxxvi) Title 14, Subtitle 44 of this article; or
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 561 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(XXXVII) SECTION 14–1327 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

14–1327.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM” MEANS AN
ELECTRONIC SYSTEM THAT USES AUTOMATED TECHNOLOGY INCLUDING CAMERAS
AND SENSORS TO DETECT NEARBY OBSTACLES AND DRIVER ERRORS TO ASSIST A
DRIVER IN THE SAFE OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.

(3) “MOTOR VEHICLE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN TITLE 11 OF
THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

(4) “MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS FACILITY” MEANS A PERSON
THAT:

(I) REPAIRS OR REPLACES MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS;
AND

(II) PROVIDES RELATED RECALIBRATION OF AN ADVANCED
DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM.

(5) “PERSON” INCLUDES AN INDIVIDUAL, A CORPORATION, A
BUSINESS TRUST, A TRUST ESTATE, AN ASSOCIATION, TWO OR MORE PERSONS
HAVING A JOINT OR COMMON INTEREST, OR ANY OTHER LEGAL OR COMMERCIAL
~~ENTITY.~~

(6) (5) “RECALIBRATION” MEANS THE READJUSTMENT OF
CAMERAS, SENSORS, AND OTHER TECHNOLOGY IN AN ADVANCED DRIVER
ASSISTANCE SYSTEM TO ENSURE PROPER WORKING ORDER IN ACCORDANCE WITH
MOTOR VEHICLE MANUFACTURER SPECIFICATIONS.

(B) BEFORE REPAIRING OR REPLACING MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS, IF A
MOTOR VEHICLE IS EQUIPPED WITH AN ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM, A
MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS FACILITY SHALL:

(1) INFORM THE CUSTOMER IF THE RECALIBRATION OF AN
ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM IS REQUIRED; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 561

(2) PROVIDE THE CUSTOMER WITH A WRITTEN STATEMENT THAT THE
WORK TO BE PERFORMED ON THE MOTOR VEHICLE WILL MEET OR EXCEED
ORIGINAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURER SPECIFICATIONS.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A MOTOR
VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS FACILITY IS NOT LIMITED TO MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS,
TOOLING, EQUIPMENT, OR REPAIR PROCEDURES PROVIDED BY THE VEHICLE
MANUFACTURER.

(2) RECALIBRATION OF AN ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM
PERFORMED BY A MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS FACILITY SHALL MEET OR
EXCEED THE MOTOR VEHICLE MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS.

(3) A MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS FACILITY MAY NOT CHARGE
FOR SERVICES THAT ARE NOT PERFORMED OR SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED.

(D) A MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS FACILITY SHALL INFORM THE
CUSTOMER IF RECALIBRATION OF AN ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM IS
REQUIRED AND IS NOT PERFORMED OR SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED.

(E) A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION BY A MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY GLASS
FACILITY IS:

(1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN
THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(2) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS
CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3