START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 914 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 914 
(Delegate Jackson) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Service Commission – Judicial Review – Proceedings 
 
 
This bill specifies that a judicial review of a final decision or order by the Public Service 
Commission (PSC) must be instituted in (1) a circuit court for a county in which the public 
service company that is a party to the proceeding provides service or (2) in the Circuit Court 
for Baltimore City. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations; however, 
PSC advises that the bill limits the venues for judicial review and as such, PSC 
administrative expenditures may decrease or be reallocated due to reduced travel for PSC 
legal staff. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except for PSC staff, a party or person in interest, including the 
People’s Counsel, that is dissatisfied by a final decision or order of PSC may seek judicial 
review of the decision or order. A proceeding for review must be instituted in (1) the 
circuit court in equity for any county in which the public service company involved in the 
proceeding operates or (2) the Circuit Court in equity for Baltimore City. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 914/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):   Public Service Commission; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of People’s Counsel; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2