START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 489

Chapter 489

(House Bill 950)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Native Plants Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Native Plants Program to encourage and
promote the use and sale of plants native to Maryland at certain businesses and to
educate the public on native plants; requiring the ~~University~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Extension~~
Department of Agriculture to administer the Program in coordination with the
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Agriculture~~ University of Maryland Extension; requiring the
University of Maryland Extension to hire an extension agent to serve as a native
plant specialist for certain educational purposes; requiring the Department of
Agriculture to create and maintain a certain voluntary certification program and a
marketing program in a certain manner; requiring the University of Maryland
Extension to create a certain website on native plants and requiring the Department
of Natural Resources to include a link to the website on the Department of Natural
Resources’ native plants website; and generally relating to plants native to
Maryland.

BY adding to
Article – Agriculture
Section 10–401 through 10–407 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4. Maryland
Native Plants Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

SUBTITLE 4. MARYLAND NATIVE PLANTS PROGRAM.

10–401.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST” MEANS A LIST OF
PLANTS THAT ARE NATIVE TO MARYLAND THAT ARE COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE
AND APPROPRIATE FOR GROWING IN RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPES.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 489 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (1) “NATIVE PLANT” MEANS A PLANT THAT OCCURS NATURALLY IN
THE STATE AND SURROUNDING REGION, ECOSYSTEM, AND HABITAT, WITHOUT
DIRECT OR INDIRECT HUMAN ACTIONS.

(2) “NATIVE PLANT” INCLUDES A PLANT THAT:

(I) WAS PRESENT BEFORE COLONIAL SETTLEMENT; OR

(II) IS LISTED AS NATIVE TO MARYLAND ON THE MARYLAND
PLANT ATLAS WEBSITE.

(3) “NATIVE PLANT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A PLANT THAT IS A NAMED
OR UNNAMED CULTIVAR OR HYBRID.

(D) “NATIVE PLANT SPECIALIST” MEANS THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
EXTENSION AGENT HIRED UNDER § 10–403 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND NATIVE PLANTS PROGRAM.

10–402.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND NATIVE PLANTS PROGRAM.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO:

(1) ENCOURAGE AND PROMOTE THE RESPOND TO THE INCREASING
DEMAND FOR, USE OF, AND SALE OF NATIVE PLANTS BY RETAIL GARDEN CENTERS,
RETAIL NURSERIES, AND WHOLESALE NURSERIES; AND

(2) EDUCATE THE PUBLIC, LANDSCAPERS, AND OTHER PLANT USERS
ON THE IMPORTANCE, BENEFIT, AND AVAILABILITY OF NATIVE PLANTS.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION SHALL ADMINISTER
THE EDUCATIONAL COMPONENTS OF THE PROGRAM IN COORDINATION WITH THE
DEPARTMENT AND OTHER AGENCIES.

10–403.

(A) (1) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION SHALL HIRE AN
EXTENSION AGENT TO SERVE AS A NATIVE PLANT SPECIALIST.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 489

(2) THE INDIVIDUAL HIRED TO SERVE AS THE NATIVE PLANT
SPECIALIST MUST HAVE EXPERTISE IN NATIVE PLANTS.

(B) THE NATIVE PLANT SPECIALIST SHALL:

(1) ASSIST THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION IN
FULFILLING ~~ANY~~ EDUCATIONAL AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING RESPONSIBILITIES
RELATED TO THE PROGRAM;

(2) COORDINATE WITH THE DEPARTMENT IN THE ADMINISTRATION
TO DELIVER EDUCATIONAL COMPONENTS OF THE PROGRAM;

(3) ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN PROVIDE INPUT AND EXPERTISE TO
THE DEPARTMENT IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND
NATIVE PLANT LIST DEVELOPED UNDER § 10–404 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(4) PROVIDE GUIDANCE INPUT AND EXPERTISE TO THE
DEPARTMENT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A LIST OF CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE
PLANT GROWERS AND RETAILERS DEVELOPED UNDER § 10–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(5) TEACH GROWERS AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS ABOUT
TECHNIQUES FOR GROWING NATIVE PLANTS; AND

(6) COORDINATE EDUCATION, APPLIED RESEARCH, AND OUTREACH
TO TEACH THE PUBLIC, LANDSCAPERS, AND OTHER PLANT USERS ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE, BENEFIT, AND AVAILABILITY OF NATIVE PLANTS.

10–404.

(A) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION, IN COORDINATION WITH
SHALL PROVIDE INPUT TO THE DEPARTMENT, WHO SHALL RECEIVE INPUT FROM
THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES, AND THE MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT
SOCIETY, SHALL TO DEVELOP A COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST.

(B) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION, IN COORDINATION WITH
SHALL PROVIDE INPUT TO THE DEPARTMENT, WHO SHALL RECEIVE INPUT FROM
THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES, AND THE MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT
SOCIETY, SHALL TO REVIEW AND UPDATE THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE
PLANT LIST AT LEAST ONCE EVERY 3 YEARS.

(C) WHEN A CULTIVAR OR HYBRID OF A NATIVE PLANT FILLS AN
ECOLOGICAL NICHE THAT A NATIVE PLANT IS NO LONGER ABLE TO FILL DUE TO
WIDESPREAD ATTACK BY DISEASE OR INSECTS, THE NATIVE PLANT SPECIALIST
SHALL FIRST RECEIVE INPUT FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 489 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

AND THE MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY AND THEN INFORM AND GUIDE THE
DEPARTMENT IN EVALUATING THE CULTIVAR OR HYBRID OF A NATIVE PLANT FOR
INCLUSION ON THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST.

(C) (D) THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST SHALL BE
POSTED ONLINE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 10–407 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

10–405.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND EXTENSION, SHALL CREATE A VOLUNTARY CERTIFICATION PROGRAM
FOR GROWERS AND RETAILERS TO BE IDENTIFIED AS A MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT
GROWER OR A MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT RETAILER, OR BOTH.

(2) THIS CERTIFICATION SHALL ONLY BE AVAILABLE TO GROWERS
AND RETAILERS THAT ARE SELLING NATIVE PLANTS LISTED ON THE COMMERCIAL
MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST.

(B) (1) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION DEPARTMENT
SHALL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A LIST OF CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT
GROWERS AND CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT RETAILERS.

(2) THE LISTS DEVELOPED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
POSTED ONLINE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 10–407 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

10–406.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COORDINATION WITH THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND EXTENSION, SHALL CREATE A “MARYLAND NATIVES” MARKETING
PROGRAM TO ENCOURAGE AND PROMOTE THE USE AND SALE OF NATIVE PLANTS
THAT ARE LISTED ON THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST.

(B) THE “MARYLAND NATIVES” MARKETING PROGRAM SHALL DEVELOP:

(1) A “MARYLAND NATIVES” LOGO TO IDENTIFY PLANTS THAT ARE
LISTED ON THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST; AND

(2) A QR CODE CONTAINING PLANT IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION
THAT LINKS TO THE WEBPAGES AND WEBSITES SPECIFIED IN § 10–407 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(C) THE “MARYLAND NATIVES” LOGO SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO
GROWERS AND RETAILERS WHO MAY:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 489

(1) PLACE THE LOGO ON LABELS, STICKERS, OR POTS OF EACH PLANT
LISTED ON THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST; AND

(2) USE THE LOGO IN DISPLAYS WITH PLANTS LISTED ON THE
COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST.

10–407.

(A) (1) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION SHALL CREATE A
“MARYLAND NATIVE PLANTS” WEBPAGE ON THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
EXTENSION’S WEBSITE.

(2) THE “MARYLAND NATIVE PLANTS” WEBPAGE SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST
DEVELOPED UNDER § 10–404 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(II) THE LISTS OF CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT
GROWERS AND CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT RETAILERS DEVELOPED
UNDER § 10–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(III) GENERAL INFORMATION ON NATIVE PLANTS.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMOTE THE PROGRAM AND INCLUDE ON
THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE’S “MARYLAND’S BEST” WEBSITE:

(1) THE COMMERCIAL MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT LIST DEVELOPED
UNDER § 10–404 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) THE LISTS OF CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT GROWERS
AND CERTIFIED MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT RETAILERS DEVELOPED UNDER §
10–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(3) GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT NATIVE PLANTS.

(C) A LINK TO THE “MARYLAND NATIVE PLANTS” WEBPAGE SHALL BE
POSTED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES’ NATIVE PLANTS WEBSITE.

(D) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$150,000 FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION TO HIRE ONE
EXTENSION AGENT AS A NATIVE PLANT SPECIALIST AND $100,000 FOR THE
DEPARTMENT TO HIRE STAFF TO ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 489 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2023~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6