START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 999 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 999 
(Delegate Fair) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Corporations - Filing Requirements for Dissolution and Termination of 
Registration or Qualification - Repeal 
 
  
This bill repeals a prohibition against the State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
(SDAT) from accepting articles of dissolution of a corporation for record unless specified 
reports have been filed. The bill also repeals a requirement that SDAT issue a certificate of 
termination to a foreign corporation if all specified reports have been filed. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by approximately $150,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2024. Expenditures are not affected.    
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A corporation must file articles of dissolution for record with SDAT if 
there are (1) any known creditors of the corporation, after the 19th day following the 
mailing of notice to them or (2) no known creditors, at any time. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 999/ Page 2 
On written request of the corporation, SDAT must furnish without charge a list of all 
collectors of taxes of counties and municipalities to which the department has certified an 
assessment of personal property taxable to the corporation within the preceding four years. 
The department may not accept articles of dissolution of a corporation for record unless 
the reports have been filed. 
 
A foreign corporation registered or qualified to do business in the State may terminate its 
registration or qualification as provided. To terminate, the corporation must file an 
application for termination with the department. The application for termination must be 
executed for the corporation by its president or one of its vice-presidents. The application 
must include (1) the name of the corporation, and the address of any principal office in this 
State; (2) the name and address of its resident agent in this State; (3) a statement that the 
corporation, in the case of termination of qualification, no longer transacts any intrastate 
business in this State or in the case of termination of registration, no longer transacts any 
interstate or foreign business in this State; and (4) a statement that the corporation wishes 
to terminate its registration or qualification to do business in this State and has filed all 
reports required by law and has paid all taxes due by it to the State and any of its political 
subdivisions as of the date of the application for termination. SDAT must issue a certificate 
of termination to the corporation if all required reports have been filed. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SDAT advises that the bill will result in fewer business entities paying 
the $300 corporate filing fee before filing papers with the department to dissolve or 
terminate, thereby reducing general fund revenues. The department estimates that based on 
past filing practices of specified corporations, approximately 500 entities would no longer 
file an annual report before filing paperwork to dissolve or terminate, thereby reducing 
general fund revenues by $150,000 annually. 
 
As a point of reference, SDAT approved 1,051 online Articles of Dissolution and 
498 online Foreign Corporation Terminations in fiscal 2022, which represented 
approximately 80% of the total approved filings for each filing type.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 999/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3