START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 722

Chapter 722

(House Bill 1011)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Refrigerants – Limitations on Use

FOR the purpose of providing that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, ~~regulation,~~
~~or~~ ~~requirement,~~ except for regulations issued by the Department of the Environment,
no provision of the State building code or other law or regulation may prohibit or
otherwise limit the use of a refrigerant ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~be~~ ~~prohibited~~ ~~or~~ ~~otherwise~~ ~~limited~~ if
the refrigerant is designated as acceptable for use under federal listing requirements
and any appliance containing the refrigerant meets federal safety standards and use
conditions; and generally relating to the use of refrigerants in the State.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 12–706
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

12–706.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “APPLIANCE” MEANS ANY DEVICE THAT:

(1) CONTAINS AND USES A CLASS I OR CLASS II SUBSTANCE OR A
SUBSTITUTE FOR A CLASS I OR CLASS II SUBSTANCE, AS DEFINED IN 42 U.S.C.
7671A, AS A REFRIGERANT; AND

(2) IS USED FOR A HOUSEHOLD OR COMMERCIAL PURPOSE,
INCLUDING AN AIR CONDITIONER, A REFRIGERATOR, A CHILLER, OR A FREEZER.

(B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, REGULATION, OR
REQUIREMENT IN THE STATE, EXCEPT FOR REGULATIONS ISSUED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, NO PROVISION OF THE STATE BUILDING
CODE OR OTHER LAW OR REGULATION MAY PROHIBIT OR OTHERWISE LIMIT THE
USE OF A REFRIGERANT MAY NOT BE PROHIBITED OR OTHERWISE LIMITED IF:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 722 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE REFRIGERANT IS DESIGNATED AS ACCEPTABLE FOR USE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH 42 U.S.C. 7671K; AND

(2) ANY APPLIANCE CONTAINING THE REFRIGERANT DESIGNATED
FOR ACCEPTABLE USE IS LABELED, INSTALLED, SERVICED, REPAIRED, AND USED,
~~AND~~ ~~DISPOSED~~ ~~OF~~ IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE SAFETY STANDARDS AND USE
CONDITIONS UNDER 42 U.S.C. 7671K.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2