START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1084 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1084 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Oyster Inspection and Severance Taxes - Increase 
 
 
This bill increases the severance tax – from $1 per bushel to $2 per bushel – that is levied 
on every bushel of oysters caught within the limits of the natural oyster bars of the State 
exclusive of the Potomac River. The bill also increases the inspection tax – from 30 cents 
per bushel to $1 per bushel – that is levied on marketable oysters shipped in the shell to 
any place outside the State. The bill also requires that $1 of every $2 of the severance tax 
collected be used by the county oyster committees in specified counties (Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Calvert, Charles, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, Somerset, St. Mary’s, 
Talbot, and Wicomico) for the repletion of natural oyster bars located in the waters of the 
county. The bill also clarifies a provision and repeals an obsolete provision (identified 
below under Current Law). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by approximately $580,900 
annually beginning in FY 2024. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$580,900 
$580,900 
$580,900 
$580,900 
$580,900 
SF Expenditure 
$580,900 
$580,900 
$580,900 
$580,900 
$580,900 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. County oyster committees are not local government entities. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1084/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A severance tax of $1 per bushel must be levied on every bushel of oysters 
caught within the limits of the natural oyster bars of the State exclusive of the 
Potomac River. The oyster buyer or receiver must pay the tax to the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR). However, if oysters in the shell are sold directly to a consumer in the 
State and the consumer is not a licensed buyer of oysters, the seller assumes the obligation 
to pay the tax. Statute establishes that these provisions do not prevent any person licensed 
to catch oysters in the State from selling oysters in the shell directly to a consumer in the 
State. (The bill clarifies this provision to refer to “any person licensed to catch and sell 
oysters.”) 
 
An inspection tax of 30 cents per bushel is levied on marketable oysters shipped in the shell 
to any place outside the State and must be paid by the shipper. The tax is levied in addition 
to the severance tax. 
 
The severance and inspection taxes collected must be credited to the Fisheries Research 
and Development Fund and used only for the repletion of the natural oyster bars of the 
State. 
 
A tax increase effective July 1, 1982, must be used solely for an oyster seed program, with 
a minimum of 5% of the increase being used in each of a number of specified counties. 
(This provision, which DNR indicates is obsolete, is repealed by the bill.) 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by approximately 
$580,900 annually beginning in fiscal 2024. This estimate reflects the collection of 
additional oyster severance and inspection tax revenue as a result of the increased tax rates 
under the bill and use of the funds for the repletion of the natural oyster bars. The estimate 
is based on the average amount of oysters harvested per year (389,863 bushels) over the 
last three oyster harvest seasons (2019-2020, 2020-2021, and 2021-2022) and an 
assumption, based on information provided by DNR, that on average 70% of oysters 
harvested are shipped out-of-state and subject to the inspection tax.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in the oyster industry may meaningfully benefit 
from the additional funding for replenishment efforts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1217 of 2022 and HB 1353 of 2020. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1084/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 634 (Senator Mautz) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Wicomico counties; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - March 22, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3