START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1026 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1026 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Prince George's County - Land Use - Development of Neglected Property  
PG 406-23 
 
 
This bill gives Prince George’s County specified authority to exercise the power of eminent 
domain on neglected property in an area that (1) has been designated as a transit-oriented 
development and (2) is located in a business improvement district. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes Prince George’s County to exercise the power of 
eminent domain on neglected property (that is not State-owned property) in an area that 
(1) has been designated as a transit-oriented development and (2) is located in a business 
improvement district. Neglected property obtained pursuant to the bill is intended to be 
developed or redeveloped for an economic development purpose in the county. Land or 
property taken by the county through the exercise of eminent domain pursuant to the bill 
(1) may only be taken for a public purpose, including for private development that is 
consistent with a public purpose and (2) may not be taken without just compensation, as 
agreed on between the parties, or awarded by a jury, being first paid or tendered to the party 
entitled to the compensation pursuant to provisions of the Real Property Article of the 
Maryland Code governing the use of eminent domain. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1026/ Page 2 
“Neglected property” means improved or unimproved real property that (1) is zoned for 
commercial, industrial, or nonresidential use by the district council and (2) has been 
abandoned, blighted, or condemned. 
 
“Transit-oriented development” means a mix of private or public parking facilities, 
commercial and residential structures, and uses, improvements, and facilities customarily 
appurtenant to such facilities and uses, that: 
 
 
is part of a deliberate development plan or strategy involving (1) property that is 
adjacent to the passenger boarding and alighting location of a planned or existing 
transit station or (2) property, any part of which is located within one-half mile of 
the passenger boarding and alighting location of a planned or existing transit station; 
 
is planned to maximize the use of transit, walking, and bicycling by residents and 
employees; and 
 
is designated as a transit-oriented development by the Secretary of Transportation, 
as specified, and the local government or multicounty agency with land use and 
planning responsibility for the relevant area. 
 
“Transit-oriented development” includes light rail stops that are located on the Purple Line 
in Prince George’s County. “Purple Line” means the light rail transit line between Bethesda 
in Montgomery County and New Carrollton in Prince George’s County. 
 
“Business improvement district” means a business improvement district established in the 
county pursuant to specified provisions of the Economic Development Article of the 
Maryland Code which have the purposes of (1) providing for the creation of business 
improvement districts and (2) promoting the general welfare of the residents, employers, 
employees, property owners, commercial tenants, consumers, and the general public within 
the geographic area of the business improvement districts. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Prince George’s County Redevelopment Authority 
 
Chapter 266 of 1996, under the Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County, authorized 
the county to create the Prince George’s County Redevelopment Authority (a body 
corporate and politic and an instrumentality of the county), declaring that, in order to 
revitalize areas of the county in need of development or redevelopment for the public 
benefit, it is necessary that the county be authorized to acquire, by any legal means, 
including by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, land or property for residential, 
commercial, or industrial development or redevelopment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1026/ Page 3 
Chapter 266 authorizes the county, as specified by local law, to acquire, within the 
boundary lines of the county, land and property of every kind, and any right, interest, 
franchise, easement, or privilege in the property, by purchase, lease, gift, condemnation, or 
any other legal means, for residential, commercial, or industrial development or 
redevelopment, including, but not limited to, the comprehensive renovation or 
rehabilitation thereof. 
 
Chapter 266 establishes that: 
 
 
land or property taken by the county by exercising the power of eminent domain 
may not be taken without just compensation, as agreed upon between the parties, or 
awarded by a jury, being first paid or tendered to the party entitled to that 
compensation; and 
 
all land or property needed or taken by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, 
by the county, under Chapter 266, is declared to be needed or taken for a public use 
or a public benefit. 
 
Chapter 266 authorizes the county to delegate its authority to the Prince George’s County 
Redevelopment Authority; however, a decision of the redevelopment authority to take 
owner-occupied residential real property must have the prior approval of the county council 
after notice to the property owner. 
 
Eminent Domain  
 
The power to take, or condemn, private property for public use is one of the inherent powers 
of state government and, through the state, its political subdivisions. Courts have long held 
that this power, known as “eminent domain,” is derived from the sovereignty of the state. 
Both the federal and State constitutions limit the condemnation authority. Both 
constitutions establish two requirements for taking property through the power of eminent 
domain:  (1) the property taken must be for a “public use”; and (2) the party whose property 
is taken must receive “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair market value 
of the real property. In either event, the party whose property is being taken is generally 
entitled to a judicial proceeding prior to the taking of the property. However, the Maryland 
Constitution does authorize “quick-take” condemnations in limited circumstances prior to 
a court proceeding.  
 
Public Use 
 
There is no clear-cut rule to determine whether a particular use of property taken through 
eminent domain is a “public use,” and Maryland courts have broadly interpreted the term. 
The Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) has recognized takings that 
encompass a “public benefit” or a “public purpose.” Maryland courts have given great 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1026/ Page 4 
deference to a legislative determination as to whether property should be taken for a 
particular public purpose. 
 
The courts have stated that government may not simply transfer property from one private 
party to another. For example, in Van Witsen v. Gutman, 79 Md. 405 (1894), the Court of 
Appeals invalidated a condemnation by Baltimore City in which the court found the 
transfer would have benefited one private citizen at the cost of others. However, 
transferring property from one private party to another is not necessarily forbidden. In 
Prince George’s County v. Collington, 275 Md. 171 (1975), the Court of Appeals 
authorized the county to use its eminent domain authority to take private property to be 
used for economic development purposes, even though the property was not blighted. The 
Collington court enunciated the following rule:  “projects reasonably designed to benefit 
the general public, by significantly enhancing the economic growth of the State or its 
subdivisions, are public uses, at least where the exercise of the power of condemnation 
provides an impetus which private enterprise cannot provide.” Id. at 191. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Office of the Attorney General 
(Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - April 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4