START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 87

Chapter 87

(House Bill 1062)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages – Alteration of License Quota

FOR the purpose of altering the quota used to determine the maximum number of certain
alcoholic beverages licenses that the Board of License Commissioners for Harford
County may issue; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Harford
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–1601
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

22–102.

This title applies only in Harford County.

22–1601.

(a) For every [3,000] 4,000 individuals in the county, as specified by the
Maryland Department of Health, the Board may not issue more than:

(1) one Class A (off–sale) license;

(2) one Class A–1 (off–sale) license; [and] OR

(3) one Class A–2 (off–sale) license.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 87 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) If the number of licenses in a class exceeds the quota specified in subsection
(a) of this section, the Board may not issue a new license of that class unless the number of
licenses of that class are reduced by revocation or surrender, creating a vacancy under the
particular quota specified.

(c) This section does not apply to the transfer, conversion, or renewal of a license.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2