START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 424

Chapter 424

(House Bill 1026)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Land Use – Development of Neglected Property

PG 406–23

FOR the purpose of authorizing Prince George’s County to exercise powers of eminent
domain to acquire and develop or redevelop, for a public purpose, certain neglected
property located in the county that has been designated as a transit–oriented
development and is located within a business development district; and generally
relating to eminent domain in Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 25–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Land Use
Section 25–403
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Land Use

25–101.

This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

25–403.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT” MEANS A BUSINESS
IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE IN THE COUNTY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 424 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “NEGLECTED PROPERTY” MEANS IMPROVED OR UNIMPROVED
REAL PROPERTY THAT:

(I) IS ZONED FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, RESIDENTIAL,
OR NONRESIDENTIAL USE BY THE DISTRICT COUNCIL; AND

(II) HAS BEEN ABANDONED, BLIGHTED, OR CONDEMNED.

(4) “PURPLE LINE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–103.8 OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

(5) (I) “TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 7–101 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

(II) “TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT” INCLUDES LIGHT
RAIL STOPS THAT ARE LOCATED ON THE PURPLE LINE IN PRINCE GEORGE’S
COUNTY.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO STATE–OWNED PROPERTY.

(C) THE COUNTY MAY EXERCISE THE POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN ON
NEGLECTED PROPERTY IN AN AREA THAT:

(1) HAS BEEN DESIGNATED AS A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT;
AND

(2) IS LOCATED IN A BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT.

(C) (D) NEGLECTED PROPERTY OBTAINED UNDER THIS SECTION IS
INTENDED TO BE DEVELOPED OR REDEVELOPED FOR AN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PURPOSE IN THE COUNTY.

(D) (E) LAND OR PROPERTY TAKEN BY THE COUNTY THROUGH THE
EXERCISE OF EMINENT DOMAIN UNDER THIS SECTION:

(1) MAY ONLY BE TAKEN FOR A PUBLIC PURPOSE, INCLUDING FOR
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH A PUBLIC PURPOSE; AND

(2) MAY NOT BE TAKEN WITHOUT JUST COMPENSATION, AS AGREED
ON BETWEEN THE PARTIES, OR AWARDED BY A JURY, BEING FIRST PAID OR
TENDERED TO THE PARTY ENTITLED TO THE COMPENSATION, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
TITLE 12 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 424

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3