START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 509

Chapter 509

(House Bill 1004)

AN ACT concerning

Wicomico County – Sanitary District – Authorization

FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing body of Wicomico County to create a sanitary
district; and generally relating to sanitary districts.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 9–601(a), (d), and (k), 9–611, and 9–621
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 9–602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

9–601.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) (1) “District” means an entity that is created under this subtitle.

(2) “District” includes a board, body, or commission that assumes the
principal functions of a district that is created under this subtitle and later abolished.

(k) “Sanitary commission” means a sanitary commission created under this
subtitle.

9–602.

This subtitle does not apply to:

(1) Anne Arundel County[.];

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 509 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Carroll County[.];

(3) Harford County[.];

(4) Montgomery County[.];

(5) Prince George’s County[.]; OR

(6) St. Mary’s County.

[(7) Wicomico County.]

9–611.

By ordinance or resolution, the governing body of a county or the governing bodies
of 2 or more counties may create a district under this subtitle.

9–621.

Except as provided in § 9–629 of this subtitle, the sanitary commission is the body
that governs a district.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2