START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1047 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1047 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Juvenile Services Education Program - Transfer of Locally Employed 
Educational Professionals 
 
 
This bill specifies that, when a locally employed educational professional, as defined by 
the bill, transfers to the Juvenile Services Education Program (JSEP) within the Department 
of Juvenile Services (DJS), the employee must be given credit as a State employee for the 
individual’s years of service as a locally employed educational professional for the purpose 
of establishing the individual’s leave accrual rates. The bill also that specifies that a locally 
employed educational professional who transfers directly from a position with a local 
public school employer to JSEP must retain any previously accumulated leave balances 
under specified circumstances. The bill applies retroactively and must be applied to and 
interpreted to affect any transfers by locally employed educational professionals on or after 
July 1, 2022. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a material effect on State operations or 
finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Local public school employer” means a county board of education or the 
Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners. “Locally employed educational 
professional” means an individual who is employed by (1) a local public school employer 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1047/ Page 2 
in a position for which professional standards are established by the State Board of 
Education and the Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board or (2) a county 
public library system in the position of librarian or public library associate.  
 
A locally employed educational professional who transfers directly from a position with a 
local public school employer to JSEP with no period of intervening employment and no 
lapse in employment greater than 90 days must receive accumulated leave in the amount 
verified by the individual’s local public school employer as the individual’s accumulated 
leave balances at the time the individual left the local public school employer and for which 
the individual was not otherwise compensated. In such a case, the individual must be 
(1) entitled to transfer all leave balances, even if the leave balances exceed the amount of 
leave an employee of JSEP is authorized to retain and (2) subject to the leave accumulation 
and carry over requirements that otherwise apply to State employees when the individual 
begins employment at JSEP.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 147 of 2021 transferred JSEP from the Maryland State Department 
of Education (MSDE) to DJS and established the Juvenile Services Education Board to 
oversee the program. Through the program, DJS oversees and provides comprehensive 
educational services to all juveniles placed in a DJS-operated detention and residential 
facility. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that 
there is no existing process to transfer locally employed educational professionals to JSEP; 
however, the program has historically hired locally employed educational professionals as 
teachers from time to time. DBM further advises that, prior to JSEP’s transfer to DJS, 
MSDE allowed teachers that were hired from local school systems to keep their sick leave; 
however, this has not been allowed since the program transferred to DJS. If the bill is 
interpreted to only apply for a transfer, then it has no effect on State operations or finances; 
however, for purposes of this analysis, it is assumed the benefit transfers envisioned by the 
bill must be followed when a locally employed educational professional is hired by JSEP. 
 
Administratively, DBM and DJS must create and track special leave rules for any locally 
employed educational professional hired by JSEP, and different leave rules may be 
necessary for professionals from different jurisdictions. The cumulative administrative 
burden of creating and tracking these rules may increase costs, albeit minimally, for DJS. 
 
DBM and DJS are unaware of any individuals hired for JSEP since July 1, 2022, to whom 
the bill’s requirements would apply, despite the retroactive nature of the bill. DJS further 
advises that the bill has no effect on its finances and that any operational effect can be 
absorbed within existing resources. Therefore, this requirement is not anticipated to affect 
DJS or DBM operations or finances. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1047/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Maryland State Library Association; Baltimore City; Montgomery County; 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 2, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3