START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

Chapter 793

(House Bill 1079)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Board of Education and School System Revisions ~~and~~
~~Local~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Campaign~~ ~~Financing~~ ~~for~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ ~~Members~~

PG 502–23

FOR the purpose of altering the purpose of and the duties and responsibilities of the Prince
George’s County Board of Education and certain officers of the county board; altering
the voting authority of the student member of the county board; ~~renaming~~ ~~and~~
~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~duties~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~County~~ ~~Superintendent~~ ~~of~~ ~~Schools;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~an~~ ~~Office~~
~~of~~ ~~Accountability~~ ~~and~~ ~~Compliance~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~headed~~ ~~by~~ ~~an~~ ~~Inspector~~ ~~General~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~
~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~government~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~purposes;~~ altering the residency, ~~term~~ ~~limit,~~
~~age,~~ and compensation requirements for elected members of the county board;
requiring the county board to retain counsel and pay certain counsel fees and expenses
incurred for defending a member in litigation involving a member’s service in the
member’s official capacity on the county board under certain circumstances; altering
certain procedures for the election of the student member of the county board;
requiring the Prince George’s County public school system to provide equal campaign
funds for certain candidates for the student member of the county board and to
educate students on the voting process under certain circumstances; applying certain
provisions of this Act retroactively; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~governing~~ ~~body~~ ~~of~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~
~~County~~ ~~to~~ ~~establish~~ ~~a~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~for~~ ~~elected~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~governing~~ ~~body~~ ~~has~~ ~~implemented~~ ~~a~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~
~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~for~~ ~~elective~~ ~~offices~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~executive~~ ~~or~~ ~~legislative~~ ~~branches~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~county~~ ~~government~~ ~~for~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~one~~ ~~complete~~ ~~election~~ ~~cycle;~~ ~~prohibiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~system~~
~~from~~ ~~including~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~election~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~student~~ ~~member~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~board;~~ and generally relating to the governance of the Prince George’s County public
school system.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section ~~3–1002(b)~~ 3–1002(b) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section ~~3–1002(i)~~ ~~3–1002(c)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(i)~~ 3–1002(g) and (i), 3–1004, 4–104, ~~4–102(a),~~
4–112, and 4–401 ~~through~~ ~~4–403~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 4–404 ~~and~~ ~~4–405~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section ~~3–1002(a)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(d)~~ 3–1002(a), (b), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Chapter 217 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section ~~3–1002(c),~~ ~~(f),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(g)~~ 3–1002(c) and (g) and 3–1003(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Chapter 217 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~13–505~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–1002.

(b) The Prince George’s County Board consists of 14 members as follows:

(1) Nine elected members, each of whom resides in a different school board
district;

(2) Four appointed members; and

(3) One student member selected under subsection (g)(2) of this section.

(c) (1) One member of the county board shall be elected from each of the nine
school board districts described in § 3–1001 of this subtitle.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(2) From the time of filing as a candidate for election, each candidate shall
be a registered voter of the county and a resident of the school board district the candidate
seeks to represent.

(3) An elected county board member shall forfeit the office if the member:

(i) Fails to reside in the school board district from which the
member was elected, unless this change is caused by a change in the boundaries of the
district; or

(ii) Fails to be a registered voter of the county.

(4) A county board member may not hold another office of profit in county
government during the member’s term.

(5) Each elected member of the county board shall be nominated by the
registered voters of the member’s school board district.

(6) EXCEPT FOR THE STUDENT MEMBER, EACH ELECTED MEMBER OF
THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

(g) (1) The student member shall be an eleventh or twelfth grade student in the
Prince George’s County public school system during the student’s term in office.

(2) (I) An eligible student shall file a nomination form at least [2] 3
weeks before a special election meeting of the Prince George’s Regional Association of Student
Governments.

(II) Nomination forms shall be made available in the administrative
offices of all public senior high schools in the county, the office of student concerns, and the
office of the president of the regional association.

(III) The delegates to the regional association annually shall elect TWO
CANDIDATES FOR the student member to the board at a [special] PRIMARY election meeting
to be held each school year.

(3) The student member may vote on all matters before the board except
those relating to:

(i) [Capital and operating budgets;

(ii) School closings, reopenings, and boundaries;

(iii)] Collective bargaining decisions;

[(iv) Student disciplinary matters;
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v)] (II) Teacher and administrator disciplinary matters as
provided under § 6–202(a) of this article; and

[(vi)] (III) Other personnel matters.

(4) On an affirmative vote of a majority of the elected and appointed
members of the county board, the board may determine if a matter before the board relates
to a subject that the student member may not vote on under paragraph (3) of this subsection.

(5) [Unless invited to attend by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
elected and appointed members of the county board, the] THE student member may [not]
attend an executive session [that] OF THE BOARD UNLESS THE EXECUTIVE SESSION
relates to [hearings]:

(I) HEARINGS on appeals of special education placements, hearings
held under § 6–202(a) of this article, or collective bargaining; OR

(II) A PERSONNEL MATTER FOR WHICH THE STUDENT MAY NOT
VOTE UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(6) (I) The Prince George’s Regional Association of Student
Governments [may] SHALL establish procedures for the election of the student member of
the county board.

(II) THE PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL PROVIDE FOR:

1. THE ADMINISTRATION OF:

A. A PRIMARY ELECTION EACH YEAR BY THE PRINCE
GEORGE’S REGIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STUDENT GOVERNMENTS; AND

B. A GENERAL ELECTION EACH YEAR BY STUDENTS IN
6TH THROUGH 12TH GRADE IN THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEM; AND

2. NOTIFICATION TO THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT
OF CANDIDATES SELECTED BY THE PRINCE GEORGE’S REGIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
STUDENT GOVERNMENTS AFTER EACH ANNUAL PRIMARY ELECTION.

(7) FOR THE GENERAL ELECTION HELD UNDER THIS SUBSECTION,
THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(I) PROVIDE EQUAL CAMPAIGN FUNDS TO THE CANDIDATES
FOR THE STUDENT MEMBER OF THE BOARD; AND

(II) EDUCATE THE STUDENTS DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(6)(II)1B OF THIS SUBSECTION ON THE VOTING PROCESS BEFORE EACH GENERAL
ELECTION.

[(7)] (8) The election procedures established by the Prince George’s
Regional Association of Student Governments are subject to the approval of the elected and
appointed members of the county board.

(i) (1) [With the approval of the Governor, the] THE State Board may remove
a member of the county board for any of the following reasons:

(i) Immorality;

(ii) Misconduct in office;

(iii) Incompetency; or

(iv) Willful neglect of duty.

(2) Before removing a member, the State Board shall send the member a
copy of the charges pending and give the member an opportunity within 10 days to request
a hearing.

(3) If the member requests a hearing within the 10–day period:

(i) The State Board promptly shall hold a hearing, but a hearing
may not be set within 10 days after the State Board sends the member a notice of the
hearing; and

(ii) The member shall have an opportunity to be heard publicly
before the State Board in the member’s own defense, in person or by counsel.

(4) A member removed under this subsection has the right to judicial
review of the removal by the Circuit Court for Prince George’s County based on an
administrative record and such additional evidence as would be authorized by § 10–222(f)
and (g) of the State Government Article.

3–1004.

(a) (1) Beginning on December 5, 2022, the county board shall elect a chair
and vice chair of the county board from among the members of the county board.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The term of the chair and vice chair appointed under this subsection
shall be [2 years] 1 YEAR.

(B) THE CHAIR OF THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR:

(1) LEADING PUBLIC MEETINGS OF THE COUNTY BOARD;

(2) MAKING SUBCOMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS;

(3) SERVING AS THE PRIMARY CONTACT FOR COMMUNICATIONS
BETWEEN THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT; AND

(4) ADMINISTERING THE COUNTY BOARD IN ACCORDANCE WITH
BYLAWS ADOPTED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(5) SIGNING CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED AND APPROVED BY A
MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY BOARD.

[(b)] (C) Subject to the provisions of § 4–403 of this article, the affirmative vote
of the members of the county board for the passage of a motion by the county board shall
be:

(1) Except as otherwise provided in item (2) of this subsection:

(i) Eight members when the student member is voting; or

(ii) Seven members when the student member is not voting; or

(2) When there are two or more vacancies on the county board:

(i) Seven members when the student member is voting; or

(ii) Six members when the student member is not voting.

(D) (1) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL ADOPT BYLAWS TO GOVERN ITS
CONDUCT AS NECESSARY AND APPROPRIATE TO CARRY OUT ITS PURPOSES UNDER
THIS TITLE.

(2) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL REVIEW AND UPDATE ITS BYLAWS AT
LEAST ONCE EVERY 4 YEARS.

[(c)] (E) (1) At the beginning of each term, each Board member shall attend
an orientation and be provided with training materials that clarify the role of a member.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(2) IN ACCORDANCE WITH A SCHEDULE DETERMINED BY THE COUNTY
BOARD IN THE BYLAWS ADOPTED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, EACH
ELECTED MEMBER SHALL COMPLETE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE
FOLLOWING TOPICS DURING EACH YEAR OF THE MEMBER’S TERM:

(I) COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT;

(II) ETHICS;

(III) LEGAL ISSUES IN EDUCATION;

(IV) PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE;

(V) PUBLIC EDUCATION BUDGETING AND FINANCING;

(VI) ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNTY BOARD; AND

(VII) ANY OTHER TOPIC DETERMINED RELEVANT BY THE
COUNTY BOARD.

(3) ELECTED MEMBERS ARE ENCOURAGED TO ATTEND
PROFESSIONAL CONFERENCES RELATING TO THEIR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
AS A MEMBER OF A BOARD OF EDUCATION.

(4) (I) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, EACH ELECTED
MEMBER SHALL SUBMIT A PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
DESCRIBING THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES THE MEMBER
COMPLETED DURING THAT YEAR.

(II) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 30 EACH YEAR, THE COUNTY
BOARD SHALL POST THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
OF THE MEMBERS ON ITS WEBSITE.

(F) (1) EACH YEAR, THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL CONVENE AND EACH
ELECTED MEMBER SHALL ATTEND A PROFESSIONAL RETREAT TO:

(I) COMPLETE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OR OTHER
TRAINING;

(II) SET ANNUAL COUNTY BOARD PERFORMANCE GOALS; AND

(III) COMPLETE A COUNTY BOARD SELF–EVALUATION,
INCLUDING IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES TO IMPROVE THE COUNTY BOARD’S
PERFORMANCE.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) WITHIN 30 DAYS OF THE LAST DAY OF THE PROFESSIONAL
RETREAT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL
POST ON ITS WEBSITE THE RESULTS OF THE COUNTY BOARD’S SELF–EVALUATION
AND ANY IDENTIFIED OPPORTUNITIES FOR IMPROVEMENT.

4–104.

(a) (1) [Each] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION, EACH county board may:

(i) Retain counsel to represent it in legal matters that affect the
board; and

(ii) Contract for the payment of a reasonable fee to the counsel.

(2) Funds for these fees shall be included in the annual budget.

(b) (1) [Each] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION, EACH county board may pay all or part of the counsel fees for the defense of a
county board member who is involved in litigation because of his service and in his official
capacity on that board.

(2) Payments made under paragraph (1) of this subsection are a valid
educational expense.

(c) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(2) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL RETAIN COUNSEL TO DEFEND A
COUNTY BOARD MEMBER WHO IS INVOLVED IN LITIGATION BECAUSE OF THE
MEMBER’S SERVICE AND IN THE MEMBER’S OFFICIAL CAPACITY ON THE COUNTY
BOARD.

(3) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL PAY ALL COUNSEL FEES AND
REASONABLE AND RELATED EXPENSES INCURRED FOR DEFENDING A MEMBER IN
LITIGATION INVOLVING THE MEMBER’S SERVICE IN THE MEMBER’S OFFICIAL
CAPACITY ON THE COUNTY BOARD IF IT IS DETERMINED DURING THE COURSE OF
LITIGATION THAT THE MEMBER WAS ACTING WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE MEMBER’S
AUTHORITY AND WITHOUT MALICE AND GROSS NEGLIGENCE.

(D) (1) In any suit or claim brought against a principal, teacher, school security
guard, or other agent or employee of a county board by a parent or other claimant with
respect to an action taken by the agent or employee, the board shall provide for counsel for
that individual if:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(i) The action was taken in the performance of his duties, within the
scope of his employment, and without malice; and

(ii) The board determines that he was acting within his authorized
official capacity in the incident.

(2) The counsel required by this section may be provided through the office
of the county attorney or city solicitor.

(3) This subsection does not require a county board to provide or reimburse
the cost of counsel to a plaintiff or claimant in a suit or claim against a county board or its
members, agents, or employees.

~~4–102.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Except~~ ~~in~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City,~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~superintendent~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~executive~~
~~officer,~~ ~~secretary,~~ ~~and~~ ~~treasurer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~In~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Baltimore~~
~~City~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~School~~ ~~Commissioners~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~executive~~ ~~officer,~~ ~~secretary,~~ ~~and~~ ~~treasurer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~School~~ ~~Commissioners.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~powers~~ ~~and~~ ~~duties~~
~~imposed~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~article.~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~a~~ ~~public~~ ~~officer~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~
~~Constitution~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

(3) [(i) In Prince George’s County, the county superintendent is the
~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~system.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~executive~~ ~~officer,~~ ~~secretary,~~
~~and~~ ~~treasurer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board.~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~powers~~ ~~and~~ ~~duties~~
~~imposed~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~article.~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Chief~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Officer~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~a~~ ~~public~~ ~~officer~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~
~~Constitution~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

(4)] A county superintendent is not a public officer under the Constitution
~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

4–112.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) Each county board shall establish at least one citizen advisory committee to
advise the board and to facilitate its activities and programs in the public schools.

(b) Similar advisory committees may be established for:

(1) An individual school; or

(2) A group of schools within a region.

(c) A committee established under this section may include parents, teachers,
students, and other citizens as members.

(D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(2) A CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED BY THE PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL REFLECT, TO THE EXTENT
PRACTICABLE, THE GEOGRAPHIC, RACIAL, ETHNIC, CULTURAL, AND GENDER
DIVERSITY OF THE COUNTY.

Subtitle 4. Prince George’s County.

4–401.

(A) The purpose of the county board is to:

(1) MAINTAIN THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY A REASONABLY UNIFORM
SYSTEM OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS THAT IS DESIGNED TO PROVIDE QUALITY EDUCATION
AND EQUITABLE EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL CHILDREN;

(2) Raise the level of academic achievement of the students in the Prince
George’s County public school system; and

[(2)] (3) Raise the level of engagement of the parents, students, and
community as a whole.

(B) (1) THE SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COUNTY BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH AN AUDIT COMMITTEE TO ENSURE THAT PUBLIC
FUNDS FOR THE COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM ARE SPENT ~~EQUALLY~~ EQUITABLY ACROSS
ALL THE SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(2) NOTHING IN THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO ALTER
THE MANDATORY ALLOCATION OF FUNDING TO INDIVIDUAL SCHOOLS REQUIRED
UNDER TITLE 5 OF THIS ARTICLE, INCLUDING THE MINIMUM SCHOOL FUNDING
REQUIRED UNDER § 5–234 OF THIS ARTICLE.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

~~4–402.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~addition~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~other~~ ~~powers~~ ~~granted~~ ~~to,~~ ~~and~~ ~~duties~~ ~~imposed~~ ~~on,~~ ~~a~~ ~~county~~
superintendent under this article, the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT has the responsibilities and powers set forth in this section.

(b) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT shall be
~~responsible~~ ~~for:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~overall~~ ~~administration~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~
~~system;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~Title~~ ~~6~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article,~~ ~~and~~ ~~after~~ ~~a~~ ~~budget~~ ~~is~~
~~submitted~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~and~~ ~~approved~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~County~~ ~~Council~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~of~~
~~each~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year,~~ ~~the~~ ~~day–to–day~~ ~~management~~ ~~and~~ ~~oversight~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~affairs~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~system,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~management~~ ~~of~~ ~~activities~~
~~related~~ ~~to:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~Administration;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~Mid–level~~ ~~administration;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~Instructional~~ ~~salaries;~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~Textbooks~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~classroom~~ ~~instructional~~ ~~supplies;~~

~~(v)~~ ~~Instructional~~ ~~costs;~~

~~(vi)~~ ~~Special~~ ~~education;~~

~~(vii)~~ ~~Student~~ ~~personnel~~ ~~services;~~

~~(viii)~~ ~~Health~~ ~~services;~~

~~(ix)~~ ~~Student~~ ~~transportation;~~

~~(x)~~ ~~Operation~~ ~~of~~ ~~plants~~ ~~and~~ ~~equipment;~~

~~(xi)~~ ~~Plant~~ ~~maintenance;~~

~~(xii)~~ ~~Fixed~~ ~~charges;~~

~~(xiii)~~ ~~Food~~ ~~services;~~ ~~and~~

~~(xiv)~~ ~~Capital~~ ~~planning~~ ~~and~~ ~~expenditures;~~ ~~and~~

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(3)~~ ~~The~~ ~~development~~ ~~and~~ ~~implementation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~curriculum~~ ~~taught~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~instruction~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~system.~~

(c) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT:

~~(1)~~ ~~Shall~~ ~~hire~~ ~~and~~ ~~set~~ ~~the~~ ~~salaries~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~chief~~ ~~operating~~ ~~officer,~~ ~~a~~ ~~chief~~
~~financial~~ ~~officer,~~ ~~a~~ ~~chief~~ ~~academic~~ ~~officer,~~ ~~a~~ ~~chief~~ ~~of~~ ~~staff,~~ ~~a~~ ~~board~~ ~~liaison,~~ ~~and~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~
necessary executive staff in the office of the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT; and

~~(2)~~ ~~May~~ ~~delegate~~ ~~the~~ ~~responsibilities~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~
~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~to~~ ~~appropriately~~ ~~qualified~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~as~~ ~~determined~~ ~~and~~ ~~deemed~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~by~~
the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT.

(d) (1) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT shall enter
~~into~~ ~~a~~ ~~memorandum~~ ~~of~~ ~~understanding~~ ~~that~~ ~~relates~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~policy~~ ~~analysis~~ ~~and~~
~~advice~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~institutions~~ ~~of~~ ~~higher~~ ~~education:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~The~~ ~~University~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland,~~ ~~College~~ ~~Park~~ ~~Campus;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~University~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Global~~ ~~Campus;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~Bowie~~ ~~State~~ ~~University;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~Community~~ ~~College.~~

(2) The [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT may
~~include~~ ~~additional~~ ~~institutions~~ ~~of~~ ~~higher~~ ~~education~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~memorandum~~ ~~of~~ ~~understanding~~
~~required~~ ~~under~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection.~~

~~4–403.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~Except~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~
~~implement~~ ~~a~~ ~~policy~~ ~~or~~ ~~take~~ ~~any~~ ~~action~~ ~~that~~ ~~contradicts~~ ~~the~~ ~~day–to–day~~ ~~management~~ ~~and~~
~~oversight~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~affairs~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~system~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
[Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT under this subtitle.

~~(b)~~ ~~Except~~ ~~for~~ ~~personnel~~ ~~matters~~ ~~and~~ ~~appeals~~ ~~of~~ ~~personnel~~ ~~matters~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~
~~with~~ ~~§§~~ ~~4–205(c)(2)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~and~~ ~~6–202~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article,~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~shall~~
~~require~~ ~~a~~ ~~two–thirds~~ ~~vote~~ ~~of~~ ~~all~~ ~~voting~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~to~~ ~~take~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~ ~~that~~
is contrary to an action of the [Chief Executive Officer] COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT.

4–404.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(A) THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT SHALL:

(1) ESTABLISH ANNUAL GOALS FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF THE
COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM; AND

(2) EVALUATE THE PERFORMANCE OF THE COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM
AGAINST THE GOALS ESTABLISHED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IN A
PUBLIC MEETING OF THE COUNTY BOARD EACH YEAR.

(B) (1) EACH YEAR, THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT SHALL CONDUCT A POLL OF THE STAKEHOLDERS AND
COMMUNITY MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM TO MEASURE PUBLIC
OPINION ON THE CONFIDENCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE COUNTY BOARD,
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, AND COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM, ADDRESSING EACH
COMPONENT SEPARATELY.

(2) WHEN ESTABLISHING ANNUAL GOALS FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF
THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM, THE COUNTY BOARD AND
THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT SHALL CONSIDER THE FINDINGS OF THE POLL
CONDUCTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) AT THE FIRST MEETING OF THE COUNTY BOARD EACH YEAR, THE
COUNTY BOARD SHALL:

(1) REVIEW THE RESPECTIVE ROLES, DUTIES, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT;

(2) ANNOUNCE THE ANNUAL PERFORMANCE GOALS OF THE COUNTY
BOARD AS DETERMINED UNDER § 3–1004 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(3) DISCUSS THE RESULTS OF THE COUNTY BOARD
SELF–EVALUATION AS DETERMINED UNDER § 3–1004 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(4) DISCUSS THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COMPLETED BY THE
COUNTY BOARD MEMBERS DURING THE PREVIOUS YEAR.

~~4–405.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “COUNTY” MEANS PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “INSPECTOR GENERAL” MEANS THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IN
THE OFFICE OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMPLIANCE.

(4) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND
~~COMPLIANCE.~~

(B) (1) THERE IS AN OFFICE OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMPLIANCE.

(2) THE OFFICE IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF THE COUNTY
~~GOVERNMENT.~~

(3) THE PURPOSE OF THE OFFICE IS TO PROVIDE ACCOUNTABILITY
~~AND~~ ~~TRANSPARENCY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXPENDITURE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~FUNDS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~IN~~
PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY AND TO ENSURE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC
SCHOOL SYSTEM PERSONNEL ARE IN COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS.

(4) ALL EXPENSES AND OPERATIONS RELATED TO THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE OFFICE SHALL BE SEPARATELY IDENTIFIED AND
INDEPENDENT OF ANY OTHER UNIT OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT.

(C) (1) THERE IS AN INSPECTOR GENERAL IN THE OFFICE OF
ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMPLIANCE.

(2) AN INDIVIDUAL IS ELIGIBLE TO BE THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
~~ONLY~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~EXECUTES~~ ~~AN~~ ~~AFFIDAVIT~~ ~~STATING~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~
WILL NOT ACCEPT APPOINTMENT TO, OR BE A CANDIDATE FOR, A COUNTY OFFICE:

(I) DURING THE PERIOD OF SERVICE AS THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL; AND

(II) FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE
INDIVIDUAL LAST SERVES AS THE INSPECTOR GENERAL.

(3) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL RENEW THE AFFIDAVIT EVERY
2 YEARS DURING THE PERIOD OF SERVICE.

(4) A FAILURE TO RENEW THE AFFIDAVIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL SUBJECT THE INSPECTOR GENERAL TO REMOVAL FROM OFFICE UNDER THIS
~~SECTION.~~

(D) (1) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL BE APPOINTED UNANIMOUSLY
BY THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY COUNCIL.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(2) THE TERM OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IS 5 YEARS, BEGINNING
JULY 1 AFTER THE APPOINTMENT OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL
CONTINUE TO SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED.

(4) IF A VACANCY OCCURS IN THE OFFICE, AN INTERIM INSPECTOR
GENERAL SHALL BE APPOINTED AS A SUCCESSOR TO SERVE FOR THE REMAINDER
OF THE UNEXPIRED TERM.

(E) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL MAY BE REMOVED UNANIMOUSLY BY THE
~~PRINCE~~ ~~GEORGE’S~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~COUNCIL~~ ~~FOR:~~

(1) MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE;

(2) PERSISTENT FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE OFFICE;
~~OR~~

(3) CONDUCT PREJUDICIAL TO THE PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF
~~JUSTICE.~~

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL BE PROFESSIONALLY QUALIFIED THROUGH
EXPERIENCE OR EDUCATION IN AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING AREAS:

~~(I)~~ ~~LAW;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~AUDITING;~~

~~(III)~~ ~~GOVERNMENT~~ ~~OPERATIONS;~~

(IV) FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT; OR

~~(V)~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~POLICY.~~

(2) IF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IS PROFESSIONALLY QUALIFIED IN
THE AREA OF EDUCATION POLICY, THE INSPECTOR GENERAL ALSO SHALL BE
~~PROFESSIONALLY~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~THROUGH~~ ~~EXPERIENCE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~AT~~ ~~LEAST~~
ONE OF THE OTHER AREAS LISTED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(G) (1) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IS ENTITLED TO THE SALARY
PROVIDED IN THE COUNTY BUDGET.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) FUNDING FOR THE OFFICE SHALL BE AS PROVIDED IN THE
COUNTY BUDGET.

(3) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL MAY APPOINT AND EMPLOY
PROFESSIONAL AND CLERICAL STAFF, INCLUDING ATTORNEYS, ACCOUNTANTS,
AUDITORS, ANALYSTS, AND INVESTIGATORS, AS APPROPRIATED IN THE ANNUAL
COUNTY BUDGET, TO CONDUCT THE WORK OF THE OFFICE.

(H) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR EXAMINING
~~AND~~ ~~INVESTIGATING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FOLLOWING~~ ~~MATTERS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~RESPECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
MANAGEMENT AND AFFAIRS OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL
~~SYSTEM:~~

(1) INSTANCES OF FRAUD, WASTE, OR ABUSE INVOLVING THE USE OF
PUBLIC FUNDS AND PROPERTY; AND

(2) COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE STATE AND LOCAL ETHICS LAWS.

(I) (1) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
CONDUCTING INDEPENDENT AUDITS:

(I) OF RESOURCE DEPLOYMENT, EXPENSES, AND STUDENT
ACTIVITY FUNDS;

(II) OF CONTRACTS WITH VENDORS TO CONSIDER SCOPE OF
WORK AND EFFECTIVENESS IN COMPLYING WITH CONTRACT TERMS; AND

(III) TO DETERMINE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF COUNTY SCHOOL
~~SYSTEM~~ ~~PROGRAMS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAKE~~ ~~RECOMMENDATIONS~~ ~~REGARDING~~ ~~THE~~
CONTINUATION TO FUNDING FOR SUCH PROGRAMS.

(2) THE OFFICE SHALL CONDUCT THE FOLLOWING TYPES OF AUDITS:

~~(I)~~ ~~COMPLIANCE;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~FINANCIAL;~~

~~(III)~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY;~~

(IV) INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS; AND

~~(V)~~ ~~OPERATIONAL.~~

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(J) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
DURING AN INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION, THE
INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL HAVE ACCESS TO ALL RECORDS, DATA, REPORTS,
CONTRACTS, CORRESPONDENCE, OR OTHER DOCUMENTS OF THE COUNTY SCHOOL
SYSTEM THAT IS THE SUBJECT OF THE INVESTIGATION.

(2) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL MAY NOT ACCESS OR COMPEL THE
PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS THAT ARE:

(I) PROTECTED UNDER THE ATTORNEY–CLIENT PRIVILEGE;
~~OR~~

(II) CONFIDENTIAL OR PRIVILEGED UNDER APPLICABLE
PROVISIONS OF FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.

(3) A PERSON MAY HAVE AN ATTORNEY PRESENT DURING ANY
CONTACT WITH THE INSPECTOR GENERAL.

(4) DURING AN INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SECTION, THE INSPECTOR GENERAL MAY:

(I) SEEK AND OBTAIN SWORN TESTIMONY; AND

(II) ISSUE SUBPOENAS AS NECESSARY TO COMPEL THE
PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS AND RECORDS OR THE ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES.

(5) (I) A SUBPOENA MAY BE SERVED IN THE SAME MANNER AS ONE
ISSUED BY A CIRCUIT COURT.

(II) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL ADVISE A PERSON OF THE
RIGHT TO COUNSEL WHEN A SUBPOENA IS SERVED.

(6) (I) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IMMEDIATELY MAY REPORT THE
~~FAILURE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OBEY~~ ~~A~~ ~~LAWFULLY~~ ~~SERVED~~ ~~SUBPOENA~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CIRCUIT~~
COURT OF THE COUNTY THAT HAS JURISDICTION.

(II) THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE
SUBPOENA AND PROOF OF SERVICE TO THE CIRCUIT COURT.

(7) AFTER CONDUCTING A HEARING AT WHICH THE PERSON WHO
~~ALLEGEDLY~~ ~~FAILED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMPLY~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUBPOENA~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OPPORTUNITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~
HEARD AND REPRESENTED BY COUNSEL, THE CIRCUIT COURT MAY GRANT
APPROPRIATE RELIEF.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(K) (1) THE COUNTY BOARD, THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, THE
COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM, OR ANY OTHER COUNTY OR LOCAL OFFICIAL MAY NOT
TAKE ADVERSE, RETALIATORY ACTION AGAINST AN INDIVIDUAL BECAUSE THE
INDIVIDUAL COOPERATED WITH OR PROVIDED INFORMATION TO THE INSPECTOR
~~GENERAL.~~

(2) RECORDS OR INFORMATION PROVIDED TO, PREPARED FOR, OR
OBTAINED BY THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IN CONNECTION WITH AN INVESTIGATION
ARE CONFIDENTIAL AND NOT SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE UNDER THE PUBLIC
~~INFORMATION~~ ~~ACT.~~

(L) (1) IF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL FINDS OR HAS REASONABLE
~~GROUNDS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BELIEVE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THERE~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~BEEN~~ ~~A~~ ~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FEDERAL~~
OR STATE LAW, THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL NOTIFY AND REFER THE MATTER
TO THE APPROPRIATE FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY,
LOCAL STATE’S ATTORNEY’S OFFICE, OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OFFICE
OF THE STATE PROSECUTOR, OR FEDERAL AGENCY.

(2) IF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL IDENTIFIES AN ISSUE OF CONCERN
THAT WOULD NOT CONSTITUTE A CRIMINAL VIOLATION OF STATE LAW, THE
INSPECTOR GENERAL MAY REPORT THE ISSUE OF CONCERN TO THE STATE
SUPERINTENDENT, THE STATE BOARD, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
EXECUTIVE, THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, THE GOVERNOR, AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL
~~ASSEMBLY.~~

(M) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE OFFICE SHALL
SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, THE COUNTY BOARD, THE
GOVERNOR, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(2) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE INFORMATION ON:

(I) THE OFFICE’S GOALS AND PRIORITIES FOR THE UPCOMING
~~YEAR;~~

(II) THE OFFICE’S ACTIVITIES DURING THE PRECEDING YEAR;

(III) THE NUMBER OF INCIDENTS, IN THE AGGREGATE, AND A
GENERAL SUMMARY OF THE NATURE OF THE REPORTED INCIDENTS, REFERRED TO
THE APPROPRIATE FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY,
LOCAL STATE’S ATTORNEY’S OFFICE, OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OFFICE
OF THE STATE PROSECUTOR, OR FEDERAL AGENCY DURING THE PRECEDING YEAR;

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(IV) SPECIFIC FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING
~~TO:~~

1. INSTANCES OF FRAUD, WASTE, OR ABUSE INVOLVING
THE USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND PROPERTY; AND

2. COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL ETHICS LAWS;
~~AND~~

(V) ANY REGULATORY OR STATUTORY CHANGES NECESSARY TO
ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Education

3–1002.

(a) In this subtitle, “elected member” means a member of the Prince George’s
County Board elected from one of the nine school board districts described in § 3–1001 of
this subtitle.

(b) The Prince George’s County Board consists of 10 members as follows:

(1) Nine elected members, each of whom resides in a different school board
district; and

(2) One student member selected under subsection (f)(2) of this section.

(c) (1) One member of the county board shall be elected from each of the nine
school board districts described in § 3–1001 of this subtitle.

(2) (I) [From the time of filing as a candidate for election, each] EACH
candidate shall [be]:

(I) 1. BE a registered voter of the county; and

(II) 2. BE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH, BE a resident of the school board district the candidate seeks to
represent FOR AT LEAST 1 YEAR BEFORE THE DATE OF THE PRIMARY GENERAL
ELECTION.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IN AN ELECTION YEAR IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING AN
APPROVED DECENNIAL REDISTRICTING PLAN CHANGING THE BOUNDARIES OF ANY
SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICT, THE 1 YEAR RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY IF THE CANDIDATE:

1. IS A QUALIFIED VOTER BUT NO LONGER RESIDES IN
THE CANDIDATE’S FORMER SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICT DUE TO A BOUNDARY CHANGE
IN THE APPROVED DECENNIAL REDISTRICTING PLAN;

2. RESIDED IN THE CANDIDATE’S FORMER SCHOOL
BOARD DISTRICT FOR AT LEAST 1 YEAR IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE GENERAL
ELECTION; AND

3. RESIDES, AS OF THE DATE OF THE DEADLINE FOR
FILING AS A CANDIDATE FOR ELECTION, IN THE SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICT SPECIFIED
UNDER ITEM 2 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH.

(3) An elected member shall forfeit the office if the member:

(i) Fails to reside in the school board district from which the
member was elected, unless this change is caused by a change in the boundaries of the
district; or

(ii) Fails to be a registered voter of the county.

(4) A member may not hold another office of profit in county government
during the member’s term.

(5) Each elected member of the county board shall be nominated by the
registered voters of the member’s school board district.

(d) The elected members of the county board shall be elected:

(1) At the general election every 4 years; and

(2) By the voters of the school board district that each member represents.

~~(f)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~student~~ ~~member~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~an~~ ~~eleventh~~ ~~or~~ ~~twelfth~~ ~~grade~~ ~~student~~ ~~in~~
~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~system~~ ~~during~~ ~~the~~ ~~student’s~~ ~~term~~ ~~in~~ ~~office.~~

(2) (I) An eligible student shall file a nomination form at least 2 3 weeks
~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~special~~ ~~election~~ ~~meeting~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~Regional~~ ~~Association~~ ~~of~~ ~~Student~~
~~Governments.~~

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

(II) Nomination forms shall be made available in the administrative
~~offices~~ ~~of~~ ~~all~~ ~~public~~ ~~senior~~ ~~high~~ ~~schools~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~county,~~ ~~the~~ ~~office~~ ~~of~~ ~~student~~ ~~concerns,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~president~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~regional~~ ~~association.~~

(III) The delegates to the regional association annually shall elect
TWO CANDIDATES FOR the student member to the board at a special PRIMARY election
~~meeting~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~held~~ ~~each~~ ~~school~~ ~~year.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~The~~ ~~student~~ ~~member~~ ~~may~~ ~~vote~~ ~~on~~ ~~all~~ ~~matters~~ ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~board~~ ~~except~~
~~those~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to:~~

(i) [Capital and operating budgets;

~~(ii)~~ ~~School~~ ~~closings,~~ ~~reopenings,~~ ~~and~~ ~~boundaries;~~

(iii)] Collective bargaining decisions;

[(iv) Student disciplinary matters;]

[(v)] (II) Teacher and administrator disciplinary matters as
~~provided~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~6–202(a)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article;~~ ~~and~~

[(vi)] (III) Other personnel matters.

~~(4)~~ ~~On~~ ~~an~~ ~~affirmative~~ ~~vote~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~majority~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~elected~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~county~~ ~~board,~~ ~~the~~ ~~board~~ ~~may~~ ~~determine~~ ~~if~~ ~~a~~ ~~matter~~ ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~board~~ ~~relates~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~subject~~ ~~that~~
~~the~~ ~~student~~ ~~member~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~vote~~ ~~on~~ ~~under~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection.~~

(5) [Unless invited to attend by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
elected members of the county board, the] THE student member may [not] attend an
executive session [that] OF THE BOARD UNLESS THE EXECUTIVE SESSION relates to
~~[hearings]:~~

(I) HEARINGS on appeals of special education placements, hearings
held under § 6–202(a) of this article, or collective bargaining; OR

(II) A PERSONNEL MATTER FOR WHICH THE STUDENT MAY NOT
VOTE UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(6) (I) The Prince George’s Regional Association of Student
Governments may SHALL establish procedures for the election of the student member of
~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board.~~

(II) THE PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL PROVIDE FOR:
– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. THE ADMINISTRATION OF:

A. A PRIMARY ELECTION EACH YEAR BY THE PRINCE
GEORGE’S REGIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STUDENT GOVERNMENTS; AND

B. A GENERAL ELECTION EACH YEAR BY STUDENTS IN
6TH THROUGH 12TH GRADE IN THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEM; AND

2. NOTIFICATION TO THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT
OF CANDIDATES SELECTED BY THE PRINCE GEORGE’S REGIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
STUDENT GOVERNMENTS AFTER EACH ANNUAL PRIMARY ELECTION.

(7) FOR THE GENERAL ELECTION HELD UNDER THIS SUBSECTION,
THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL:

(I) PROVIDE EQUAL CAMPAIGN FUNDS TO THE CANDIDATES
FOR THE STUDENT MEMBER OF THE BOARD; AND

(II) EDUCATE THE STUDENTS DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(6)(II)1B OF THIS SUBSECTION ON THE VOTING PROCESS BEFORE EACH GENERAL
~~ELECTION.~~

(7) (8) The election procedures established by the Prince George’s
~~Regional~~ ~~Association~~ ~~of~~ ~~Student~~ ~~Governments~~ ~~are~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~approval~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~elected~~
~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~board.~~

(g) (1) An elected member serves for a term of 4 years beginning on the first
Monday in December after the member’s election and until the member’s successor is
elected and qualifies.

(2) (I) UNLESS OTHERWISE DISQUALIFIED UNDER THIS SECTION,
AN ELECTED MEMBER OF THE COUNTY BOARD IS ELIGIBLE FOR REELECTION.

(II) AN ELECTED MEMBER MAY NOT SERVE FOR MORE THAN
TWO TERMS AS AN ELECTED MEMBER.

[(2)] (3) The student member serves for a term of 1 year beginning at the
end of a school year.

[(3)] (4) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, if a seat
held by an elected member of the county board becomes vacant, the County Executive shall:

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

1. Appoint a qualified individual to fill the seat for the
remainder of the term; and

2. Transmit the name of the appointee to the clerk of the
County Council.

(ii) If the County Council does not disapprove an appointment under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph by a two–thirds vote of all members of the County
Council within 45 days after the transmittal of the name of the appointee, the appointment
shall be considered approved.

3–1003.

(a) (1) [From and after December 4, 2006, at] AT the beginning of each
member’s full term FROM AND AFTER DECEMBER 7, 2026, the chair of the county board
is entitled to receive [$19,000] $32,000 $30,000 annually as compensation and the other
elected members are each entitled to receive [$18,000] $27,000 annually as compensation.

(2) Each elected member of the county board may be provided health
insurance and other fringe benefits regularly provided to employees of the Board of
Education under the same terms and conditions extended to other employees of the Board
of Education.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Election~~ ~~Law~~

~~13–505.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~“contested~~ ~~election~~ ~~committee”~~ ~~means~~ ~~a~~ ~~contested~~ ~~election~~
~~committee~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~Title~~ ~~12,~~ ~~Subtitle~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article.~~

(b) (1) (I) Subject to the provisions of this section, the governing body of a
~~county~~ ~~may~~ ~~establish,~~ ~~by~~ ~~law,~~ ~~a~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~for~~ ~~elective~~ ~~offices~~ ~~in~~
~~the~~ ~~executive~~ ~~or~~ ~~legislative~~ ~~branches~~ ~~of~~ ~~county~~ ~~government.~~

(II) 1. THIS SUBPARAGRAPH APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE
~~GEORGE’S~~ ~~COUNTY.~~

2. SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION,
AFTER THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY HAS IMPLEMENTED A
SYSTEM OF PUBLIC CAMPAIGN FINANCING ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH FOR AT LEAST ONE COMPLETE ELECTION CYCLE, THE
GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY MAY ESTABLISH, BY LAW, A
SYSTEM OF PUBLIC CAMPAIGN FINANCING FOR ELECTED MEMBERS OF THE PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION.

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. A SYSTEM OF PUBLIC CAMPAIGN FINANCING FOR
~~ELECTED~~ ~~MEMBERS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~OF~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH MAY NOT INCLUDE PUBLIC
~~CAMPAIGN~~ ~~FINANCING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ELECTION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~STUDENT~~ ~~MEMBER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~
BOARD OF EDUCATION.

~~(2)~~ ~~A~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~financing~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~subsection~~ ~~may~~ ~~include~~ ~~public~~ ~~financing~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~contested~~ ~~election~~ ~~committee.~~

(3) When establishing a system of public campaign financing for [elective
offices in the executive or legislative branches of county government] AN OFFICE UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, the governing body of a county shall:

~~(i)~~ ~~specify~~ ~~the~~ ~~criteria~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~to~~ ~~determine~~ ~~whether~~ ~~an~~
~~individual~~ ~~is~~ ~~eligible~~ ~~for~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~provide~~ ~~the~~ ~~funding~~ ~~and~~ ~~staff~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~operation,~~
~~administration,~~ ~~and~~ ~~auditing~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~A~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~section:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~provide~~ ~~for~~ ~~participation~~ ~~of~~ ~~candidates~~ ~~in~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~
~~financing~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~strictly~~ ~~voluntary~~ ~~basis;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~regulate~~ ~~candidates~~ ~~who~~ ~~choose~~ ~~not~~ ~~to~~ ~~participate~~ ~~in~~ ~~public~~
~~campaign~~ ~~financing;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~prohibit~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~for~~ ~~any~~ ~~campaign~~
except a campaign for [county] LOCAL elective office;

~~(4)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~require~~ ~~a~~ ~~candidate~~ ~~who~~ ~~accepts~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~to:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~establish~~ ~~a~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~solely~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~for~~
[county] LOCAL elective office; and

~~(ii)~~ ~~use~~ ~~funds~~ ~~from~~ ~~that~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~only~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
campaign for [county] LOCAL elective office;

~~(5)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~prohibit~~ ~~a~~ ~~candidate~~ ~~who~~ ~~accepts~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~from~~
~~transferring~~ ~~funds:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~established~~ ~~to~~ ~~finance~~ ~~the~~
campaign for [county] LOCAL elective office from any other campaign finance entity
~~established~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~candidate;~~ ~~and~~

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 793

~~(ii)~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~established~~ ~~to~~ ~~finance~~ ~~the~~
campaign for [county] LOCAL elective office to any other campaign finance entity;

(6) shall provide for a public election fund for [county] LOCAL elective
~~offices~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~administered~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~chief~~ ~~financial~~ ~~officer~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~county;~~ ~~and~~

~~(7)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~regulation~~ ~~and~~ ~~oversight~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~to~~ ~~ensure~~
~~conformity~~ ~~with~~ ~~State~~ ~~law~~ ~~and~~ ~~policy~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~extent~~ ~~practicable.~~

~~(d)~~ ~~A~~ ~~system~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~section~~ ~~may:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~provide~~ ~~for~~ ~~more~~ ~~stringent~~ ~~regulation~~ ~~of~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~activity~~ ~~by~~
~~candidates~~ ~~who~~ ~~choose~~ ~~to~~ ~~accept~~ ~~public~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~financing,~~ ~~including~~ ~~contributions,~~
~~expenditures,~~ ~~reporting,~~ ~~and~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~material,~~ ~~than~~ ~~is~~ ~~provided~~ ~~for~~ ~~by~~ ~~State~~ ~~law;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~provide~~ ~~for~~ ~~administrative~~ ~~penalties~~ ~~for~~ ~~violations,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~
~~10–202~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Local~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~allow~~ ~~a~~ ~~publicly~~ ~~financed~~ ~~candidate~~ ~~to~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~any~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~funds~~
~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~candidate’s~~ ~~campaign~~ ~~finance~~ ~~entity~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~candidate’s~~ ~~contested~~ ~~election~~
~~committee.~~

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The provisions of § 4–104 of the Education Article, as enacted by Section 1 of
this Act, shall be construed to apply retroactively and shall be applied to and interpreted to
affect any litigation that was initiated on or after January 1, 2020, involving the defense of
a member of the Prince George’s County Board of Education who:

(1) is involved in litigation because of the member’s service and in the
member’s official capacity on the county board; and

(2) was found during the course of litigation to have been acting within the
scope of the member’s authority and without malice and gross negligence.

(b) An individual seeking to be reimbursed by the Prince George’s County Board
of Education under this section must provide to the Prince George’s County Board of
Education on or before August 1, 2023, documentation of the litigation costs incurred.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall
take effect July 1, 2024, the effective date of Chapter 217 of the Acts of the General
Assembly of 2022. If the effective date of Chapter 217 is amended, Section 2 of this Act shall
take effect on the taking effect of Chapter 217.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 793 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION ~~4.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in
Section ~~3~~ 4 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2023, ~~contingent~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~taking~~ ~~effect~~
~~of~~ ~~Chapter~~ ~~____~~ ~~(H.B.~~ ~~432)~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~of~~ ~~2023,~~ ~~and~~ ~~if~~ ~~Chapter~~ ~~____~~
~~(H.B.~~ ~~432)~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~become~~ ~~effective,~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~null~~ ~~and~~ ~~void.~~

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26