START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1063 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1063 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class HC (Health Club) License 
 
 
This bill establishes six-day and seven-day Class HC (health club) beer and wine licenses 
in Harford County. The Harford County Board of License Commissioners may issue a 
6-day or 7-day Class HC license to a person who (1) sells health club services, as specified, 
(2) has a health club facility that offers an indoor or outdoor swimming pool, or pickleball 
courts; (3) has at least 150 members who pay dues, and (4) owns or leases real property in 
the county for use as a for-profit or nonprofit health club facility. The annual fee for the 
6-day Class HC license is $1,300 and the annual fee for the 7-day Class HC license is 
$1,400. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Harford County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2024, to the extent that 
6-day and/or 7-day Class HC licenses are issued under the bill. Harford County can monitor 
any additional licenses using existing resources.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for any small business 
health club that obtains a Class HC license under the bill.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The 6-day Class HC license authorizes the license holder to sell beer and 
wine from Monday through Saturday in a bar area at a swimming pool or an indoor lounge 
or both. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1063/ Page 2 
The 7-day Class HC license authorizes the license holder to sell beer and wine from 
Monday through Sunday in a bar area at a swimming pool or an indoor lounge or both.  
 
The 6-day and 7-day Class HC license holders may sell beer and wine for on-premises 
consumption from 1 p.m. to 9 p.m.  
 
The license holder must purchase beer and wine from an authorized licensed wholesaler. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The annual license fee for a 6-day Class HC license is $1,300, and 
the annual license fee for a 7-day Class HC license is $1,400. Harford County estimates 
that one business will obtain a 7-day Class HC license beginning in fiscal 2024. Therefore, 
Harford County license fee revenues increase by $1,400 beginning in fiscal 2024.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 654 (Senator Gallion) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2