START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

Chapter 773

(House Bill 1066)

AN ACT concerning

Hate Crimes – Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention –
Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention;
and generally relating to the Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 6–701 and 6–702 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 7. Commission on
Hate Crime Response and Prevention”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

SUBTITLE 7. COMMISSION ON HATE CRIME RESPONSE AND PREVENTION.

6–701.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “COMMISSION” MEANS THE COMMISSION ON HATE CRIME
RESPONSE AND PREVENTION.

6–702.

(A) THERE IS A COMMISSION ON HATE CRIME RESPONSE AND
PREVENTION IN THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

(B) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS,
APPOINTED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL:

(1) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ANTI–DEFAMATION LEAGUE;

(2) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ASIAN AMERICAN AND PACIFIC
ISLANDER COMMUNITY;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 773 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BALTIMORE COUNTY
DEPARTMENT OF DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION WOMEN’S LAW CENTER;

(4) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BALTIMORE JEWISH COUNCIL;

(5) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COALITION OPPOSED TO
VIOLENCE AND EXTREMISM;

(6) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COUNCIL ON AMERICAN–ISLAMIC
RELATIONS MARYLAND OFFICE;

(7) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF FREE STATE JUSTICE;

(8) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE JEWISH COMMUNITY RELATIONS
COUNCIL;

(9) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE IMMIGRATION OUTREACH
SERVICE CENTER;

(10) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND ASSOCIATION OF
HUMAN RELATIONS/HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCIES;

(11) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND CHIEFS OF POLICE
ASSOCIATION;

(12) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND COMMISSION ON
CIVIL RIGHTS;

(13) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND COORDINATION AND
ANALYSIS CENTER;

(14) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND CENTER FOR SCHOOL
SAFETY;

(15) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND SHERIFFS’
ASSOCIATION;

(16) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND STATE’S ATTORNEYS’
ASSOCIATION;

(17) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE ON MENTAL
ILLNESS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

(18) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE;

(19) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PRIDE CENTER OF MARYLAND;

(20) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SIKH COALITION; AND

(21) TWO MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC.

(C) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION IS 4
YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS
REQUIRED BY THE TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION ON JUNE
1, 2023.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, AN APPOINTED MEMBER CONTINUES TO
SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
ONLY FOR THE REST OF THE TERM AND UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND
QUALIFIES.

(D) (1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
DESIGNEE, IS THE CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION.

(2) THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PROVIDE STAFF
FOR THE COMMISSION.

(E) IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND IN EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE FUNDS IN THE STATE BUDGET TO IMPLEMENT THIS
SECTION, INCLUDING FUNDS TO:

(1) EMPLOY A FULL–TIME ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL TO STAFF
THE COMMISSION; AND

(2) OPERATE AND MAINTAIN THE OFFICE.

(F) (1) A MAJORITY OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL
CONSTITUTE A QUORUM FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS.

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY ADOPT RULES GOVERNING THE
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMISSION.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 773 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(H) THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(1) DEVELOP STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND RESPOND TO HATE
CRIME ACTIVITY; AND

(2) EVALUATE STATE LAWS AND POLICIES RELATING TO HATE
CRIMES.

(I) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024,
THE COMMISSION SHALL REPORT TO THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION ON
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS TO ADDRESS HATE CRIMES THAT OCCUR IN SCHOOLS.

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024,
THE COMMISSION SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON LEGISLATIVE
RECOMMENDATIONS TO ADDRESS HATE CRIMES IN THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the initial
appointed members of the Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention shall
expire as follows:

(1) five members in 2024;

(2) five members in 2025;

(3) six members in 2026; and

(4) six members in 2027.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4