START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1096 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1096 
(Delegate Nawrocki, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Baltimore County - Property Tax Exemption - Real Property Owned by Fire 
Company or Rescue Squad 
 
 
This bill alters a property tax exemption for real property owned by an incorporated, 
nonprofit fire company or rescue squad in Baltimore County. The bill specifies that the 
exemption only applies if the real property owned by an incorporated, nonprofit fire 
company or rescue squad (1) is actually used exclusively for the purposes of the fire 
company or rescue squad; or (2) is not used for any purpose but will be actually used 
exclusively for the purposes of the fire company or rescue squad in the future. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues will not be significantly affected by the 
expansion of the existing property tax exemption for nonprofit fire companies and rescue 
squads in Baltimore County. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County property tax revenues will not be significantly affected 
by the expansion of the existing property tax exemption for nonprofit fire companies and 
rescue squads located in the county. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Property owned by an incorporated, nonprofit fire company or rescue 
squad is not subject to property tax provided that the property is necessary for and actually 
used exclusively for the purposes of the fire company or rescue squad. This includes 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1096/ Page 2 
property that is:  (1) used for training or fund raising at carnivals or bazaars; (2) held in an 
advanced land acquisition program of the fire company or rescue squad; (3) leased for not 
more than 60 days during any 12-month period, if the property is used for a purpose that is 
related to the purposes of the fire company or rescue squad and the rent that is received 
from the property is used exclusively for the purposes of the fire company or rescue squad; 
(4) leased to any nonprofit organization, if the property is used for a purpose that is related 
to the purposes of the fire company or rescue squad and the rent that is received from the 
property is used exclusively for the purposes of the fire company or rescue squad; or 
(5) used as a residence for an individual who is (a) responsible for taking care of property 
owned by the fire company or rescue squad; (b) a member of the fire company or rescue 
squad; (c) not an employee of the fire company or rescue squad; and (d) not under an 
obligation to pay for the use of the property. 
 
Major Property Tax Exemptions 
 
The major exemptions from the local property tax are local, State, and federal government 
property; property of religious organizations; cemeteries and mausoleums; nonprofit 
hospitals; portions of continuing care facilities for the elderly; property of charitable, 
fraternal, and educational institutions; property used for national defense or military 
housing; property of national veterans’ organizations; homes of disabled veterans and the 
blind (partial exemption), or a surviving spouse of either; property of historical societies 
and museums; property owned by certain taxpayers engaged in building, operating, and 
managing nonprofit multifamily units, subject to local government approval; and property 
owned by fire companies, rescue squads, community water corporations, and housing 
authorities. 
 
A comprehensive overview on exempt property in Maryland can be found in Chapter 3 of 
the Guide to the Property Tax Structure in Maryland. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1096/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3