START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1079 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1079 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Prince George's County - Board of Education and School System Revisions  
PG 502-23 
 
 
This bill makes various changes to State law relating to the Prince George’s County Board 
of Education, the county superintendent, and the Prince George’s County Public School 
System (PGCPS), including (1) adding to the board’s and superintendent’s responsibilities; 
(2) altering nonstudent board member eligibility and board member removal provisions; 
(3) increasing nonstudent board member compensation beginning December 7, 2026; 
(4) expanding the voting rights of and altering the election procedures for the student 
member of the board; and (5) requiring the board to retain counsel for board members and 
pay counsel fees and reasonable related expenses under specified circumstances (these 
requirements also apply retroactively to litigation initiated on or after January 1, 2020). 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023; however, certain provisions (identified below) take 
effect upon the effective date of Chapter 217 of 2022 (July 1, 2024). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County Board of Education expenditures increase by 
$48,400 in FY 2027 and by $83,000 annually thereafter for compensation increases. Board 
expenditures may also increase by an indeterminate amount, beginning in FY 2024, for 
board member legal fees/expenses. County revenues are not affected. This bill may 
impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1079/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Board of Education and Superintendent – Purpose and Responsibilities 
 
The purpose of the board under the bill includes maintaining a reasonably uniform system 
of public schools that is designed to provide quality education and equitable educational 
opportunity. The bill also specifies certain responsibilities of the chair of the board 
including (1) leading public meetings; (2) making subcommittee appointments; (3) serving 
as the primary contact for communications between the board and the county 
superintendent; (4) administering the county board in accordance with its bylaws; and 
(5) signing contracts authorized and approved by a majority of the members of the board. 
The board must adopt bylaws to govern its conduct and review and update those bylaws at 
least once every four years. 
 
In addition to orientation and training required under current law, each elected member of 
the board must complete professional development on certain specified topics in 
accordance with the bylaws adopted by the board. The bill encourages elected members to 
attend professional development conferences and requires that, by December 1 each year, 
each elected member submit a professional development disclosure statement describing 
the professional development activities the member completed during that year. By 
January 30 each year, the board must post the disclosure statements on its website. Each 
year, the board must convene, and elected members must attend, a professional retreat to 
complete professional development or other training, set annual board performance goals, 
and complete a board self-evaluation. The board must post the results of the self-evaluation 
on its website within 30 days of the last day of the retreat. 
 
The board must establish an audit committee to ensure that public funds for the 
county school system are spent equitably across all the schools in the county school system. 
The bill’s language relating to the audit committee may not be construed to alter the 
mandatory allocation of funding to individual schools as required under current law.  
 
The board and superintendent must establish annual goals for the performance of the 
county school system and evaluate the performance of the school system against those 
goals in a public meeting of the board each year. Each year, the board and superintendent 
must conduct a poll of stakeholders and community members of the county school system 
to measure public opinion on the confidence and effectiveness of the board, superintendent, 
and school system, addressing each component separately. When establishing annual 
performance goals, the board and superintendent must consider the findings of the poll. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1079/ Page 3 
At the first meeting of the board each year, the board must review the respective roles, 
duties, and responsibilities of the board and superintendent, announce the annual 
performance goals of the board, discuss the results of the self-evaluation, and discuss the 
professional development completed by the board members during the previous year. 
 
Board Member Eligibility and Compensation – Takes Effect with Chapter 217 of 2022 
(July 1, 2024) 
 
The bill requires each candidate to be a resident of the school board district the candidate 
seeks to represent for at least one year before the date of the general election (instead of 
from the time of filing as a candidate for election). In an election year immediately 
following an approved decennial redistricting plan changing the boundaries of any school 
board district, the one-year residency requirement does not apply if the candidate (1) is a 
qualified voter but no longer resides in the candidate’s former school board district due to 
a boundary change in the redistricting plan; (2) resided in the candidate’s former school 
board district for at least one year immediately preceding the general election; and 
(3) resides, as of the date of the deadline for filing as a candidate for election, in the 
candidate’s former school board district. Unless otherwise disqualified, an elected member 
of the county board is eligible for re-election. 
 
Beginning December 7, 2026, compensation for the chair of the board increases (by 
$11,000) to $30,000 annually and compensation for other elected members increases (by 
$9,000) to $27,000 annually.  
 
Board Member Removal 
 
The bill allows the State Board of Education to remove a member of the 
Prince George’s County Board of Education without the approval of the Governor.  
 
Student Member Voting Rights and Election Procedures  
 
Under the bill, the student member may vote on, among other matters before the board, 
(1) capital and operating budgets; (2) school closings, reopenings, and boundaries; and 
(3) student disciplinary matters. The student member still may not vote on collective 
bargaining decisions, teacher and administrator disciplinary matters, and other personnel 
matters. The bill preserves a restriction on the student member attending an 
executive session relating to specified hearings or collective bargaining and additionally 
prohibits the student member from attending an executive session on a personnel matter on 
which the student member may not vote. 
 
The bill also alters the procedures for the election of the student member. Under the bill, 
delegates to the Prince George’s County Regional Association of Student Governments 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1079/ Page 4 
must annually elect two candidates for student board member at a primary election held 
each school year. Subsequently, the single student board member must be elected, at a 
general election held each year, by students in sixth through twelfth grade in PGCPS. The 
bill requires the regional association to establish procedures for the election of the student 
member of the board (under current law the association is simply authorized to establish 
such procedures). Those procedures must provide for the administration of the primary and 
general election and notification to the county superintendent of candidates selected after 
each primary election. For the general election, PGCPS must provide equal campaign funds 
to student board member candidates and educate sixth through twelfth grade students on 
the voting process before each general election. Lastly, the bill requires an eligible student 
to file a nomination form at least three weeks (instead of two weeks) before a 
special election meeting of the regional association. 
 
Retention of Legal Counsel and Payment of Fees/Expenses 
 
The bill requires the board to retain counsel to defend a board member who is involved in 
litigation because of the member’s service and in the member’s official capacity on the 
board. The board must also pay all counsel fees and reasonable and related expenses 
incurred for defending a member in litigation involving the member’s service in their 
official capacity on the board if it is determined during the course of litigation that the 
member was acting within the scope of the member’s authority and without malice and 
gross negligence. 
 
These provisions apply retroactively and must be applied to and interpreted to affect any 
litigation that was initiated on or after January 1, 2020, involving the defense of a member 
of the board who (1) is involved in litigation because of the member’s service and in the 
member’s official capacity on the board and (2) was found during the course of litigation 
to have been acting within the scope of the member’s authority and without malice and 
gross negligence. An individual seeking to be reimbursed by the board under the retroactive 
application of the provisions must provide documentation to the board, by August 1, 2023, 
of the litigation costs incurred. 
 
Citizen Advisory Committee 
 
The bill requires that the citizen advisory committee established by the board reflect, to the 
extent practicable, the geographic, racial, ethnic, cultural, and gender diversity of the 
county. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1079/ Page 5 
Current Law:   
 
Board Member Compensation, Residency Requirements, and Other Provisions 
 
The chair of the Prince George’s County Board of Education is entitled to receive $19,000 
annually as compensation and the other elected and appointed members are each entitled 
to receive $18,000 annually as compensation. 
 
From the time of filing as a candidate for election to the board, each candidate must be a 
registered voter of the county and a resident of the school board district the candidate seeks 
to represent. An elected member must forfeit the office if the member (1) fails to reside in 
the school board district from which the member was elected, unless the change is caused 
by a change in the boundaries of the district, or (2) fails to be a registered voter of the 
county. 
 
The elected members of the county board must be elected at the general election every 
four years by the voters of the school board district that each member represents. There are 
no term limits imposed on members of the board. 
 
With the approval of the Governor, the State Board of Education may remove a member 
of the county board for any of the following reasons:  (1) immorality; (2) misconduct in 
office; (3) incompetency; or (4) willful neglect of duty. 
 
The county board elects the chair and vice chair, whose terms are two years.  
 
At the beginning of each term, each board member must attend an orientation and be 
provided with training materials that clarify the role of a member. 
 
Under Chapter 217, effective July 1, 2024, the 4 appointed members of the board are 
removed, and the board consists of 10 members (9 elected members and the student 
member). 
 
For background purposes, the Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership of the 24 local boards of 
education. 
 
Board Purpose 
 
The statutory purpose of the board is to (1) raise the level of academic achievement of the 
students in PGCPS and (2) raise the level of engagement of the parents, students, and 
community as a whole. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1079/ Page 6 
Student Member Voting Rights and Election Procedures 
 
The student member must be an eleventh or twelfth grade student in PGCPS during their 
term in office. The student member serves for a term of one year beginning at the end of a 
school year. The student member may vote on all matters before the board except those 
relating to (1) capital and operating budgets; (2) school closings, reopenings, and 
boundaries; (3) collective bargaining decisions; (4) student disciplinary decisions; 
(5) teacher and administrator disciplinary matters; and (6) other personnel matters. On an 
affirmative vote of a majority of the nonstudent members of the board, the board may 
determine if a matter relates to a subject that the student member may not vote on. Unless 
invited to attend by an affirmative vote of a majority of the nonstudent members of the 
board, the student member may not attend an executive session that relates to (1) hearings 
on appeals of special education placements or specified personnel suspensions and 
dismissals or (2) collective bargaining decisions. 
 
The delegates to the Prince George’s County Regional Association of Student 
Governments must annually elect the student member to the board at a special election 
meeting to be held each school year. The regional association may establish procedures for 
the election of the student member of the board. Any election procedures established by 
the association are subject to the approval of the elected members of the board.  
 
An eligible student must file a nomination form at least two weeks before a special election 
meeting of the regional association. Nomination forms must be made available in the 
administrative offices of all public senior high schools in the county, the office of student 
concerns, and the office of the president of the regional association.  
 
Retention of Legal Counsel and Payment of Fees 
 
Each county board may retain counsel to represent it in legal matters that affect the board 
and contract for the payment of a reasonable fee to the counsel. Funds for such fees must 
be included in the annual budget. Each county board may also pay all or part of the counsel 
fees for the defense of a county board member who is involved in litigation because of the 
board member’s service and in their official capacity on the board. 
 
Citizen Advisory Committee 
 
Each county board must establish at least one citizen advisory committee to advise the 
board and to facilitate its activities and programs in the public schools. Similar advisory 
committees may be established for an individual school or groups of schools within a 
region. A citizen advisory committee may include parents, teachers, students, and other 
citizens as members. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1079/ Page 7 
Local Expenditures:  Prince George’s County Board of Education expenditures increase 
by $48,400 in fiscal 2027 and by $83,000 annually thereafter, reflecting the bill’s increased 
compensation for the chair of the board and eight other elected board members, beginning 
December 7, 2026. This estimate reflects the composition of the board following the 
changes under Chapter 217, that are effective July 1, 2024.  
 
Board expenditures may also increase (1) in fiscal 2024 for reimbursement of board 
member legal fees/expenses under the bill’s retroactive application of the requirement to 
pay board member legal fees/expenses under specified circumstances and (2) in fiscal 2024 
and future years to the extent the board retains counsel and/or pays legal fees/expenses for 
board members pursuant to the bill’s requirements when it otherwise would not have in the 
absence of the bill. The extent of any increase in expenditures cannot be reliably estimated 
and depends in part on the scope of litigation board members are involved in. 
 
The bill’s provisions are otherwise expected to be implemented with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 9, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1079/ Page 8 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
Membership 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. Twenty-two boards have student members; 
however, only 8 boards allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority 
to vote on matters relating to collective bargaining, personnel, and operating and capital 
budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership of the 
24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2023 
 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Anne Arundel2 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore City3 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed from county at large  
7 elected from councilmanic districts  
1 student (one-year term)  
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1079/ Page 9 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles4 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Harford5 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed from county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (one-year term)  
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term) 
Kent6 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Prince George’s7 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Somerset 
5 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Washington8 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Wicomico 
7 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term) 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1079/ Page 10 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed by Governor and elected board, except (1) in Baltimore City, 
members are appointed by the mayor and (2) in Harford County, members are appointed by the county 
executive with the advice and consent of the county council. Entries for local boards that are at any point 
in the process of transitioning between means of selection reflect the final state the board will be in once 
the transition fully takes effect. 
 
2 Chapter 473 of 2017 restructured the Anne Arundel County Board of Education from a nine-member 
appointed board to an eight-member elected board consisting of seven elected members (one from each of 
the seven councilmanic districts on a nonpartisan basis) and one student member. The terms of the elected 
members are staggered; four members were elected at the 2018 general election and three members were 
elected at the 2020 general election as the terms of previously appointed board members expired. In this 
manner, the elected board is phased in. The members elected in 2018 serve a six-year term, while the 
members elected in 2020 serve a four-year term. Thus, beginning in 2024, all members must stand for 
election. An elected member of the board generally serves a four-year term beginning on the first Monday 
in December after the member’s election and until a successor is elected and qualifies. 
 
3 Chapter 593 of 2017 repealed the role of the Governor in making appointments to the Baltimore City 
Board of School Commissioners; it also repealed the Governor’s role in filling board vacancies and 
removing board members. As a result, board members are appointed solely by the Mayor of Baltimore City 
until the appointed/elected board established by the legislation is executed at the 2022 general election. 
Chapter 593 also established the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel (which the mayor 
must convene) and specified its membership. The purpose of the panel is to select nominees to be 
recommended to the mayor as qualified candidates for appointment to the board, including candidates for 
vacancies. If the mayor chooses not to appoint a member or to fill a vacancy from a list submitted by the 
panel, the mayor must reconvene the panel to submit additional names of qualified candidates. Beginning 
with the 2022 general election, the board will be restructured as a hybrid board with two members elected 
from the city at large, nine members appointed by the mayor, and one student member. Elected members 
will serve a four-year term and appointed members will serve a three-year term. 
 
4 Chapters 404 and 405 of 2021 added two new members to the Charles County Board of Education and 
altered the selection method for board members by requiring that eight board members be elected from the 
county commissioner districts (two from each of the four districts) and one board member be elected from 
the county at large. Previously, the seven board members were all elected from the county at large. All seats 
are subject to election in November 2022; however, the at-large member elected in November 2022 must 
serve a two-year term (instead of the usual four-year term) until a successor is elected to a full term in 
November 2024. Chapters 404 and 405 also provided the student member with voting rights, subject to 
certain restrictions. 
 
5 Chapter 569 of 2022 eliminated the role of the Governor in appointing members to the Harford County 
Board of Education. Instead, beginning with members appointed following the 2022 gubernatorial election, 
the Harford County Executive will appoint board members, subject to the advice and consent of the 
Harford County Council by a vote of at least five members. In appointing members to the board, the county 
executive must ensure, to the extent practicable, that the total makeup of the board reflects the gender, 
ethnic, and racial diversity of the county. Members appointed to the board following the 2022 election must 
serve for a term of two years until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Subsequent board members will 
be appointed following the 2024 presidential election and each presidential election thereafter. 
 
6 Although not in statute, the Kent County Board of Education reports that there is a nonvoting student 
member of the board and that the student member does not attend closed sessions. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1079/ Page 11 
7 Chapter 217 of 2022 altered the membership of the Prince George’s County Board of Education by 
removing the four appointed members from the board. Effective July 1, 2024, the board will become an 
elected board that consists of nine elected members, each of whom must reside in and be elected from a 
different school board district, and one student member. 
 
8 Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 

END OF PAGE 11