START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 398

Chapter 398

(House Bill 1059)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages – Performing Arts Theater License

FOR the purpose of establishing in Harford County a performing arts theater beer and wine
license that authorizes the holder to sell or serve beer and wine in certain performing
arts theaters at retail for on–premises consumption; and generally relating to
alcoholic beverages licenses in Harford County.

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–1005.2
to be Section 22–1005.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–1005.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 22–1005.2 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 22–1005.3.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

22–102.

This title applies only in Harford County.

22–1005.2.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 398 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PERFORMING ARTS THEATER” MEANS AN AREA, A
BUILDING, OR A STRUCTURE DESIGNED AND USED FOR PLAYS, ACTS, DRAMAS,
CONCERTS, OR HISTRIONICS BY ACTORS OR ACTRESSES PERFORMING ON A STAGE
OR THE SHOWING OF MOVIES OR FILMS.

(B) THERE IS A PERFORMING ARTS THEATER BEER AND WINE LICENSE.

(C) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE ON THE PREMISES OF A
PERFORMING ARTS THEATER OPERATED BY A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

(D) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL OR SERVE BEER AND
WINE AT RETAIL FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(E) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL OR SERVE BEER AND WINE:

(1) 1 HOUR BEFORE AND AFTER A PERFORMANCE;

(2) DURING A PERFORMANCE;

(3) DURING AN INTERMISSION; AND

(4) DURING A RECEPTION 1 HOUR BEFORE OR 1 HOUR AFTER A
PERFORMANCE.

(F) THE LICENSE MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER LOCATION.

(G) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL PURCHASE BEER AND WINE FROM A
~~RETAIL~~ ~~LICENSE~~ ~~HOLDER~~ ~~OR~~ AN AUTHORIZED AND LICENSED WHOLESALER ~~OR~~
~~MANUFACTURER.~~

(H) ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE UNDER THIS SECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT THE
BOARD FROM ISSUING A CLASS C PER DIEM LICENSE THAT APPLIES TO THE
PERFORMING ARTS THEATER.

(I) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL SERVE OR OFFER FOR SALE SNACKS AT
ALL TIMES WHEN BEER AND WINE ARE SOLD.

(J) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $500.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2