START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1049 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1049 
(Delegate Bridges) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Transportation – Assaults on Public Transit Operators – Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) to submit an annual report 
on assaults on public transit operators, including specified information, by 
December 1 each year. The report must be submitted to each local executive authority, the 
State’s Attorney for each county, and specified committees of the General Assembly. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $50,000 in 
FY 2024 only to evaluate the feasibility of establishing a statewide local transit safety 
officer, as required for the first annual report; the bill’s other reporting requirements can 
be handled using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
50,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments can provide the required data to MTA (and receive the 
reports from MTA) using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1049/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For purposes of the bill, “public transit operator” means an individual who 
is (1) employed by MTA, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority 
(WMATA), or a political subdivision of the State and (2) engaged in providing public 
transportation services, including bus, train, light rail, and subway services. “Public transit 
operator” includes a transit station manager. 
 
Each report must include, for the immediately preceding 12 months:   
 
 
for each assault on a public transit operator (1) the nature of the assault; (2) the mode 
of transit where the assault occurred; (3) the location of the assault; (4) whether 
police were involved in responding to the assault; and (5) the outcome of any 
investigation into the assault, including any disciplinary action taken, if the 
information is available; 
 
a comparison of that data, in aggregate, with at least two other states with similar 
transit systems or populations; and 
 
a review of current transit industry best practices to prevent and mitigate assaults on 
public transit operators. 
 
The first annual report, due December 1, 2023, must also include:   
 
 
all of the aforementioned data on assaults for each of the immediately preceding 
five years; 
 
an evaluation of assault prevention and mitigation technology and policies for each 
transit system operated by a political subdivision; 
 
recommendations to improve the existing assault prevention and mitigation 
technology and policies for each transit system operated by a political subdivision; 
and 
 
an evaluation of the feasibility of establishing a statewide local transit safety officer 
to provide guidance to transit systems operated by political subdivisions on best 
practices to prevent and mitigate assaults on public transit operators. 
 
Current Law:  MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit 
system throughout the 
Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in 
Baltimore and other services such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter 
buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. With the exception of the 
District of Columbia Metrorail system (which is managed by WMATA) and some local 
bus services (such as those managed by the Montgomery County Department of 
Transportation), MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies responsible for the 
construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1049/ Page 3 
WMATA was established in 1967 through an interstate compact among Maryland, 
Virginia, and the District of Columbia. The original purpose was construction and 
operation of a rapid rail transit system for the Washington metropolitan area. In 1973, 
WMATA purchased the assets of four major private bus companies operating in the area. 
Maryland’s overall participation in the Washington metropolitan transit system consists of 
the provision of annual funding to WMATA for capital and operating costs of the 
Metrorail, Metrobus, and MetroAccess systems. 
 
State Expenditures:  MTA advises that it currently has an internal committee dedicated 
to collecting and reviewing data, strategies, potential causes, and responses to operator 
assaults; however, the committee does not have any knowledge or expertise related to local 
transit safety officers. 
 
Accordingly, TTF expenditures increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2024 only for MTA to engage 
one of its expert consultants to conduct the evaluation of the feasibility of establishing a 
statewide local transit safety officer; this evaluation is only required for the first annual 
report (due December 1, 2023) and, as such, there are no ongoing costs. MTA’s existing 
committee can handle the remainder of the bill’s reporting requirements using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 693 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Harford and 
Montgomery counties; City of College Park; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
Enrolled - April 13, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 13, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3