START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1011 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1011 
(Delegate Stein) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Safety – Refrigerants – Limitations on Use 
 
 
This bill establishes that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, except for regulations 
issued by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), no provision of the State 
building code or other law or regulation may prohibit or otherwise limit the use of a 
refrigerant if (1) the refrigerant is designated as acceptable for use in accordance with  
42 U.S.C. 7671k (a provision of the federal Clean Air Act (CAA) which governs 
stratospheric ozone protection and a safe alternatives policy for specified substances) and 
(2) any “appliance” containing the refrigerant designated for acceptable use is installed and 
used in accordance with the safety standards and use conditions under that provision of 
federal law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. MDE advises 
that it can handle the bill’s changes with existing budgeted resources.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Appliance” means any device that (1) contains and uses a class I or 
class II substance or a substitute for a class I or class II substance (as defined under 
specified federal law) as a refrigerant and (2) is used for a household or commercial 
purpose, including an air conditioner, a refrigerator, a chiller, or a freezer. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1011/ Page 2 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Clean Air Act – 42 U.S.C. 7671 – Stratospheric Ozone Protection 
 
CAA is the comprehensive federal law that regulates air emissions from stationary and 
mobile sources. 
 
Under 42 U.S.C. 7671a, the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) must publish a list of class I and class II substances that contain specified 
chlorofluorocarbons. The administrator must also add to the list of class II substances any 
other substance that administrator finds is known or may reasonably be anticipated to cause 
or contribute to harmful effects of the stratospheric ozone layer. The administrator may 
add, by rule, any substance to the list of class I or class II substances, as specified under 
federal law. In the case of any substance added to the lists after initial publication, the 
administrator may extend any schedule or compliance deadline to a later date under 
specified conditions. Simultaneously with the publication of the lists (and any addition to 
either list), the administrator must assign to each listed substance a numerical value 
representing the substance’s ozone-depleting potential. After notice and opportunity for 
public comment, the administrator must publish the global warming potential of each listed 
substance.  
 
42 U.S.C. 7671k also established related monitoring and reporting requirements and 
provided for the phase out of the production and consumption of class I and class II 
substances, with specified exceptions.  
 
Generally, 42 U.S.C 7671k requires that, to the maximum extent practicable, class I and 
class II ozone-depleting substances be replaced by chemicals, product substitutes, or 
alternative manufacturing processes that reduce overall risks to human health and the 
environment.  
 
The Significant New Alternatives Policy (SNAP) program within EPA implements this 
requirement. Under SNAP, EPA (1) identifies and evaluates substitutes within a 
comparative risk framework in specified industrial sectors and (2) publishes lists of 
acceptable and unacceptable substitutes for each of the major industrial use sectors, 
including refrigeration and air conditioning. EPA has modified the SNAP lists many times, 
most often by expanding the list of acceptable substitutes, but in some cases by prohibiting 
the use of substitutes previously listed as acceptable. 
 
American Innovation and Manufacturing Act 
 
The federal American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 requires EPA to address 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) by phasing down production and consumption, maximizing 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1011/ Page 3 
reclamation and minimizing releases from equipment, and facilitating the transition to 
next-generation technologies through sector-based restrictions. On December 15, 2022, 
EPA proposed a rule to prohibit the manufacture and import of products containing 
restricted HFCs, including refrigerants, by January 1, 2025, in addition to prohibiting the 
sale, distribution, and export of those products, as specified. 
 
Maryland Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets and the Climate Solutions Now 
Act 
 
The Climate Solutions Now Act (Chapter 38 of 2022) made broad changes to the State’s 
approach to reducing statewide greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and addressing climate 
change. Among other things, the Act accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions 
reductions targets originally established under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction 
Act by requiring the State to develop plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to 
(1) reduce GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031; and (2) achieve net-zero 
statewide GHG emissions by 2045. The net-zero requirement terminates June 30, 2030. 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards and the International Mechanical Code 
 
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) currently incorporates by reference the 
International Building Code (2018 Edition), including the International Energy 
Conservation Code (IECC) (2018 Edition), with modifications, as Maryland Building 
Performance Standards (MBPS). In general, the standards apply to all buildings and 
structures within the State for which a building permit application is received by a local 
government. Chapter 38 required MDL to adopt IECC (2018 Edition) by January 1, 2023, 
and to adopt each subsequent version of IECC within 18 months after it is issued. 
 
MDL also incorporates by reference the International Mechanical Code (IMC) 
(2018 Edition), which generally governs the installation of heating, ventilation, 
air-conditioning, and refrigeration systems. MDL advises that MBPS and IMC include 
provisions concerning the use of refrigerants. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 741 (Senator Jackson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1011/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Labor; 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4