START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1005 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1005 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Howard County – Archery Hunting – Safety Zone and Position of Archery 
Hunter Ho. Co. 15–23 
 
   
This bill decreases the archery hunting “safety zone” for archery hunters in Howard County 
who are hunting under the authority of a deer management permit or who are actively 
participating in a hunting program administered by the county from 150 yards to 50 yards 
from a dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or camp occupied by 
human beings. An archery hunter in Howard County who is hunting under the authority of 
a deer management permit or is actively participating in a hunting program administered 
by the county must be in an elevated position that allows the hunter to shoot in a downward 
trajectory when hunting within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence, church, 
school, or other building or camp occupied by human beings. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1005/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Archery Hunting Safety Zones  
 
Generally, a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not shoot or discharge any 
firearm or other deadly weapon within a specified area within 150 yards, known as the 
“safety zone,” of a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied 
by human beings without the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant. Also, 
a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not shoot at any animal while it is within 
the safety zone without the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant. 
 
For archery hunters in Allegany, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, 
Montgomery, St. Mary’s, and Washington counties, the safety zone extends for 50 yards 
from a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied by human 
beings. For archery hunters in Anne Arundel County, the safety zone extends for 100 yards 
from a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied by human 
beings. An archery hunter in Harford County must use a tree stand when hunting within 
50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or camp 
occupied by human beings. An archery hunter in Montgomery and Washington counties 
must be in an elevated position that allows the hunter to shoot in a downward trajectory 
when hunting within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence, church, school, or 
other building or camp occupied by human beings. 
 
A person, while hunting for any wild bird or mammal, may not shoot or discharge any 
firearm within 300 yards of a school during school hours or when a school-approved 
activity is taking place. 
 
During any open hunting season, a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not hunt 
or chase willfully any wild bird or mammal within the safety zone without the specific 
advance permission of the owner or occupant. 
 
Deer Management Permits 
 
Maryland landowners or agricultural lessees who are experiencing severe economic loss 
from deer to commercially grown crops (including row crops, truck crops, pasture, nursery 
stock, orchards, and certain tree plantings) or significant ecological damage to certain 
native plant communities due to deer may be eligible to receive a deer management permit. 
Deer management permits allow the permittee or their agent to remove deer from the 
designated property outside any deer bag limits and/or the established deer hunting seasons, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1005/ Page 3 
including on any Sunday throughout the year. These permits are issued by the Wildlife and 
Heritage Service within the Department of Natural Resources; there is no permit fee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 96 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3