START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1071 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1071 
(Delegate Crutchfield, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law and Procedure - Cannabis - Fines for Smoking in Public, Stops, 
and Searches 
 
 
This bill prohibits a law enforcement officer from (1) initiating a stop or a search of a 
person, motor vehicle, or vessel based solely on specified types of cannabis-related 
evidence and (2) conducting a search of specified areas of a motor vehicle or vessel during 
an investigation of a person solely for driving a motor vehicle or vessel while impaired by 
or under the influence of cannabis. Evidence discovered or obtained in violation of the bill, 
including evidence discovered or obtained by consent, is not admissible in a trial, hearing, 
or other proceeding. In addition, the penalty for smoking cannabis in a public place is 
reduced for a first offense, to a maximum fine of $50 (rather than $250 under current law) 
and for a second or subsequent offense, to a maximum fine of $150 (rather than $500 under 
current law). The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2023. The bill’s provisions related 
to smoking cannabis in a public place take effect July 1, 2023, contingent upon 
Section 4 of Chapter 26 of 2022 taking effect. (Section 4 of Chapter 26 is set to take 
effect July 1, 2023.)  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures decrease minimally, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures decrease minimally, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1071/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A law enforcement officer may not initiate a stop or a search of a person, 
a motor vehicle, or a vessel based solely on one or more of the following types of evidence:  
(1) odor of burnt or unburnt cannabis; (2) possession (or suspicion of possession) of 
cannabis that does not exceed the personal use amount; or (3) the presence of cash or 
currency in proximity to cannabis without other indicia of an intent to distribute. 
 
If a law enforcement officer is investigating a person solely for driving or attempting to 
drive a motor vehicle or vessel while impaired by or under the influence of cannabis, the 
law enforcement officer may not search of an area of a motor vehicle or vessel that is not 
(1) readily accessible to the driver or operator of the motor vehicle or vessel or 
(2) reasonably likely to contain evidence relevant to the condition of the driver or operator 
of the motor vehicle or vessel. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Controlled Dangerous Substances – Cannabis 
 
Controlled dangerous substances (CDS) are listed on one of five schedules (Schedules I 
through V) set forth in statute depending on their potential for abuse and acceptance for 
medical use. Cannabis (also known as marijuana) is listed on Schedule I. Under the federal 
Controlled Substances Act, for a drug or substance to be classified as Schedule I, the 
following findings must be made:  (1) the substance has a high potential for abuse; (2) the 
drug or other substance has no currently accepted medical use in the United States; and 
(3) there is a lack of accepted safety for use of the drug or other substance under medical 
supervision. 
 
No distinction is made in State law regarding the illegal possession of any CDS, regardless 
of which schedule it is on, with the exception of cannabis. 
 
Among other things, Chapter 26 of 2022, renamed marijuana as “cannabis” in statute and 
defined cannabis as the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of the plant, including all 
derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts, and salts of isomers, whether 
growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC) concentration greater 
than 0.3% on a dry weight basis. “Cannabis” does not include hemp as defined in § 14-101 
of the Agriculture Article. 
 
Possession of Cannabis 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022 and the passage of the affiliated constitutional referendum, 
as of January 1, 2023, statute distinguishes between a “personal use amount” and a “civil 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1071/ Page 3 
use amount” of cannabis. Exhibit 1 shows a comparison of what is included under the 
definitions of each of these terms. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Comparison of “Personal Use Amount” and “Civil Use Amount” Definitions 
 
Personal Use Amount 
Civil Use Amount 
 up to 1.5 ounces of usable cannabis 
 more than 1.5 ounces but not more than 
2.5 ounces of usable cannabis 
 
 up to 12 grams of concentrated cannabis  more than 12 grams but not more than 
20 grams of concentrated cannabis 
 
 cannabis products containing up to 
750 milligrams of delta-9-THC 
 
 (as of July 1, 2023) up to two cannabis 
plants 
 cannabis products containing more than 
750 milligrams but not more than 
1,250 milligrams of delta-9-THC 
 
THC:  tetrahydrocannabinol  
 
Note:  Effective July 1, 2023, “personal use amount” also includes up to two cannabis plants. Cannabis 
plants are not included in the definition of civil use amount, thus cultivating any number of plants from 
January 1, 2023, to June 30, 2023, and more than two plants as of July 1, 2023, is a criminal misdemeanor 
with a maximum penalty of imprisonment for three years and/or a $5,000 fine. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Effective July 1, 2023, an individual at least age 21 may possess the personal use amount 
of cannabis. Exhibit 2 shows the penalties related to cannabis possession from 
January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, and the penalties that take effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1071/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 2 
Civil and Criminal Penalties for Possession of Cannabis 
Effective January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, and Effective July 1, 2023 
 
Offense 
Offense Type 
Maximum Penalty 
Effective  
January 1 through 
June 30, 2023 
Maximum Penalty 
Effective 
July 1, 2023 
Possession of the personal use 
amount 
Civil 
$100 fine* 
$100 fine for 
individual younger 
than age 21* 
Possession of the civil use 
amount 
Civil 
$250 fine* 
$250 fine* 
Possession of more than the 
civil use amount 
Criminal 
misdemeanor 
Six months 
imprisonment and/or 
$1,000 fine 
Six months 
imprisonment and/or 
$1,000 fine 
 
*With respect to a person younger than age 21, the court may (1) order the person to attend a drug education 
program approved by the Maryland Department of Health; (2) refer the person to an assessment for 
substance abuse disorder; and (3) refer the person to substance abuse treatment, if necessary. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Possession with the Intent to Distribute and Adult Sharing of Cannabis:  As of 
January 1, 2023, a person may not possess cannabis in sufficient quantity to reasonably 
indicate under all circumstances an intent to distribute or dispense cannabis. However, 
possession of the personal use amount of cannabis or the civil use amount of cannabis 
without other evidence of an intent to distribute or dispense does not constitute a violation 
of this prohibition. A police officer must charge a violation of this provision by citation, as 
specified. A person who violates this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a 
maximum penalty of imprisonment for three years and/or a $5,000 fine.  
 
Effective July 1, 2023, the prohibition against distributing, dispensing, or possessing with 
the intent to distribute a CDS does not prohibit adult sharing of the personal use amount of 
cannabis. A civil or criminal penalty may not be imposed for “adult sharing” (generally 
defined as the transfer of cannabis between persons who are at least age 21 without 
remuneration) of the personal use amount of cannabis. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1071/ Page 5 
Smoking Cannabis in Public:  Effective January 1, 2023, the penalty for the civil offense 
of smoking cannabis in a public place is a fine of up to $250 for a first finding of guilt and 
a fine of up to $500 for a second or subsequent finding of guilt. In addition, the smoking 
of cannabis or hemp is specifically prohibited in specified locations, including an indoor 
area open to the public, under the Clean Indoor Air Act. 
 
Smoking Cannabis in the Passenger Area of a Vehicle:  Effective July 1, 2023, an occupant 
of a motor vehicle may not smoke cannabis in the passenger area of a motor vehicle on a 
highway. “Passenger area” means an area that is designed to seat the driver and any 
passenger while the motor vehicle is in operation or is readily accessible to the driver or 
passenger while in their seating positions. The passenger area of a vehicle does not include 
(1) a locked glove compartment; (2) the trunk of a motor vehicle; or (3) if the motor vehicle 
does not have a trunk, the area behind the rearmost upright seat or an area that is not 
normally occupied by the driver or a passenger. 
 
A violation of this prohibition is a civil offense subject to a maximum fine of $25. 
Additionally, a driver of a motor vehicle may not smoke or consume cannabis in the 
passenger area of a motor vehicle on a highway. A violation of this prohibition is a 
misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of $500. The prepayment penalty established by 
the District Court is $530, and the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) must assess 
one point against a violator’s license. If, however, the violation contributes to an accident, 
the prepayment penalty is $570, and MVA must assess three points against the violator’s 
license. 
 
Debilitating Medical Conditions and Medical Necessity:  In a prosecution for the use or 
possession of cannabis, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant used or possessed 
the cannabis because (1) the defendant has a debilitating medical condition that has been 
diagnosed by a physician with whom the defendant has a bona fide physician-patient 
relationship; (2) the debilitating medical condition is severe and resistant to conventional 
medicine; and (3) cannabis is likely to provide the defendant with therapeutic or palliative 
relief from the debilitating medical condition. Likewise, in a prosecution for the possession 
of cannabis, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant possessed cannabis because the 
cannabis was intended for medical use by an individual with a debilitating medical 
condition for whom the defendant is a caregiver; however, such a defendant must notify 
the State’s Attorney of the intention to assert the affirmative defense and provide specified 
documentation. In either case, the affirmative defense may not be used if the defendant was 
using cannabis in a public place or was assisting the person for whom the defendant is a 
caregiver in using cannabis in a public place or was in possession of more than one ounce 
of cannabis. 
 
Finally, medical necessity may be used as a mitigating factor in a prosecution for the 
possession or use of cannabis. A defendant may introduce, and the court must consider as 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1071/ Page 6 
a mitigating factor, any evidence of medical necessity. If a court finds that the use or 
possession of cannabis was due to medical necessity, the court must dismiss the charge. 
 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol or While Impaired by Alcohol, Drugs, or 
Controlled Dangerous Substances 
 
Under the Transportation Article, a person may not drive or attempt to drive any vehicle 
while (1) under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; 
(2) impaired by alcohol; (3) impaired by a drug, any combination of drugs, or any 
combination of drugs and alcohol; or (4) impaired by a CDS. Additionally, a person may 
not commit any of these offenses while transporting a minor. 
 
A person convicted of one of the above offenses is subject to higher maximum penalties 
when that person has specified prior convictions. Chapter 20 of 2019 increased maximum 
penalties for subsequent drunk and drugged driving violations. Exhibit 3 displays the 
maximum penalties for alcohol and drug-related driving offenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1071/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 3 
 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Under the Influence Per Se, or  
While Impaired by a CDS 
First Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $1,000 
Second Offense 
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Under the Influence Per Se, or  
While Impaired by a CDS While Transporting a Minor 
First Offense  
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Second Offense 
3 years imprisonment and/or fine of $3,000 
Third Offense 
 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol or While Impaired by a Drug, a Combination of 
Drugs, or a Combination of One or More Drugs and Alcohol 
First Offense 
2 months imprisonment and/or fine of $500 
Second Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $500 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol or While Impaired by a Drug, a Combination of 
Drugs, or a Combination of One or More Drugs and Alcohol  
While Transporting a Minor 
First Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $1,000 
Second Offense 
2 year imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
 
CDS:  controlled dangerous substance 
 
Notes:  All listed offenses are misdemeanors. Additionally, for the offense of driving under the influence 
of alcohol, under the influence per se, or while impaired by a CDS, a repeat conviction or convictions within 
five years requires a mandatory minimum penalty of imprisonment from 5 to 10 days. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1071/ Page 8 
Probable Cause to Arrest – Odor of Marijuana 
 
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution protects individuals from unreasonable 
searches and seizures by the government. Generally, U.S. Supreme Court decisions have 
established the principle that a warrant issued by a “neutral and detached magistrate” must 
be obtained before a government authority may breach the individual privacy that the 
Fourth Amendment secures. However, the U.S. Supreme Court recognizes a number of 
exceptions to the warrant requirement including for arrests where probable cause exists to 
believe that a crime has been committed by the person being seized.  
 
Additionally, in U.S. v. Humphries, 372 F.3d 653, 659 (4th Cir. 2004) the court stated that 
while the odor of marijuana provides probable cause to believe that marijuana is present, 
the presence of marijuana does not of itself authorize the police to arrest any person in the 
vicinity. Additional factors must be present to localize the presence of marijuana such that 
its placement will justify the arrest.  
 
The Maryland Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) considered whether 
the odor of marijuana alone provided probable cause to arrest despite the decriminalization 
of possession of less than 10 grams of marijuana, and subsequently held that “the mere 
odor of marijuana alone is not indicative of the amount of marijuana that may be in a 
person’s possession and does not provide a law enforcement officer with the requisite 
probable cause to arrest a person and perform a warrantless search of that person incident 
to the arrest.” Lewis v. State, 470 Md. 1 (2020). However, the Court of Appeals held that 
“the odor of marijuana provides reasonable suspicion of criminal activity sufficient to 
conduct a brief investigatory detention.” In re D.D., 479 Md. 206 (2022). 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill may result in a decrease in arrests and charges where 
probable cause or reasonable articulable suspicion to stop or search would previously have 
existed based on the (1) odor of burnt or unburnt cannabis; (2) possession (or suspicion of 
possession) of cannabis that does not exceed the personal use amount; or (3) the presence 
of cash or currency in proximity to cannabis without other indicia of an intent to distribute. 
Although such an impact may result in decreased workloads directly attributable to those 
cases for affected entities (e.g., State law enforcement agencies – including the Department 
of State Police, Department of Natural Resources Police, Maryland Transit Administration 
Police, and the Maryland Transportation Authority – the Judiciary, the Office of the Public 
Defender, etc.), it is generally assumed that resources are simply redirected to meet other 
responsibilities and there is no material impact on associated State expenditures. 
 
General fund incarceration expenditures decrease minimally to the extent that the bill 
results in fewer people being committed to State correctional facilities and reduced 
payments to counties for reimbursement of inmate costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1071/ Page 9 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$4,970 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For persons sentenced to a term 
of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the discretion to order that the 
sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional facility. The State provides 
assistance to the counties for locally sentenced inmates and for (1) inmates who are 
sentenced to and awaiting transfer to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced inmates 
confined in a local detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) inmates who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility.   
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease minimally (1) from the bill’s reduced 
fine penalty for smoking cannabis in a public place and (2) to the extent that the bill results 
in fewer fine penalties being imposed (and collected) for cases heard in District Court. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Incarceration expenditures decrease minimally to the extent that the 
bill results in fewer people being committed to local correctional facilities. Counties pay 
the full cost of incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the 
sentence. Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have ranged from 
approximately $90 to $300 per inmate in recent years. 
 
Similar to the impact described above for State entities, it is generally assumed that the bill 
does not materially impact other local expenditures, as resources that would have been 
devoted to cases affected by the bill are simply reallocated elsewhere. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues decrease minimally to the extent that the bill results in fewer 
fine penalties being imposed (and collected) for cases heard in the circuit courts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1071/ Page 10 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10