START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 502

Chapter 502

(House Bill 1049)

AN ACT concerning

Transportation – Assaults on Public Transit Operators – Report

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Transit Administration to submit a certain
annual report on assaults on public transit operators to certain persons; and
generally relating to assaults on public transit operators.

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 7–714
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

7–714.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “LOCAL EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY” MEANS:

(I) 1. THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF A COUNTY; OR

(II) 2. IF A COUNTY DOES NOT HAVE A CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, THE COUNTY GOVERNING BODY; AND

(II) IF A MUNICIPALITY OPERATES A TRANSIT SYSTEM:

1. THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE
MUNICIPALITY; OR

2. IF THE MUNICIPALITY DOES NOT HAVE A CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE MUNICIPALITY.

(3) (I) “PUBLIC TRANSIT OPERATOR” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
IS:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 502 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. EMPLOYED BY THE ADMINISTRATION, THE
WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY, OR A POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION; AND

2. ENGAGED IN PROVIDING PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
SERVICES, INCLUDING:

A. BUS SERVICE;

B. TRAIN SERVICE;

C. LIGHT RAIL SERVICE; AND

D. SUBWAY SERVICE.

(II) “PUBLIC TRANSIT OPERATOR” INCLUDES A TRANSIT
STATION MANAGER.

(B) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL SUBMIT AN ANNUAL REPORT ON
ASSAULTS ON PUBLIC TRANSIT OPERATORS AS REQUIRED BY THIS SECTION.

(C) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION FOR THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12 MONTHS:

(1) FOR EACH ASSAULT ON A PUBLIC TRANSIT OPERATOR:

(I) THE NATURE OF THE ASSAULT;

(II) THE MODE OF TRANSIT WHERE THE ASSAULT OCCURRED;

(III) THE LOCATION OF THE ASSAULT;

(IV) WHETHER POLICE WERE INVOLVED IN RESPONDING TO THE
ASSAULT; AND

(V) THE OUTCOME OF ANY INVESTIGATION INTO THE ASSAULT,
INCLUDING ANY DISCIPLINARY ACTION TAKEN, IF THE INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE;

(2) A COMPARISON OF THE AGGREGATE DATA COMPILED UNDER
ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION WITH AT LEAST TWO OTHER STATES WITH SIMILAR
TRANSIT SYSTEMS OR POPULATIONS; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 502

(3) A REVIEW OF CURRENT TRANSIT INDUSTRY BEST PRACTICES TO
PREVENT AND MITIGATE ASSAULTS ON PUBLIC TRANSIT OPERATORS.

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR DECEMBER 1, 2023, AND EACH
DECEMBER 1 THEREAFTER, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL SUBMIT THE REPORT
UNDER THIS SECTION TO:

(1) THE LOCAL EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY OF EACH COUNTY EACH
LOCAL EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY;

(2) THE STATE’S ATTORNEY FOR EACH COUNTY; AND

(3) THE FOLLOWING COMMITTEES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE:

(I) THE SENATE JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS COMMITTEE;

(II) THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE;

(III) THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE; AND

(IV) THE HOUSE ENVIRONMENT AND TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the report due on December
1, 2023, under § 7–714 of the Transportation Article as enacted by Section 1 of this Act
shall include, in addition to the information required by § 7–714 of the Transportation
Article as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, the following information:

(1) the data described in § 7–714(c)(1) of the Transportation Article as
enacted by Section 1 of this Act for each of the immediately preceding 5 years;

(2) an evaluation of assault prevention and mitigation technology and
policies for each transit system operated by a political subdivision;

(3) recommendations to improve the existing assault prevention and
mitigation technology and policies for each transit system operated by a political
subdivision; and

(4) an evaluation of the feasibility of establishing a statewide local transit
safety officer to provide guidance to transit systems operated by political subdivisions on
best practices to prevent and mitigate assaults on public transit operators.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 502 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4