START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 156

Chapter 156

(House Bill 1051)

AN ACT concerning

Public Information Act – Decisions of the State Public Information Act
Compliance Board – Appeals

FOR the purpose of authorizing an applicant to appeal a certain decision issued by the
State Public Information Act Compliance Board; authorizing a party aggrieved by a
final judgment of a circuit court in a proceeding for judicial review of a certain
decision of the ~~State~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Information~~ ~~Act~~ ~~Compliance~~ Board to appeal to the
Appellate Court of Maryland; and generally relating to the Public Information Act.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 4–101(a) through (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 4–1A–10 and 4–362
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – General Provisions

4–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Applicant” means a person or governmental unit that asks to inspect a public
record.

(c) “Board” means the State Public Information Act Compliance Board.

4–1A–10.

(a) A person or governmental unit need not exhaust the administrative remedy
under this subtitle before filing suit.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 156 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, AN APPLICANT, a
complainant, or A custodian may appeal the decision issued by the Board under this subtitle
in accordance with § 4–362 of this title.

(2) An appeal under this subsection automatically stays the decision of the
Board pending the circuit court’s decision.

4–362.

(a) (1) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, whenever a person or
governmental unit is denied inspection of a public record or is not provided with a copy,
printout, or photograph of a public record as requested, the person or governmental unit
may file a complaint with the circuit court.

(2) Except as otherwise provided in Subtitle 1A of this title and subject to
paragraph (3) of this subsection, a complainant or custodian AN APPLICANT, A
COMPLAINANT, OR A CUSTODIAN may appeal to the circuit court a decision issued by the
State Public Information Act Compliance Board as provided under § 4–1A–10 of this title.

(3) A complaint or an appeal under this subsection shall be filed with the
circuit court for the county where:

(i) FOR APPEALS OF DECISIONS BY THE BOARD ISSUED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE BOARD’S AUTHORITY UNDER § 4–1A–04(B) OF THIS TITLE,
THE APPLICANT RESIDES OR HAS A PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS;

(II) the complainant resides or has a principal place of business; or

(ii) (III) the public record is located.

(b) (1) Unless, for good cause shown, the court otherwise directs, and
notwithstanding any other provision of law, the defendant shall serve an answer or
otherwise plead to the complaint within 30 days after service of the complaint.

(2) The defendant:

(i) has the burden of sustaining a decision to:

1. deny inspection of a public record; or

2. deny the person or governmental unit a copy, printout, or
photograph of a public record; and

(ii) in support of the decision, may submit a memorandum to the
court.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 156

(c) (1) Except for cases that the court considers of greater importance, a
proceeding under this section, including an appeal, shall:

(i) take precedence on the docket;

(ii) be heard at the earliest practicable date; and

(iii) be expedited in every way.

(2) The court may examine the public record in camera to determine
whether any part of the public record may be withheld under this title.

(3) The court may:

(i) enjoin the State, a political subdivision, or a unit, an official, or
an employee of the State or of a political subdivision from:

1. withholding the public record; or

2. withholding a copy, printout, or photograph of the public
record;

(ii) issue an order for the production of the public record or a copy,
printout, or photograph of the public record that was withheld from the complainant; and

(iii) for noncompliance with the order, punish the responsible
employee for contempt.

(d) (1) A defendant governmental unit is liable to the complainant for
statutory damages and actual damages that the court considers appropriate if the court
finds that any defendant knowingly and willfully failed to:

(i) disclose or fully to disclose a public record that the complainant
was entitled to inspect under this title; or

(ii) provide a copy, printout, or photograph of a public record that the
complainant requested under § 4–205 of this title.

(2) An official custodian is liable for actual damages that the court
considers appropriate if the court finds that, after temporarily denying inspection of a
public record, the official custodian failed to petition a court for an order to continue the
denial.

(3) Statutory damages imposed by the court under paragraph (1) of this
subsection may not exceed $1,000.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 156 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) (1) Whenever the court orders the production of a public record or a copy,
printout, or photograph of a public record that was withheld from the applicant and, in
addition, finds that the custodian acted arbitrarily or capriciously in withholding the public
record or the copy, printout, or photograph of the public record, the court shall send a
certified copy of its finding to the appointing authority of the custodian.

(2) On receipt of the statement of the court and after an appropriate
investigation, the appointing authority shall take the disciplinary action that the
circumstances warrant.

(f) If the court determines that the complainant has substantially prevailed, the
court may assess against a defendant governmental unit reasonable counsel fees and other
litigation costs that the complainant reasonably incurred.

(G) NOTWITHSTANDING § 12–302(A) OF THE COURTS ARTICLE, A PARTY
WHO IS AGGRIEVED BY A FINAL JUDGMENT OF A CIRCUIT COURT IN A JUDICIAL
REVIEW PROCEEDING UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION MAY APPEAL TO
THE APPELLATE COURT OF MARYLAND IN THE MANNER THAT LAW PROVIDES FOR
APPEAL OF CIVIL CASES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4