START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1074 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1074 
(Delegate D. Barnes, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Automated External Defibrillator Tax Credit 
 
 
This bill authorizes a nonrefundable credit against the State income tax for the first $500 of 
the purchase price of an automated external defibrillator (AED) purchased for use at a 
restaurant in the State. In general, an individual or a business entity that owns a restaurant 
in the State may claim up to $1,500 in credit in a taxable year; any unused amount may not 
be carried over to any other taxable year. The credit allowed under the bill is applicable for 
only one AED purchased for use at a restaurant location in the State with annual gross 
income of at least $400,000 and may be claimed only once by an individual or business 
entity for each restaurant location. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to 
tax years 2023 through 2027. The bill terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  In FY 2024, general fund revenues may decrease by an estimated $930,000; 
Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues may decrease by an estimated 
$51,000; Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues may decrease by an estimated 
$143,000; and TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants may decrease by 
an estimated $22,000, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and minimal 
utilization of the tax credit after tax year 2024. General fund expenditures for the 
Comptroller’s Office increase by an estimated $63,000 in FY 2024 only. 
  
($ in thousands) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($930) 
($1,136) 
($212) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Revenue 
($193) 
($268) 
($69) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$63 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
($22) 
($36) 
($10) 
(-) 
(-) 
Net Effect 
($1,164) 
($1,368) 
($270) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1074/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease due to credits claimed against the 
corporate income tax and may decrease by an estimated total of $69,000 in FY 2024 
through 2026. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for small businesses 
that are able to claim the State income tax credit for eligible AED purchases. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  AED is defined as a medical heart monitor and defibrillator device that:   
 
 
is cleared for market by the federal Food and Drug Administration; 
 
recognizes the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation or rapid ventricular 
tachycardia; 
 
determines, without intervention by an operator, whether defibrillation should be 
performed; 
 
after a determination that defibrillation should be performed, automatically charges; 
and 
 
operates in a manner that (1) requires operator intervention to deliver an electrical 
impulse or (2) automatically continues with delivery of an electrical impulse. 
 
Current Law:  No similar State income tax credit exists. Businesses generally may deduct 
costs associated with the purchase of AEDs as ordinary and necessary business expenses, 
which typically results in a lower federal and State income tax liability. 
 
Chapter 167 of 1999 established the Maryland Public Access AED Program, which 
authorized certain facilities to make AEDs available to victims of sudden cardiac arrest. 
The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) is the State 
agency that oversees the program, including approving entities to participate and issuing 
registrations. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.06.02.01), to be eligible for registration or 
renewal of registration, each facility must designate an AED coordinator who must:   
 
 
complete cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and AED training and subsequent 
refresher training, in accordance with specified requirements; 
 
be responsible for implementing and administering the AED program at the facility; 
and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1074/ Page 3 
 
ensure that monthly safety inspections of all supplemental and AED equipment are 
conducted. 
 
A facility must ensure that all expected AED operators have completed CPR and AED 
training and subsequent refresher training, as specified. AEDs must be placed in locations 
that are visible and readily accessible to any person willing to operate the AED in the event 
of a suspected cardiac arrest. A facility must have a telephone or communication service 
available at all times at which an AED is operated for the notification of a public safety 
answering point; it must also submit data or other information concerning the AED 
program as requested by MIEMSS. 
 
Chapters 304 and 305 of 2023, which were signed into law on May 3, 2023, require 
restaurants with annual gross income of more than $1.0 million (exclusive of sales for 
off-premises consumption) and seating capacity of at least 100 individuals, as well as 
certain grocery stores, to be equipped with an AED beginning January 1, 2025, as specified. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease in fiscal 2024 through 2028 due 
to credits claimed against the State income tax. HEIF and TTF revenues and local highway 
user revenue grants to local governments also decrease due to credits claimed against the 
corporate income tax. 
 
Based on information provided by the Maryland Restaurant Association, an estimated 
7,800 Maryland restaurants are potentially eligible for the credit based on the bill’s 
minimum annual gross income requirement. As noted above, Chapters 304 and 305 require 
restaurants with annual gross income of more than $1.0 million (as specified) and specified 
minimum seating capacity to be equipped with an AED beginning January 1, 2025. The 
Maryland Restaurant Association advises that an estimated 4,300 Maryland restaurants 
have annual gross income of more than $1.0 million; thus, it is assumed that up to 
4,300 restaurants are potentially affected by the legislation. Based on information provided 
by MIEMSS, a new AED unit costs between $880 and $1,700, and the cost for a certified 
pre-owned AED generally ranges from $500 to $880. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the bill’s estimated effect on State and local revenues in fiscal 2024 
through 2026. As shown in the exhibit, over fiscal 2024 through 2026, State revenues may 
decrease by an estimated total of $2.8 million, including $2.3 million in general funds, and 
local highway user revenues may decrease by an estimated total of $69,000. This estimate 
assumes that a $500 credit is claimed against the income tax with respect to 90% of eligible 
Maryland restaurants with annual gross income of more than $1.0 million, as AEDs are 
acquired in response to the requirements of Chapters 304 and 305, and 50% of eligible 
restaurants with annual gross income of $1.0 million or less. This estimate also assumes 
that (1) 50% of credits are claimed in tax year 2023, and the remaining 50% of credits are 
claimed in tax year 2024 and (2) approximately 80% of credits are claimed against the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1074/ Page 4 
corporate income tax, with the remaining 20% claimed against the personal income tax. To 
the extent that utilization of the tax credit differs from the above assumptions, actual 
revenue losses experienced under the bill may differ from the estimate. 
 
In fiscal 2027 and 2028, State and local revenues decrease, potentially minimally, to the 
extent additional credits are claimed for eligible AED purchases. As noted above, an 
individual or business entity may claim the tax credit only once for each restaurant location. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Effects on State and Local Revenues 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Thousands) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
State Revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
($930) 
($1,136) 
($212) 
(-) 
(-) 
HEIF 
(51) 
(67) 
(17) 
(-) 
(-) 
TTF 
(143) 
(200) 
(52) 
(-) 
(-) 
Total 
($1,123) 
($1,404) 
($281) 
(-) 
(-) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
LHUR 
($22) 
($36) 
($10) 
(-) 
(-) 
 
HEIF:  Higher Education Investment Fund 
LHUR:  local highway user revenues 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
$63,000 in fiscal 2024 for one-time changes to the Comptroller’s tax systems. 
 
In addition, TTF expenditures for highway user revenue grants to local governments 
decrease in fiscal 2024 through 2028 due to credits claimed against the corporate income 
tax and may decrease by an estimated total of $69,000 over fiscal 2024 through 2026. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1074/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 624 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services Systems; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - May 12, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5