START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 396

Chapter 396

(House Bill 1063)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages – Class HC (Health Club) License

FOR the purpose of establishing a Class HC (health club) beer, and wine, ~~and~~ ~~liquor~~ license
in Harford County; authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Harford
County to issue the license to a person that sells certain health club services;
exempting the holder of the license from certain distance requirements related to
places of worship and schools; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses
in Harford County.

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–1004 and 22–1004.1
to be Section 22–1004.1 and 22–1004.2, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–1004
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 22–1602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 22–1004 and 22–1004.1 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages of the Annotated
Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 22–1004.1 and 22–1004.2, respectively.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 396 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

22–102.

This title applies only in Harford County.

22–1004.

(A) THERE IS:

(1) A 6–DAY CLASS HC (HEALTH CLUB) BEER, AND WINE, AND LIQUOR
LICENSE; AND

(2) A 7–DAY CLASS HC (HEALTH CLUB) BEER, AND WINE, AND LIQUOR
LICENSE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE 6–DAY OR THE 7–DAY LICENSE TO A PERSON
WHO:

(1) SELLS HEALTH CLUB SERVICES, AS DEFINED IN § 14–12B–01 OF
THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE;

(2) HAS A HEALTH CLUB FACILITY THAT OFFERS:

(I) AN INDOOR OR OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOL; OR

(II) PICKLEBALL COURTS;

(2) (3) HAS AT LEAST 150 MEMBERS WHO PAY DUES; AND

(3) (4) OWNS OR LEASES REAL PROPERTY IN THE COUNTY FOR USE
AS A FOR–PROFIT OR NONPROFIT HEALTH CLUB FACILITY.

(C) (1) THE 6–DAY LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE HOLDER TO SELL
BEER, AND WINE, AND LIQUOR FROM MONDAY THROUGH SATURDAY FOR
~~CONSUMPTION~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LAND~~ ~~AND~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BUILDINGS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CLUB~~
~~FACILITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PATRONS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~EITHER~~ ~~SEATED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~STANDING~~ IN A BAR AREA
AT A SWIMMING POOL OR AN INDOOR LOUNGE OR BOTH.

(2) THE 7–DAY LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE HOLDER TO SELL
BEER, AND WINE, AND LIQUOR FROM MONDAY THROUGH SUNDAY FOR
~~CONSUMPTION~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LAND~~ ~~AND~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BUILDINGS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CLUB~~
~~FACILITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PATRONS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~EITHER~~ ~~SEATED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~STANDING~~ IN A BAR AREA
AT A SWIMMING POOL OR AN INDOOR LOUNGE OR BOTH.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 396

(D) THE 6–DAY LICENSE HOLDER AND THE 7–DAY LICENSE HOLDER MAY
SELL BEER, AND WINE, AND LIQUOR FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION DURING THE
HOURS AND DAYS AS SET OUT FOR A CLASS C BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE
UNDER § 22–2004(F) OF THIS TITLE FROM 1 P.M. TO 9 P.M.

(E) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL PURCHASE BEER AND WINE FROM AN
AUTHORIZED AND LICENSED WHOLESALER.

(F) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL PROVIDE PREPACKAGED FOOD OR
SNACKS AT ALL TIMES WHEN BEER AND WINE ARE SOLD.

(E) (G) (1) THE ANNUAL FEE FOR THE 6–DAY LICENSE IS $1,300.

(2) THE ANNUAL FEE FOR THE 7–DAY LICENSE IS $1,400.

22–1602.

(a) This section does not apply to:

(1) a license in effect on July 1, 1975, or the issuance or transfer of a Class
B (on–sale) beer, wine, and liquor license for use on any premises licensed on July 1, 1975;

(2) a license in effect on July 1, 1977;

(3) the renewal, transfer, or upgrading of a license, unless the license is
transferred to a new location; and

(4) the issuance of:

(i) a 1–day license that is to be used on the premises of a place of
worship or school;

(ii) A CLASS HC (HEALTH CLUB) LICENSE;

(III) a Class GC (golf course) license;

[(iii)] (IV) a Class CCFA (continuing care facility) license;

[(iv)] (V) a Class ALP (assisted living program) license; and

[(v)] (VI) a gift basket permit.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 396 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection and
subsection (c) of this section, the Board may not issue a license for an establishment that
is within 300 feet of a place of worship.

(ii) The distance from the establishment to the place of worship is to
be measured from the nearest point of the building of the establishment to the nearest point
of the building of the place of worship.

(2) Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply to the issuance of:

(i) a 1–day license for use in a building;

(ii) a license issued to a hotel, motel, restaurant, club, caterer,
brewery, or distillery in a municipality; and

(iii) a Class H beer, wine, and liquor license issued to a caterer for
use in a banquet facility in an establishment if:

1. the construction of the establishment was completed after
July 1, 1991; and

2. the establishment is used for emergency operations by a
volunteer fire company.

(c) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, the Board may
waive the distance restrictions from a place of worship and issue a license on a
case–by–case basis.

(2) Before the Board decides whether to waive the distance restrictions
from a place of worship under paragraph (1) of this subsection:

(i) a public hearing shall be held by the governing body of:

1. if the establishment is located in a municipality, the
municipality where the establishment is located; or

2. if the establishment is located outside the boundaries of a
municipality, the county;

(ii) the governing body shall make a recommendation to the Board
regarding whether the distance restrictions should be waived; and

(iii) after receiving a recommendation:

1. in favor of the waiver, the Board shall hold a public
hearing; or

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 396

2. to deny a waiver, the Board shall deny the waiver.

(3) In making a decision whether to waive the distance restrictions from a
place of worship, the Board shall consider:

(i) comments received from members and leaders of the place of
worship; and

(ii) comments made at the public hearing held by the Board.

(d) (1) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Board
may not issue a license to a business establishment that is within 1,000 feet of a public or
private school building.

(ii) The distance from the establishment to the public or private
school is to be measured from the nearest point of the building of the establishment to the
nearest point of the building of the school.

(2) The Board may issue a license to a business establishment in Harford
County and in a municipality in Harford County if the business establishment is not located
within 300 feet of a public or private school.

(3) A decision of the County Board of Education to locate a public school
building within 1,000 feet of the premises of a license holder may not be the basis to revoke
or deny the renewal, transfer, or upgrading of the license.

(e) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, the Board may
waive the distance restrictions from a public or private school building and issue a Class B
(on–sale) restaurant license or a Class B cafe license on a case–by–case basis.

(2) Before the Board decides whether to waive the distance restrictions
from a public or private school building under paragraph (1) of this subsection:

(i) a public hearing shall be held by the governing body of:

1. if the restaurant is located in a municipality, the
municipality where the restaurant is located; or

2. if the restaurant is located outside the boundaries of a
municipality, the county where the restaurant is located;

(ii) the governing body shall make a recommendation to the Board
regarding whether the distance restrictions should be waived; and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 396 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) after receiving the recommendation, the Board shall hold a
public hearing.

(3) In making a decision whether to waive the distance restrictions from a
public or private school building, the Board shall take into consideration:

(i) the recommendation from the governing body;

(ii) comments received from parents whose children attend the
public or private school; and

(iii) comments made at the public hearing held by the Board.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6