START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1051 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1051 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Information Act - Decisions of the State Public Information Act 
Compliance Board - Appeals 
 
 
This bill (1) authorizes an applicant (defined under current law as a person or governmental 
unit that asks to inspect a public record) to appeal a decision by the State Public Information 
Act Compliance Board (PIACB) and (2) specifies that for certain complaints involving 
allegations that an applicant’s request or pattern of requests is frivolous, vexatious, or in 
bad faith, an appeal must be filed in the circuit court for the county where the applicant 
resides or has a principal place of business. The bill also authorizes a party who is aggrieved 
by a final judgement of a circuit court in a proceeding for judicial review of a decision 
issued by PIACB to appeal to the Appellate Court of Maryland, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s Public Information Act (PIA) establishes that all persons are 
entitled to have access to information about the affairs of government and the official acts 
of public officials and employees. Each governmental unit that maintains public records 
must identify a representative whom a member of the public may contact to request a public 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1051/ Page 2 
record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) must post all such contact information 
on its website and in any Public Information Act Manual published by OAG. 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified.  
 
Denials  
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the 
Maryland Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for 
specified personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, 
personnel and student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial 
information, and shielded criminal and police records. Chapter 62 of 2021 specifies that a 
record relating to an administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police 
officer is not a protected personnel record under PIA and requires a custodian to allow 
access to such records by federal and State prosecutors. 
 
Discretionary Denials:  Unless otherwise specified, if a custodian believes that inspection 
of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to the public interest, the 
custodian may deny inspection to the applicant of that part of the record. PIA specifies the 
types of records and information that are eligible for discretionary denials, including 
documents that would not be available through discovery in a lawsuit. 
 
Procedure for Denial:  A custodian who denies inspection of a public record must, within 
10 working days, provide a written statement to the applicant that gives (1) the reason for 
denial; (2) if denying a part of a record on a discretionary basis, a brief explanation of why 
the denial is necessary and why redacting information would not address the reasons for 
the denial; (3) the legal authority for the denial; (4) a brief description of the undisclosed 
record (without disclosing the protected information); and (5) notice of the available 
statutory remedies. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1051/ Page 3 
Fees and Fee Waivers  
 
An official custodian may charge an applicant the actual cost of the search, preparation, 
and reproduction of any public record in a standard format, including the cost of media 
and mechanical processing. If an applicant requests a public record in a customized format, 
an official custodian may charge a reasonable fee for the search, preparation, and 
reproduction of the public record. PIA authorizes fee waivers under specified 
circumstances. 
 
Office of the Public Access Ombudsman 
 
The Office of the Public Access Ombudsman reviews and resolves disputes between 
applicants and custodians over requests for public records. The ombudsman may not 
compel a custodian to disclose public records or redacted information. However, if an 
applicant files a complaint with the office challenging a denial or exemption, the custodian 
must demonstrate that the denial or exemption is clearly applicable to the requested public 
record and, if inspection of part of a public record is denied on a discretionary basis, that 
the harm from disclosure is greater than the public interest in access to the information. 
 
Public Information Act Compliance Board  
 
In General:  PIACB, a five-member board appointed by the Governor, receives, reviews, 
and resolves complaints from applicants alleging that a custodian of a public record 
charged an unreasonable fee of more than $350. The board must issue a written opinion as 
to whether a violation occurred and, if it finds that a custodian charged an unreasonable 
fee, order the custodian to reduce the fee and refund the difference, as specified. 
 
Chapter 658, effective July 1, 2022, expands the jurisdiction of the board to include 
receiving, reviewing, and resolving additional types of PIA disputes and institutes an 
integrated PIA compliant resolution process that includes the Public Access Ombudsman. 
Under the Act, an applicant, an applicant’s designee, or a custodian may file a written 
complaint with PIACB if (1) the complainant has attempted to resolve the dispute through 
the Office of the Public Access Ombudsman and (2) the ombudsman has issued a final 
determination stating that the dispute was not resolved. 
 
Among other responsibilities, PIACB must also (1) receive, review, and resolve complaints 
from any custodian alleging that an applicant’s request or pattern of requests is frivolous, 
vexatious, or in bad faith; (2) issue a written decision as to whether the applicant’s request 
or pattern of requests is frivolous, vexatious, or in bad faith; and (3) if PIACB finds that 
the applicant’s request is frivolous, vexatious, or in bad faith, based on the totality of 
circumstances, as specified, issue an order authorizing the custodian to ignore the request 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1051/ Page 4 
or respond to a less burdensome version of the request within a reasonable timeframe, as 
determined by PIACB. 
 
Judicial Review:  Generally, a complainant or custodian may appeal a decision of PIACB 
to the circuit court. An appeal must be filed with the circuit court for the county where the 
complainant resides or has a principal place of business or the public record is located. An 
appeal automatically stays the board’s decision pending the circuit court’s decision. A 
defendant governmental unit is liable to the complainant for statutory damages and actual 
damages that the court considers appropriate if the court finds that any defendant 
knowingly and willfully failed to disclose or fully disclose a public record to which the 
complainant was entitled to inspect or provide a copy, printout, or photograph of a public 
record that was requested, as specified. Statutory damages may not exceed $1,000. In 
limited circumstances, an official custodian may be liable for actual damages and subject 
to disciplinary action. If the court determines that the complainant has substantially 
prevailed, the court may assess against a defendant governmental unit reasonable counsel 
fees and other litigation costs that the complainant reasonably incurred.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4