START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1059 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1059 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Performing Arts Theater License 
 
 
This bill establishes a performing arts theater beer and wine license in Harford County. The 
Harford County Board of License Commissioners may issue the license for use on the 
premises of a performing arts theater operated by a nonprofit organization. The annual 
license fee is $500. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Harford County revenues increase by $500 annually beginning in FY 2024 
from the issuance of one performing arts theater license under the bill. Harford County can 
handle any additional enforcement activity with existing resources.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Performing arts theater” means an area, a building, or a structure 
designed and used for plays, acts, dramas, concerts, or histrionics by actors or actresses 
performing on a stage or the showing of movies or films. The license authorizes the holder 
to sell or serve beer and wine at retail for on-premises consumption.  
 
The license holder may sell or serve beer and wine (1) one hour before and after a 
performance; (2) during a performance; (3) during an intermission; and (4) during a 
reception one hour before or one hour after a performance. The license holder must serve 
or offer for sale snacks at all times when beer and wine are sold.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1059/ Page 2 
This license is nontransferable. The license holder must purchase beer and wine from an 
authorized licensed wholesaler.  
 
Issuance of a performing arts theater license does not prohibit the board from issuing a 
Class C per diem license that applies to the performing arts theatre.  
 
Current Law:  In Harford County, there are Class C per diem beer and wine and Class C 
per diem beer, wine, and liquor licenses that may be issued to nonprofit organizations, as 
specified.  
 
Local Revenues:  Harford County revenues increase by $500 for each performing arts 
theater beer and wine license issued under the bill. Harford County estimates that it will 
issue one license beginning in fiscal 2024; therefore, Harford County revenues increase by 
$500 from license fees beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 738 (Senator Gallion) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon M. Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2