START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

Chapter 603

(House Bill 1005)

AN ACT concerning

Howard County – Archery Hunting – Safety Zone and Position of Archery
Hunter

Ho. Co. 15–23

FOR the purpose of altering the size of the safety zone for certain archery hunters in
Howard County within which archery hunting may not take place except under
certain circumstances; requiring certain archery hunters in Howard County to be in
an elevated position when hunting any wild bird or mammal within a certain
distance of certain buildings; and generally relating to archery hunting in Howard
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–410(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–410.

(g) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, a
person, other than the owner or occupant, while hunting for any wild bird or mammal may
not shoot or discharge any firearm or other deadly weapon within 150 yards, known as the
“safety zone”, of a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp occupied by
human beings, or shoot at any wild bird or mammal while it is within this area, without
the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant.

(2) A person, while hunting for any wild bird or mammal, may not shoot or
discharge any firearm within 300 yards of a public or nonpublic school during school hours
or at a time when a school–approved activity is taking place.

(3) (i) For archery hunters in Allegany County, Calvert County, Carroll
County, Cecil County, Frederick County, Garrett County, Harford County, Montgomery
County, St. Mary’s County, or Washington County, the safety zone described in paragraph
(1) of this subsection extends for 50 yards from a dwelling house, residence, church, or any
other building or camp occupied by human beings.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 603 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) For archery hunters in Anne Arundel County, the safety zone
described in paragraph (1) of this subsection extends for 100 yards from a dwelling house,
residence, church, or any other building or camp occupied by human beings.

(III) IN HOWARD COUNTY, FOR ARCHERY HUNTERS WHO ARE
HUNTING UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF A DEER MANAGEMENT PERMIT, OR WHO ARE
ACTIVELY PARTICIPATING IN A HUNTING PROGRAM ADMINISTERED BY THE COUNTY,
THE SAFETY ZONE DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION EXTENDS
FOR 50 YARDS FROM A DWELLING HOUSE, RESIDENCE, CHURCH, OR ANY OTHER
BUILDING OR CAMP OCCUPIED BY HUMANS.

(4) During any open hunting season, a person, other than the owner or
occupant, may not hunt or chase willfully any wild bird or mammal within the safety zone
without the specific advance permission of the owner or occupant.

(5) In Harford County, an archery hunter shall use a tree stand when
hunting any wild bird or mammal within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling house, residence,
church, public or nonpublic school, or other building or camp occupied by human beings.

(6) (I) In Montgomery County or Washington County, an archery
hunter shall be in an elevated position that allows the hunter to shoot in a downward
trajectory when hunting any wild bird or mammal within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling
house, residence, church, public or nonpublic school, or other building or camp occupied by
human beings.

(II) IN HOWARD COUNTY, FOR ARCHERY HUNTERS WHO IS
HUNTING UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF A DEER MANAGEMENT PERMIT, OR WHO IS
ACTIVELY PARTICIPATING IN A HUNTING PROGRAM ADMINISTERED BY THE COUNTY,
SHALL BE IN AN ELEVATED POSITION THAT ALLOWS THE HUNTER TO SHOOT IN A
DOWNWARD TRAJECTORY WHEN HUNTING ANY WILD BIRD OR MAMMAL WITHIN 50
TO 150 YARDS OF A DWELLING HOUSE, RESIDENCE, CHURCH, PUBLIC OR NONPUBLIC
SCHOOL, OR OTHER BUILDING OR CAMP OCCUPIED BY HUMAN BEINGS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2