START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1062 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1062 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Alteration of License Quota 
 
 
This bill increases, from 3,000 to 4,000 individuals, the quota used by the Harford County 
Board of License Commissioners when issuing specified Class A licenses and reduces the 
number of Class A licenses the board may issue from three to one. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Harford County finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Harford County, for every 3,000 individuals in the county, the board 
may not issue more than (1) one Class A (off-sale) license, (2) one Class A-1 (off-sale) 
license, and one Class A-2 (off-sale) license.  
 
If the number of licenses in a class exceeds the quota, the board may not issue a new license 
in that class unless the number of licenses of that class are reduced by revocation or 
surrender, creating a vacancy.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1062/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon M. Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2