START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1004 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1004 
(Wicomico County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Wicomico County - Sanitary District - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes Wicomico County to establish sanitary districts within the county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in Wicomico County expenditures and revenues to the 
extent that sanitary districts are established by the Wicomico County Council. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Certain county governments have the authority to establish sanitary 
districts or special taxing districts to provide sewer services to their residents. Currently, 
Wicomico County is only authorized to establish special taxing districts to provide 
infrastructure improvements, which include the development of sewer systems. 
Wicomico County is not authorized to establish sanitary districts. 
 
Sanitary Districts 
 
Section 9-601 of the Environment Article establishes the authority of certain county 
governments to establish sanitary districts for the benefit of county residents. However, 
this authorization is not provided to the following seven counties:  Anne Arundel, Carroll, 
Harford, Montgomery, Prince George’s, St. Mary’s, and Wicomico. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1004/ Page 2 
Except for specified counties, by ordinance or resolution, the governing body of a county 
or the governing bodies of two or more counties may create a sanitary district. Each district 
is a public corporate body that exercises public and essential government functions for the 
public health and welfare. Each district, its income, its property, and its incorporation are 
exempt from any State or local taxation or assessments. However, when making required 
filings of corporate documents, each district may be required to pay the usual filing and 
recording fees, and service charges. 
 
In general, sanitary districts have all the powers, privileges, and immunities granted to 
Maryland corporations under the Maryland General Corporation Law. Apart from 
Allegany and Garrett Counties, county sanitary districts are governed by sanitary 
commissions. Districts and commissions have various authorities specified in statute 
including the creation of service areas, the construction of facilities, the establishment of 
benefits assessments and connection charges, the issuance of bonds, and eminent domain 
authority. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Wicomico County indicates that establishing sanitary districts within 
the county would have a significant financial impact; however, the actual cost cannot 
currently be calculated. The potential need to establish sanitary districts is due to the rise 
in the number of failing septic systems within the county. Establishing sanitary districts is 
one approach to address this issue. 
 
Wicomico County Water and Sewerage Plan 
 
Wicomico County has approximately 18,000 septic systems and currently does not have a 
central regulatory authority overseeing the operation of water and sewer facilities in the 
county. 
 
In 2010, the Wicomico County Department of Public Works formulated a plan, The 
Wicomico County Comprehensive Water and Sewerage Plan, which was intended to, 
among other things, protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people of 
Wicomico County by maintaining and providing adequate water supply and sewerage 
systems. This plan highlighted the “sewer problem areas,” which is defined as areas with 
known failures and further potential for septic systems to fail. The results are high 
concentrations of nutrients and bacteria that can enter groundwater and surface water, 
causing contamination to the drinking water source and ultimately leading to a public 
health emergency.  
 
To further assist the county in the implementation of its efforts, the Greater Salisbury 
Committee established the Wicomico Water and Sewer Committee, and together with the 
county executive, a water and sewer master plan was initiated in 2019. The committee 
recommended two paths for the elimination of septic systems which depend entirely on the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1004/ Page 3 
location of the septic system and existing municipal water and sewer infrastructure. Most 
importantly, it was determined that in order for the plan to be successfully implemented, 
Wicomico County must be the responsible entity for the county’s water and sewer utilities, 
which requires the county to request legislation establishing sanitary districts within the 
county. The establishment of sanitary districts will assist in resolving the water and 
sewerage issues currently facing the county. 
 
The committee has released a white paper report, which outlines the necessary steps to 
implement the plan. According to the report, it is anticipated to take a decade or more to 
fully implement the plan, and various funding sources from both the State and federal 
government will be explored for its implementation.  
 
Additional Comments:  At present, the Wicomico County government does not provide 
sewer services to county residents; however, six municipalities within Wicomico County 
currently provide sewer services to municipal residents. In fiscal 2021, municipal 
expenditures for sewer services totaled $15.4 million (Exhibit 1). Approximately 45% of 
county residents live within a municipality. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Municipal Expenditures for Sewer Services in Wicomico County 
Fiscal 2021 
 
Municipality 
Sewer Expenditures 
Delmar 
$0 
Fruitland 
1,764,550 
Hebron 
203,152 
Mardela Springs 
0 
Pittsville 
408,639 
Salisbury 
12,520,718 
Sharptown 
169,445 
Willards 
310,973 
Total 
$15,377,477 
 
Source:  Local Government Finances; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1004/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 246 (Senators Carozza and Mautz) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Wicomico County; Greater Salisbury Committee; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4