START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1066 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1066 
(Delegate Vogel, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Hate Crimes - Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention 
(commission). The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) must staff the commission. 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under the standard State travel regulations. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the 
Governor must include funds in the annual State budget to implement the bill, including 
funds to (1) employ a full-time assistant Attorney General to staff the commission and 
(2) operate and maintain the office. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Federal fund expenditures for OAG increase by $114,400 in FY 2024 for a 
contractual assistant Attorney General to staff the commission. General fund expenditures 
for OAG increase by $136,300 in FY 2025 for a permanent assistant Attorney General to 
staff the commission beginning in FY 2025. Future year expenditures reflect inflation and 
annualization. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation 
beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
136,300 
142,400 
148,600 
156,400 
FF Expenditure 
114,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($114,400) 
($136,300) 
($142,400) 
($148,600) 
($156,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances and operations.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1066/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Commission members are appointed by the Attorney General, and the 
Attorney General or the Attorney General’s designee is the chair of the commission. 
 
The commission must (1) develop strategies to prevent and respond to hate crime activity 
and (2) evaluate State laws and policies relating to hate crimes.  
 
On or before December 1 each year, beginning in 2024, the commission must report to 
(1) the State Department of Education on policy recommendations to address hate crimes 
that occur in schools and (2) the General Assembly on legislative recommendations to 
address hate crimes in the State.  
 
Current Law:  The State’s hate crimes statutes are contained in Title 10, Subtitle 3 of the 
Criminal Law Article, specifically §§ 10-302 (damaging property of a religious entity), 
10-303 (obstructing exercise of religious beliefs), 10-304 (harassment or destruction of 
property), 10-305 (damage to an associated building), and 10-305.1 (prohibition on use of 
item or symbol to threaten or intimidate). 
 
State Expenditures:  Federal fund expenditures for OAG increase by $114,356 in 
fiscal 2024, which reflects the cost of hiring one contractual assistant Attorney General to 
staff the commission in fiscal 2024 (beginning July 1, 2023) using federal grant funds. This 
estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. The bill’s mandated appropriation does not commence until fiscal 2025. OAG 
does not anticipate that federal grant funds will be available for the position beyond 
fiscal 2024 and plans to convert the position to a regular State employee (paid for with 
general funds) beginning in fiscal 2025 when the mandated appropriation commences. This 
analysis assumes that despite the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date, OAG does not incur 
expenses in fiscal 2023. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$106,682 
Operating Expenses 
$7,674 
FY 2024 OAG Expenditures 
$114,356 
 
Future year expenditures reflect conversion of the position to a regular State employee 
position paid for with general funds, full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover, as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This contractual position estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could 
be incurred for specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the 
federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1066/ Page 3 
The bill refers to funding for the operation and maintenance of “the office.” However, the 
bill does not establish an office and does not otherwise refer to an office other than OAG. 
Therefore, this analysis does not address any operational expenses related to an office other 
than standard expenses associated with the position discussed above.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon M. Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3