START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1002 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1002 
(Delegates Foley and Barve) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Commercial Vehicles - Police-Initiated Towing - Alterations 
 
 
This bill establishes a Committee on Rate Setting and Complaint Resolution for 
Police-Initiated Medium‐Duty and Heavy‐Duty Towing and Recovery within the 
Department of State Police (DSP) to recommend approved rates for police‐initiated towing 
and recovery services and perform other duties, as specified. Among other provisions, the 
bill (1) requires DSP to establish the approved rates for towing and recovery that may be 
charged by a tow company on a specified tow list by January 1, 2024, and (2) alters 
provisions that establish an effective date for when an authorized tow company must accept 
certain payments for the release of a vehicle, as specified. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2023, with certain provisions subject to a specified contingency. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DSP increase by $44,700 in FY 2024 for staff. 
Future years reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
44,700 
50,300 
52,500 
55,000 
58,000 
Net Effect 
($44,700) 
($50,300) 
($52,500) 
($55,000) 
($58,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  This bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:   Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1002/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Police‐initiated Towing – In General 
 
Under current law (and unchanged by the bill) police‐initiated towing is the towing or 
recovery of a commercial motor vehicle that was authorized, requested, or dispatched by 
DSP. A tow list is a list of towing businesses authorized by DSP to perform police-initiated 
towing services of disabled or abandoned commercial vehicles within DSP’s jurisdiction. 
 
Committee on Rate Setting and Complaint Resolution for Police‐Initiated Medium-Duty 
and Heavy‐Duty Towing and Recovery 
 
The bill establishes a Committee on Rate Setting and Complaint Resolution for 
Police-Initiated Medium‐Duty and Heavy‐Duty Towing and Recovery, which must:   
 
 
on or before December 1, 2023, recommend approved rates to DSP that should be 
charged for police‐initiated towing and recovery services; 
 
meet at least once every three years to review and consider modification of the 
approved rates;  
 
request information and comments from other parties of interest to assist with its 
work; 
 
recommend to DSP a process for resolving towing complaints; and 
 
make any additional recommendations to DSP that the committee considers 
appropriate. 
 
DSP must provide staff support for the committee. A member of the committee may not 
receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the standard 
State travel regulations. 
 
By January 1, 2024, DSP must establish the approved rates for medium‐ and heavy-duty 
towing and recovery that may be charged by a tow company on the tow list. Within 
five days after the approved rates have been adopted, DSP must notify the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS). 
 
Department of State Police Requirements and Procedures for Police‐initiated Towing 
 
Chapter 575 of 2022 established numerous requirements and procedures for 
police-initiated towing of certain commercial vehicles. Generally, DSP requires a tow 
company applying to DSP’s tow list (for medium- and heavy-duty towing) to (1) submit a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1002/ Page 3 
rate sheet that does not include per pound billing and (2) ban the use of per pound billing 
by October 1, 2023. In general, DSP makes each towing company’s rate sheet publicly 
available, upon request, and an authorized tow company may charge less, but not more, 
than the rates on the rate sheet submitted to DSP for police‐initiated towing. 
 
The bill repeals these provisions, instead specifying that DSP must require a tow company 
that is on the tow list to ban the use of per pound billing by October 1, 2023. A tow company 
may continue to charge less than (but not more than) the approved rates. “Approved rates” 
are the maximum rates approved by DSP that apply to police-initiated towing and recovery 
services. 
 
Dispute of Fees and Release of Vehicle 
 
Under current law, beginning October 1, 2023, in the case of a genuine dispute as to the 
reasonableness (or amount) of the fees assessed by an authorized tow company, an 
authorized tow company must release the vehicle to the owner (or authorized agent) upon 
payment of 20% of the invoice by the vehicle owner or operator (or the owner’s designee). 
Any such payment does not eliminate the remainder of the financial obligation to the 
authorized tow company. The bill alters the effective date of the aforementioned provision 
from beginning October 1, 2023, to March 1, 2024. 
 
However, the bill also establishes that if DLS receives notice of the adoption of approved 
rates, the aforementioned provisions regarding the dispute of fees and release of vehicle 
are instead repealed. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for DSP increase by $44,730 in 
fiscal 2024, which accounts for a 90‐day start‐up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part‐time administrator to perform administrative duties, including coordination 
and assistance with committee meetings, handling complaints and investigations, and 
providing research support for the committee’s recommendations. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$37,718 
Other Operating Expenses 
    7,012 
FY 2023 State Expenditures 
$44,730 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover. 
DSP advises that based on the experience of a similar group, it is anticipated that the 
committee will meet more than once every three years, and that a permanent administrator 
is necessary to perform administrative duties for the committee and other related tasks for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1002/ Page 4 
police-initiated towing. To the extent that the committee generates less work than 
anticipated, the additional staff support may be eliminated in future years. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for the committee members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budget resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s provisions may have a meaningful impact on small 
business towing companies or small businesses that are the subject of police-initiated 
towing. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 927 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4