START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1162 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Study on the Utilization of the Expedited Licensing Process for Service Members, 
Veterans, and Military Spouses 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), in consultation with the 
Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA), to conduct a study on the utilization 
of the expedited licensing process for service members, veterans, and military spouses for 
licenses. By June 30, 2024, MDL, in consultation with MDVA, must report its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023, and terminates December 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDL (along with MDVA) can conduct the required study using existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must include information on:  
 
 
the number of service members, veterans, and military spouses that have used the 
expedited process and have had credit for military experience, education, or training 
applied to those license requirements;  
 
the type of experience, education, and training for which credit may be given toward 
experience, training, or education requirements for licensure; 
 
sample application forms, as specified;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1162/ Page 2 
 
existing and potential outreach activities and publications relating to Maryland’s 
expedited licensing process;  
 
suggested best practices for disseminating information regarding expedited 
applications;  
 
measures to increase the visibility on State websites on information regarding 
expedited applications; and  
 
a comparison with similar programs and outreach efforts in other states.  
 
Current Law:  The Veterans Full Employment Act of 2013 facilitates professional 
licensing for active military personnel, veterans, and their spouses. The Act applies to the 
State’s major licensing agencies, including MDL. Under the Act, as amended by 
Chapter 312 of 2019, occupational and professional licensing units within MDL must issue 
expedited licenses, registrations, or certificates to military service members, veterans, and 
military spouses if specified education, training, and experience conditions are met. 
 
Licenses must be issued within 60 days after receipt of a completed application. In 
calculating an individual’s years of practice in an occupation or a profession, each MDL 
licensing unit must give credit for all relevant experience as a service member. Each unit 
must credit any training and education provided by the military and completed by a service 
member toward any training or education requirements for licensure if the training or 
education is substantially equivalent to the training or education required by the unit and 
not otherwise contrary to any other licensing requirement. MDL, and each licensing unit 
of MDL, must prominently publish on its website the process for obtaining a license and 
the time period during which an expedited license must be issued. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Veterans Affairs; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1162/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3