START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1153 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1153 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Behavioral Health Programs - Residential Programs - Food Service Facility 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to adopt regulations that 
establish food service facility standards that are appropriate to programs that have fewer 
than 17 residents and are licensed as a (1) residential-low intensity level 3.1 program; 
(2) residential-medium intensity level 3.3 program; (3) residential-high intensity level 
3.5 program; or (4) residential-intensive level 3.7 program.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can likely adopt regulations within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Any change in local operations pursuant to the bill do not materially affect 
local finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Exhibit 1 details the licensure requirements for residential-low intensity  
level 3.1, residential-medium intensity level 3.3, residential-high intensity level 3.5, and 
residential-intensive level 3.7 programs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1153/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Residential Treatment Programs Specified under the Bill 
 
Program Type 
Licensure Requirements 
Residential – Low 
Intensity 1, 2  
(ASAM Level 3.1) 
 provides clinically managed, substance-related disorder treatment in 
large and small halfway houses; 
 to individuals capable of self-care but not ready to return to family or 
independent living; and 
 minimum of five hours per week of services directed toward 
preventing a relapse, applying recovery services, and reintegrating into 
the community. 
Residential – Medium 
Intensity 1, 2 
(ASAM Level 3.3) 
 provides clinically managed, substance-related disorder treatment in a 
structured environment in combination with medium-intensity 
treatment and ancillary services to support and promote recovery; 
 to individuals who are chronically alcohol- or other drug-dependent, 
do not need skilled nursing care, may have a history of multiple 
admission to substance related disorder programs, may have physical 
or mental disability resulting from prolonged substance-related 
disorder, and have been identified as requiring a controlled 
environment and supportive therapy for an indefinite period of time; 
and 
 from 20 to 35 hours per week. 
Residential – High 
Intensity 1, 2 
(ASAM Level 3.5) 
 provides clinically managed substance-related disorder treatment in a 
highly structured environment with moderate/high-intensity treatment 
and ancillary services to support and promote recovery; and 
 minimum of 36 hours of therapeutic services per week that are 
characterized by reliance on the treatment community as a therapeutic 
agent. 
Residential – 
Intensive 1 
(ASAM Level 3.7) 
 provides medically monitored, intensive substance-related disorder 
treatment in a residential intermediate care facility, as specified; 
 minimum of 36 hours of therapeutic services per week on a planned 
regimen of 24-hour evaluation, care, and treatment that meets the 
requirements for withdrawal management services; and 
 employ a physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant to 
provide on-site monitoring and specified patient assessments. 
 
ASAM:  American Society of Addiction Medicine 
 
1 Program may provide withdrawal management services, as specified, if the license specifically authorizes. 
2 Program may provide an opioid treatment service, as specified, if the license specifically authorizes. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1153/ Page 3 
In general, pursuant to COMAR 10.15.03, food service facilities in the State must meet 
standards related to, among other things, food preparation and storage, standards for 
equipment and utensils, and requirements for areas of food preparation and storage. The 
person in charge (including a licensee or another person responsible for the operation of a 
food service facility) must ensure that the specified requirements are met. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Specified residential substance-related treatment programs may 
benefit from the establishment of appropriate food service standards under the bill.  
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that the bill will ensure equity among licensed 
residential behavioral health programs because not all jurisdictions currently enforce foods 
service facility regulations as a result of the regulations being lengthy and unclear.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 794 (Senators Carozza and Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3