START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 789

Chapter 789

(House Bill 1178)

AN ACT concerning

Calvert County – Length of Service Award Program – Benefits

FOR the purpose of altering a certain benefit amount for certain fire and rescue volunteers;
authorizing the Calvert County Board of County Commissioners to approve an
increase in benefit payment for certain volunteers; and generally relating to the
Length of Service Award Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Calvert County
Section 14–102(a) and (h)
Article 5 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2002 Edition and October 2021 Supplement, as amended)
(As enacted by Chapter 99 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2019)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Calvert County
Section 14–102(g) and (i)
Article 5 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2002 Edition and October 2021 Supplement, as amended)
(As enacted by Chapter 99 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2019)

BY adding to
The Public Local Laws of Calvert County
Section 14–102(j)
Article 5 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2002 Edition and October 2021 Supplement, as amended)
(As enacted by Chapter 99 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2019)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 5 – Calvert County

14–102.

(a) Any individual who has served as a member of any Calvert County volunteer
fire company, Calvert County volunteer rescue squad, or Calvert County rescue dive team
is eligible to receive the following benefits, provided that:

(1) The individual is certified in accordance with the provisions of § 14–101
of this subtitle to have served as an active volunteer subsequent to January 1, 1986.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 789 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Any individual who discontinued active volunteer service prior to
January 1, 1986, may receive credit for the service after being certified in accordance with
the provisions of § 14–104(b) of this subtitle.

(g) (1) In the event a qualified volunteer who has completed 25 years of
certified service dies, a [burial] DEATH benefit up to [$6,000] $10,000 shall be payable.

(2) In the event a volunteer who is receiving benefits under Subsection (h)
of this section dies, a burial benefit up to [$240] $336 for each year of certified service shall
be payable.

(h) In the event that any active volunteer fireman, squad member, or rescue dive
team member (defined as an individual who has at least two years of qualifying service in
the five preceding years) attains the age of 70 years and fails to achieve the required 25
years of service, the volunteer is entitled to a monthly benefit of the number of years of
certified service completed multiplied by $8. These benefits shall be payable in the normal
manner.

(i) In addition to any other benefit provided under this section, in the event that
a qualified volunteer dies in the line of duty, as determined by the State Workers’
Compensation Commission, the qualified volunteer is eligible to receive a death benefit of
[$6,000] $10,000.

(J) THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS MAY APPROVE AN INCREASE IN THE
BENEFIT AMOUNT THAT A QUALIFIED VOLUNTEER IS ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE THAT
CORRESPONDS TO THE PERCENTAGE OF THE COST–OF–LIVING INCREASE
AUTHORIZED FOR COUNTY EMPLOYEES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2