START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 604

Chapter 604

(House Bill 1127)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Advisory Plumbing Board

FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing body of Harford County to enact a local law
providing for the membership and terms of the Harford County Advisory Plumbing
Board; and generally relating to the Harford County Advisory Plumbing Board.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Local Government
Section 13–916
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

13–916.

(a) The provisions of §§ 9–105 and 9–106 of this article apply to an act, an
ordinance, or a resolution adopted by a commission county under this section.

(b) (1) This subsection applies only to Frederick County, Harford County, and
Kent County.

(2) The governing body of a county may:

(i) adopt regulations for the issuance of plumbing permits for the
installation of sanitary systems, plumbing, and plumbing fixtures; and

(ii) impose a fee for the permits and for enforcement of the permits.

(c) (1) This subsection applies only to Frederick County and Harford County.

(2) The governing body of a county may:

(i) adopt a plumbing code to regulate the construction of water,
sewer, drainage, and sanitary facilities;

(ii) employ personnel to enforce the code; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 604 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) provide criminal penalties for a violation of the code.

(3) (i) If the County Commissioners of Frederick County adopt a
plumbing code, the county commissioners shall appoint an Advisory Plumbing Board.

(ii) The Advisory Plumbing Board shall consist of an individual
designated by the Frederick County health officer, two plumbers, and two other
individuals.

(iii) The Advisory Plumbing Board shall assist in the drafting,
adoption, and enforcement of the plumbing code.

(iv) The term of a member is 4 years.

(v) The terms of members are staggered as required by the terms
provided for members of the Advisory Plumbing Board on October 1, 2013.

(vi) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.

(vii) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only
for the rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(4) (i) If the governing body of Harford County adopts a plumbing code,
the governing body shall appoint an Advisory Plumbing Board.

[(ii) The Advisory Plumbing Board shall consist of a physician, a
plumber, and one other individual to assist in the drafting, adoption, and enforcement of
the plumbing code.

(iii) The term of a member is 4 years.]

(II) THE GOVERNING BODY OF HARFORD COUNTY MAY ENACT A
LOCAL LAW PROVIDING FOR THE MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE FOR THE
ADVISORY PLUMBING BOARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2