START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 399

Chapter 399

(House Bill 1156)

AN ACT concerning

Pharmacists – Therapy Management Contract – Form

FOR the purpose of providing that a therapy management contract may be entered into in
writing or orally; requiring, if a therapy management contract is entered into orally,
the parties to ~~a~~ the therapy management contract to reduce the contract to writing
~~if~~ ~~it~~ ~~is~~ ~~entered~~ ~~into~~ ~~orally~~ within a certain time period; providing that a therapy
management contract may be in electronic form; and generally relating to therapy
management contracts.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–6A–01(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–6A–01(h) and 12–6A–07
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

12–6A–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(h) “Therapy management contract” means a voluntary[, written] arrangement
that is:

(1) Disease–state specific;

(2) [Signed] AGREED ON by:

(i) One licensed pharmacist and the licensed pharmacist’s
designated alternate licensed pharmacists;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 399 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) One authorized prescriber and alternate designated authorized
prescribers involved directly in patient care; and

(iii) One patient receiving care from an authorized prescriber and a
licensed pharmacist pursuant to a prescriber–pharmacist agreement and protocol under
this subtitle; and

(3) Related to treatment using drug therapy, laboratory tests, or medical
devices, under defined conditions or limitations for the purpose of improving patient
outcomes.

12–6A–07.

(a) A therapy management contract shall apply only to conditions for which
protocols have been agreed to by an authorized prescriber and a licensed pharmacist in
accordance with the regulations adopted under this subtitle.

(b) A therapy management contract shall include:

(1) A statement that none of the parties involved in the therapy
management contract have been coerced, given economic incentives, excluding normal
reimbursement for services rendered, or involuntarily required to participate;

(2) Notice to the patient indicating:

(i) That the patient may terminate the therapy management
contract at any time; and

(ii) The procedure by which the patient may terminate the therapy
management contract;

(3) A procedure for periodic review by the authorized prescriber, of the
drugs modified pursuant to the agreement or changed with the consent of the authorized
prescriber; and

(4) Reference to a protocol, which will be provided to the patient on request.

(C) (1) A THERAPY MANAGEMENT CONTRACT MAY BE ENTERED INTO IN
WRITING OR ORALLY.

(2) IF A THERAPY MANAGEMENT CONTRACT IS ENTERED INTO
ORALLY, THE PARTIES TO THE THERAPY MANAGEMENT CONTRACT SHALL REDUCE
THE AGREEMENT TO WRITING WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER ENTERING INTO THE THERAPY
MANAGEMENT CONTRACT.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 399

(3) A THERAPY MANAGEMENT CONTRACT MAY BE IN ELECTRONIC
FORM.

[(c)] (D) Any party to the therapy management contract may terminate the
contract at any time.

[(d)] (E) The Board may assess a fee, as established in regulation, for approval
of a pharmacist to enter into a prescriber–pharmacist agreement.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3