START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1191 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1191 
(Delegate Pasteur, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Task Force on Preventing and Countering Elder Abuse 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force on Preventing and Countering Elder Abuse, staffed by 
the Maryland Department of Aging. The task force must (1) study existing laws, policies, 
and practices relating to elder abuse and other crimes commonly committed against older 
adults and (2) make recommendations regarding changes to State law, policy, and practice 
that would aid in preventing elder abuse. By December 31, 2023, the task force must submit 
a preliminary report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly; a final report is due by December 31, 2024. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $26,500 in FY 2024 for contractual 
staff. Future years reflect inflation and the termination of the contractual employee during 
FY 2025. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
26,500 
11,400 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($26,500) 
($11,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1191/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In making recommendations, the task force must consider the role of the 
State; the amount of resources to be expended; ways to provide transparency to the public; 
funding mechanisms; oversight measures; and ways to prosecute elder abuse. 
 
The Governor must designate the chair of the task force. Task force members are not 
eligible for compensation but are eligible for expense reimbursements under the standard 
State travel regulations. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Abuse or Neglect of a Vulnerable Adult 
 
A “vulnerable adult” is an adult who lacks the physical or mental capacity to provide for 
the adult’s daily needs. Sections 3-604 and 3-605 of the Criminal Law Article prohibit the 
abuse or neglect of a vulnerable adult. “Abuse” means the sustaining of physical pain or 
injury by a vulnerable adult as a result of cruel or inhumane treatment or as a result of a 
malicious act under circumstances that indicate that the vulnerable adult’s health or welfare 
is harmed or threatened. “Abuse” includes the sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult. “Abuse” 
does not include an accepted medical or behavioral procedure ordered by a health care 
provider authorized to practice under the Health Occupations Article or emergency medical 
personnel acting within the scope of the health care provider’s practice. 
 
A caregiver, a parent, or other person who has permanent or temporary care or 
responsibility for the supervision of a vulnerable adult may not cause abuse or neglect of 
the vulnerable adult that results in death, causes serious physical injury, or involves sexual 
abuse. The same prohibition applies to a household member or family member. 
 
A violator is guilty of the felony of abuse or neglect of a vulnerable adult in the first degree 
and subject to maximum penalties of 10 years imprisonment and/or a fine of $10,000. A 
sentence imposed under this provision must be in addition to any other sentence imposed 
for a conviction arising from the same facts and circumstances unless the evidence required 
to prove each crime is substantially identical. 
 
Under the second-degree prohibition, a caregiver, a parent, or other person who has 
permanent or temporary care or responsibility for the supervision of a vulnerable adult may 
not cause abuse or neglect of the vulnerable adult. A household member or family member 
may not cause abuse or neglect of a vulnerable adult. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and subject to maximum penalties of imprisonment for five years and/or a $5,000 fine. A 
sentence imposed under this provision must be in addition to any other sentence imposed 
for a conviction arising from the same facts and circumstances unless the evidence required 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1191/ Page 3 
to prove each crime is substantially identical. The second-degree prohibition does not apply 
to sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult. 
 
Financial Abuse 
 
A person may not knowingly and willfully obtain by deception, intimidation, or undue 
influence the property of an individual that the person knows or reasonably should know 
is a vulnerable adult with intent to deprive the vulnerable adult of the vulnerable adult’s 
property. A person may not knowingly and willfully obtain by deception, intimidation, or 
undue influence the property of an individual that the person knows or reasonably should 
know is at least age 68, with intent to deprive the individual of the individual’s property. 
“Undue influence” means domination and influence amounting to force and coercion 
exercised by another person to such an extent that a vulnerable adult or an individual at 
least age 68 was prevented from exercising free judgment and choice. 
 
The penalties for exploitation of a vulnerable adult or elderly individual vary based on the 
value of the property obtained, as discussed below. A sentence may be separate from and 
consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the act or acts 
establishing the violation. In addition to the following penalties, a violator must restore the 
property taken or its value to the owner or the owner’s estate:   
 
 
value of the property is less than $1,500:  misdemeanor, imprisonment for up to one 
year and/or a $500 maximum fine; 
 
value of the property is at least $1,500 but less than $25,000:  felony, imprisonment 
for up to five years and/or a $10,000 maximum fine; 
 
value of the property is at least $25,000 but less than $100,000:  felony, 
imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a $15,000 maximum fine; and 
 
value of the property is $100,000 or more:  felony, imprisonment for up to 20 years 
and/or a $25,000 maximum fine. 
 
If a defendant fails to restore fully the property taken or its value as ordered, the defendant 
is disqualified, to the extent of the defendant’s failure to restore the property or its value, 
from inheriting, taking, enjoying, receiving, or otherwise benefiting from the estate, 
insurance proceeds, or property of the victim of the offense, whether by operation of law 
or pursuant to a legal document executed or entered into by the victim before the defendant 
shall have been convicted. The defendant has the burden of proof with respect to 
establishing that the defendant has fully restored the property taken or its value. 
 
A violation is also considered an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA) and is subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1191/ Page 4 
These provisions may not be construed to impose criminal liability on a person who, at the 
request of the victim of the offense, the victim’s family, or the court appointed guardian of 
the victim, has made a good faith effort to assist the victim in the management of or transfer 
of the victim’s property.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $26,506 in fiscal 2024, which 
assumes a 60‐day start‐up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date (in order to give 
sufficient time for the task force to be appointed while also accounting for the interim report 
due date of December 1, 2023). This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part‐time 
contractual employee to staff the task force and perform the research necessary to inform 
the task force’s work. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$19,452 
Operating Expenses 
    7,054 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$26,506 
 
Future year expenditures reflect an annual salary increase and employee turnover as well 
as an annual increase in ongoing operating expenses. The estimate assumes the contractual 
employee is terminated at the end of calendar 2024, after the final report of the task force 
is submitted. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for task force members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 797 (Senators Hettleman and Jennings) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1191/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer K. Botts 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5