START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 619

Chapter 619

(House Bill 1162)

AN ACT concerning

Study on the Utilization of the Expedited Licensing Process for Service
Members, Veterans, and Military Spouses

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Labor, in consultation with the
Department of Veterans Affairs, to conduct a study on the utilization of the expedited
licensing process for service members, veterans, and military spouses for certain
occupational and professional licenses in the State; and generally relating to a study
related to service members, veterans, and military spouses.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) (1) In this section, the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “License” has the meaning stated in § 2.5–101 of the Business
Regulation Article.

(3) “Military spouse” has the meaning stated in § 2.5–101 of the Business
Regulation Article.

(4) “Service member” has the meaning stated in § 2.5–101 of the Business
Regulation Article.

(5) “Veteran” has the meaning stated in § 2.5–101 of the Business
Regulation Article.

(b) The Department of Labor, in consultation with the Department of Veterans
Affairs, shall conduct a study on the utilization of the expedited licensing process for service
members, veterans, and military spouses for licenses under Title 2.5 of the Business
Regulation Article.

(c) The study shall include:

(1) information on:

(i) the number of service members, veterans, and military spouses
that have used the expedited process and have had credit for military experience,
education, or training applied to license requirements;

(ii) the type of experience, education, and training for which credit
may be given toward experience, training, or education requirements for licensure,
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 619 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

including whether the credit is considered substantially equivalent to the experience,
education, or training required for the license; and

(iii) sample application forms, if any, used to request credit for
military experience, education, or training to be applied to license requirements;

(2) information on existing and potential outreach activities and
publications relating to Maryland’s expedited licensing process and military experience,
education, or training being applied to license requirements;

(3) suggested best practices for disseminating information regarding
expedited applications for licenses and the types and amount of credit offered for
experience, education, and training offered by the military;

(4) increasing the visibility on State websites of information regarding
expedited applications for licenses and the types and amount of credit offered for
experience, education, and training offered by the military; and

(5) a comparison with similar programs and outreach efforts in other
states.

(d) On or before June 30, 2024, the Department of Labor, in consultation with the
Department of Veterans Affairs, shall report its findings and recommendations to the
Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General
Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and 6 months and, at the end of
December 31, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall
be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 12, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2