START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1159 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1159 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Dental Examiners - University of Maryland School of Dentistry 
Faculty - Qualifying for Examination 
 
 
This bill expands the qualifications by which a faculty member at the University of 
Maryland School of Dentistry (UMSOD) trained at a foreign dental school may qualify to 
take an examination offered by the American Board of Dental Examiners, Inc. (ADEX). A 
faculty member may qualify if they are a general dentist who (1) has successfully 
completed a general dental practice residency or advanced education in a general dentistry 
program or (2) is board certified by the American Board of General Dentistry. As under 
current law, to qualify to take the examination, the faculty member must also be  
(1) a full-time faculty member at UMSOD who has completed at least seven consecutive 
years as a full-time faculty member and (2) submit to the State Board of Dental Examiners 
(BDE) a specified written letter of support from UMSOD. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  BDE special fund revenues increase minimally beginning in FY 2024 from 
license fees as a result of additional dentists seeking licensure under the bill. Any additional 
workload can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the Health Occupations Article, an individual must obtain a license 
from BDE to practice dentistry or dental hygiene. BDE is mandated to protect the public 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1159/ Page 2 
by regulating the practice of dentistry and dental hygiene in Maryland. Among the 
enumerated duties, BDE issues licenses, adopts standards of practice, investigates 
complaints based on alleged violations of regulations and statutes, and disciplines 
licensees. 
 
Chapters 710 and 711 of 2018 authorized a dentist who is a faculty member at UMSOD 
and who was trained at a foreign dental school to apply to BDE for a general license to 
practice dentistry if the faculty member meets certain criteria. Specifically, BDE must 
qualify the faculty member to take an examination offered by ADEX if the faculty member:   
 
 
completes training in a dental specialty recognized by BDE; 
 
is board certified in a dental specialty recognized by BDE; 
 
is a full-time faculty member at UMSOD and has completed at least 
seven consecutive years as a full-time faculty member at the time of application; 
and 
 
submits a written letter of support from UMSOD. 
 
If the dentist receives a passing score on the ADEX examination, the dentist may apply for 
a general license to practice dentistry. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2