START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1175 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1175 
(Delegate Valentine, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Hunting Offenses - Expungement 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for expungement of a police record, court record, or other 
record maintained by the State or a political subdivision of the State under § 10-110 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article to include specified misdemeanor hunting offenses.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase through FY 2026, as 
discussed below. The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) can implement the bill with 
existing budgeted resources. General fund revenues from filing fees increase minimally.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands eligibility for an expungement under § 10-110 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article to include a conviction for any of the following misdemeanor 
hunting-related offenses under the Natural Resources Article:   
 
 
§ 10‐301 (hunting game birds or mammals without a hunting license); 
 
§ 10‐306 (duty to be in physical possession of a license while hunting and duty to 
present a license to law enforcement on demand while hunting); 
 
§ 10‐308.1 (hunting migratory game birds without a Maryland migratory game 
bird stamp, etc.); 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1175/ Page 2 
 
§ 10‐413(e)(1) (training a retriever dog using artificially reared game birds without 
a permit); 
 
§ 10‐418 (failure to wear fluorescent clothing while hunting); 
 
§ 10‐502 (trapping furbearers without a nonresident trapper’s license); 
 
§ 10‐611 (hunting wild waterfowl from a blind site without a license); and 
 
§ 10‐907(a) (engaging in specified activities without a falconry permit). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Petition-based Expungement of a Court or Police Record 
 
Other than specified exceptions, to begin the process of expungement, a petitioner must 
file a petition for expungement with the court under § 10-105 or § 10-110 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article, which establishes eligibility for the expungement of records pertaining 
to a criminal charge or conviction. 
 
Expungement of a court or police record means removal from public inspection: 
 
 
by obliteration; 
 
by removal to a separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate 
reason for access are denied access; or 
 
if access to a court record or police record can be obtained only by reference to another 
such record, by the expungement of that record, or the part of it that provides access. 
 
Pursuant to § 10-107 of the Criminal Procedure Article, if two or more charges, other than 
one for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal 
Law Article, arise from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts, they are considered 
to be a unit. A charge for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 
of the Criminal Law Article that arises from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts 
as a charge in the unit is not a part of the unit. If a person is not entitled to expungement of 
one charge or conviction in a unit, the person is not entitled to expungement of any other 
charge or conviction in the unit. This “unit rule” applies to expungements under §§ 10-105 
and 10-110. 
 
Section 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article 
 
Section 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article authorizes an individual convicted of any 
of a list of approximately 100 specified offenses or an attempt, a conspiracy, or a 
solicitation of any of these offenses, to file a petition for expungement of the conviction, 
subject to specified procedures and requirements.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1175/ Page 3 
In general, a petition to expunge a misdemeanor conviction under § 10-110 cannot be filed 
earlier than 10 years after the person satisfies the sentence or sentences imposed for all 
convictions for which expungement is requested, including parole, probation, or mandatory 
supervision. A petition to expunge a conviction for second-degree assault, common law 
battery, a “domestically related crime,” or a felony may not be filed earlier than 15 years 
after the person satisfies the sentence or sentences imposed for all convictions for which 
expungement is requested, including parole, probation, or mandatory supervision. A person 
who is convicted of possession with the intent to distribute cannabis under § 5-602(b)(1) of 
the Criminal Law Article may file a petition for expungement of the conviction 3 years 
after satisfaction of the sentence(s) imposed for all convictions for which expungement is 
requested, including parole, probation, or mandatory supervision. If the person is convicted 
of a new crime during the applicable waiting period, the original conviction or convictions 
are not eligible for expungement unless the new conviction becomes eligible for 
expungement. 
 
Timeline for Expungement 
 
Maryland’s expungement process for removing an eligible record takes a minimum of 
90 days. If a State’s Attorney or victim, as applicable, objects, the court must hold a hearing 
on the petition. If an objection is not filed within 30 days, as specified, the court must pass 
an order requiring the expungement of all police and court records concerning the charges. 
After the court orders are sent to each required agency, each agency has 60 days from 
receipt to comply with the order. 
  
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally from filing fees for petitions 
for expungement. The courts charge a $30 filing fee for a petition to expunge a guilty 
disposition (conviction), though fee waivers for financial hardship are available.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase for the Judiciary to process 
additional expungements in the initial years (through fiscal 2026) under the bill, when 
individuals with immediately eligible older hunting violations can file petitions for 
expungement.  
 
The Judiciary previously advised that statistics are not available on violations of the 
applicable statutes, since Natural Resources violations are not charged with Criminal 
Justice Information System codes that allow for individual tracking. DNR did not provide 
offense-related statistics but has previously advised that there are as many as 4,000 hunting 
and fishing violations each year.  
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of petitions for expungement filed in the 
trial courts in fiscal 2020 through 2022.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1175/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Petitions for Expungement 
Fiscal 2020-2022 
 
 
District Court 
Circuit Court 
Fiscal 2020 
55,105 
8,642 
Fiscal 2021 
39,061 
5,940 
Fiscal 2022 
32,874 
5,574 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
The Judiciary advises that the impact on workloads is difficult to project because the 
Judiciary is uncertain of the number of additional petitions that will be received. Should 
the bill result in a significant number of additional expungement petitions, it would have a 
significant fiscal and operational impact on the District Court. As an illustration, the 
Judiciary advises it would need 23 additional clerks, at a cost of $1.4 million in fiscal 2024 
and increasing to $1.9 million by fiscal 2028, if 70% of defendants in all of the cases filed 
under the Natural Resources Article during fiscal 2019 through 2022 filed petitions for 
expungement.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that the bill likely necessitates additional 
resources, especially during the initial years of implementation (through fiscal 2026) when 
defendants file petitions to expunge older convictions immediately eligible for 
expungement (which can date back as far as 50 years according to the Judiciary). However, 
the exact need for additional resources cannot be reliably determined at this time given 
(1) the bill’s application to particular Natural Resources violations that cannot be 
individually tracked and (2) the unknown likelihood of defendants petitioning to expunge 
these convictions. Due to the nature of the applicable offenses, some of these defendants 
may not be inclined to file a petition unless they have experienced difficulties from their 
convictions in other areas of their lives. For illustrative purposes only, the approximate 
cost associated with one additional contractual clerk is $46,200 in fiscal 2024 and increases 
to $52,300 by fiscal 2026. 
 
Given the frequency with which expungement laws are amended, other expenditures noted 
by the Judiciary, including revising and restocking forms and brochures, can be handled 
with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1175/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 960 and HB 1298 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5