START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 301

Chapter 301

(House Bill 1151)

AN ACT concerning

Health Insurance – Reimbursement for Services Rendered by a Pharmacist

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Medical Assistance Program, the Maryland
Children’s Health Program, and certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and
health maintenance organizations to provide coverage for all services rendered by a
licensed pharmacist within the pharmacist’s lawful scope of practice, rather than
only certain services, to the same extent as services rendered by any other health
care practitioner; and generally relating to reimbursement for health care services
provided by a pharmacist.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–148
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–151
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–716
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–148.

(a) Except for a drug or device for which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
has issued a black box warning, the Program and the Maryland Children’s Health Program
may not apply a prior authorization requirement for a contraceptive drug or device that is:

(1) (i) An intrauterine device; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 301 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) An implantable rod;

(2) Approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration; and

(3) Obtained under a prescription written by an authorized prescriber.

(b) The Program and the Maryland Children’s Health Program shall provide
coverage for a single dispensing to an enrollee of a supply of prescription contraceptives for
a 12–month period.

[(c) The Program and the Maryland Children’s Health Program shall provide
coverage for services, to the same extent as services rendered by any other licensed health
care practitioner, rendered to an enrollee by a licensed pharmacist under:

(1) § 12–509 of the Health Occupations Article in administering
self–administered medications, maintenance injectable medications, or injectable
medications for treatment of sexually transmitted infections; or

(2) § 12–511 of the Health Occupations Article in screening an enrollee and
prescribing contraceptives for the enrollee.]

15–151.

(A) THE PROGRAM AND THE MARYLAND CHILDREN’S HEALTH PROGRAM
SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR SERVICES RENDERED TO AN ENROLLEE BY A
LICENSED PHARMACIST ACTING WITHIN THE PHARMACIST’S LAWFUL SCOPE OF
PRACTICE TO THE SAME EXTENT AS SERVICES RENDERED BY ANY OTHER LICENSED
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER.

(B) REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONDITIONED ON WHETHER THE LICENSED PHARMACIST
IS:

(1) EMPLOYED BY A PHYSICIAN, PHARMACY, OR FACILITY; OR

(2) ACTING UNDER A PHYSICIAN’S ORDERS.

Article – Insurance

15–716.

(a) This section applies to individual, group, or blanket health insurance policies
and contracts delivered or issued for delivery in the State by insurers, nonprofit health
service plans, and health maintenance organizations [that provide coverage for patient
assessment regarding, and administration of, self–administered medications, maintenance

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 301

injectable medications, and injectable medications for treatment of sexually transmitted
infections] THAT PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR SERVICES THAT ARE WITHIN THE LAWFUL
SCOPE OF PRACTICE OF A LICENSED PHARMACIST.

(b) An entity subject to this section shall provide coverage for services rendered
by a licensed pharmacist [under § 12–509 of the Health Occupations Article] ACTING
WITHIN THE PHARMACIST’S LAWFUL SCOPE OF PRACTICE to an individual who is
covered under a policy or contract issued or delivered by the entity, to the same extent as
services rendered by any other licensed health care practitioner[, for patient assessment
regarding and in administering self–administered medications, maintenance injectable
medications, or injectable medications for treatment of sexually transmitted infections].

(C) REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY
NOT BE CONDITIONED ON WHETHER THE LICENSED PHARMACIST IS:

(1) EMPLOYED BY A PHYSICIAN, PHARMACY, OR FACILITY; OR

(2) ACTING UNDER A PHYSICIAN’S ORDERS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, to implement § 15–151 of the
Health – General Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, on or before January 1, 2024,
the Maryland Department of Health shall apply for and obtain from the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services any necessary amendments to or waivers for the Maryland
Medical Assistance Program or the Maryland Children’s Health Program.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or
after January 1, 2024.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3