START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1174 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1174 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Calvert County - Civil Infractions - Prosecutorial Designations 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State’s Attorney in Calvert County, subject to the approval of the 
county commissioners, to designate in writing the county attorney or an assistant 
county attorney to prosecute civil infractions. The designated county attorney or assistant 
county attorney may exercise the powers of the State’s Attorney in connection with a civil 
infraction. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  It is assumed that any operational impact for Calvert County does not 
materially affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 6‐108 of the Local Government Article authorizes the 
State’s Attorney for a county to prosecute a municipal infraction; a municipality may also 
designate an attorney to prosecute a municipal infraction in the same manner as the 
State’s Attorney for a county. Also, §11‐206 of the Local Government Article explicitly 
authorizes the State’s Attorney in a code county to designate in writing the county attorney 
or an assistant county attorney to prosecute a civil infraction, subject to the approval of the 
county commissioners; the individual designated may exercise the powers of the 
State’s Attorney in connection with a civil infraction. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1174/ Page 2 
Calvert County is one of six counties that operate under the commission form of 
government. Commission counties have limited powers and only those powers that are 
expressly delegated by the General Assembly. Accordingly, in Calvert County, authorizing 
the State’s Attorney to designate the county attorney or assistant county attorney to 
prosecute civil infractions must receive the approval of the General Assembly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2