START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

Chapter 608

(House Bill 1109)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Economic Development – Business Improvement
Districts

PG 407–23

FOR the purpose of authorizing Prince George’s County ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~ ~~in~~
~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ to create certain business improvement districts; requiring
the county ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ to adopt certain local laws to
provide for the creation and organization of a district; providing for the imposition of
a certain tax in a certain manner under certain circumstances; removing Prince
George’s County from the scope of law governing the establishment of business
improvement districts; and generally relating to business improvement districts and
district corporations in Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–402.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–901 through 12–912 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Prince
George’s County – Business Improvement Districts”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

12–402.1.

This subtitle does not apply in Montgomery County OR PRINCE GEORGE’S
COUNTY.

SUBTITLE 9. PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY – BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.

12–901.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 608 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF A DISTRICT
CORPORATION.

(C) “COMMERCIAL TENANT” MEANS A LESSEE OR OTHER LAWFUL
OCCUPANT, OTHER THAN THE OWNER, OF NONEXEMPT PROPERTY WITHIN A
DISTRICT.

(D) “CONDOMINIUM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 11–101 OF THE REAL
PROPERTY ARTICLE.

(E) “COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
§ 5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE.

(F) “DISTRICT” MEANS A BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ESTABLISHED
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(G) “DISTRICT CORPORATION” MEANS A BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT CORPORATION FORMED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(H) “FORMATION STEERING COMMITTEE” MEANS THE GROUP OF
STAKEHOLDERS RESPONSIBLE FOR LEADING THE FORMATION OF A DISTRICT AND
PREPARING THE APPLICATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 12–908 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(I) “HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 11B–101
OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE.

(J) “MEMBERS OF THE DISTRICT” MEANS OWNERS OF NONEXEMPT
PROPERTY, COMMERCIAL TENANTS, AND RESIDENTS IN THE DISTRICT.

(K) “NONEXEMPT PROPERTY” MEANS ALL REAL PROPERTY THAT IS NOT
EXEMPT FROM PAYING REAL PROPERTY TAXES EXCEPT:

(1) CONDOMINIUM UNITS AND COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION UNITS THAT EXIST ON OR BEFORE THE DATE OF ESTABLISHMENT OF
A DISTRICT;

(2) HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATIONS; OR

(3) RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY WITH FEWER THAN FOUR DWELLING
UNITS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

(L) “RESIDENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHOSE PRIMARY RESIDENCE IS
WITHIN A DISTRICT, INCLUDING A RENTER OR AN OWNER OF RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL RESIDES ON NONEXEMPT
PROPERTY OR EXEMPT PROPERTY.

12–902.

THE LEGISLATIVE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE ARE TO:

(1) PROVIDE FOR THE CREATION OF BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICTS WITHIN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY; AND

(2) PROMOTE THE GENERAL WELFARE OF THE RESIDENTS,
EMPLOYERS, EMPLOYEES, PROPERTY OWNERS, COMMERCIAL TENANTS,
CONSUMERS, AND THE GENERAL PUBLIC WITHIN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.

12–903.

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

12–904.

(A) SUBJECT TO A PUBLIC HEARING UNDER § 12–909 OF THIS SUBTITLE
AND TO ACCOMPLISH A LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE LISTED IN § 12–902 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ MAY ADOPT A LOCAL LAW TO CREATE A BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IS SELF–EXECUTING AND FULLY
AUTHORIZES THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ TO
ESTABLISH A DISTRICT, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER STATUTORY OR CHARTER
PROVISION.

(C) A LOCAL LAW ADOPTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE NAME OF THE DISTRICT CORPORATION;

(2) THAT THE DISTRICT CORPORATION IS FORMED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 608 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE NAMES, ADDRESSES, AND TERMS OF OFFICE OF THE INITIAL
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE DISTRICT CORPORATION;

(4) THE ADDRESS OF THE PRINCIPAL OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT
CORPORATION;

(5) THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE DISTRICT IS FORMED;

(6) THE POWERS OF THE DISTRICT, SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS ON
THE POWERS OF DISTRICTS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(7) IF APPLICABLE, ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF THE DISTRICT
CORPORATION.

12–905.

(A) A BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL GOVERN THE DISTRICT CORPORATION.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) THROUGH (4) OF THIS
SUBSECTION:

(I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
THE BOARD OF A DISTRICT CORPORATION CONSISTS OF AT LEAST NINE MEMBERS;
OR

(II) THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~A~~ ~~DISTRICT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ MAY
DETERMINE A DIFFERENT NUMBER OF MEMBERS FOR THE BOARD IF THE DISTRICT
IS CONNECTED WITH A BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT IN ANOTHER COUNTY OR
STATE OR IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

(2) (I) THE BOARD SHALL BE REPRESENTATIVE OF PROPERTY
OWNERS, BUSINESS OWNERS, RESIDENTS, AND REPRESENTATIVES OF THE LOCAL
JURISDICTIONS WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT.

(II) IT SHALL BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE INITIAL BOARD
OF THE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT TO DETERMINE IN THE DISTRICT’S
BYLAWS THE SPECIFIC DETAILS PERTAINING TO BOARD STRUCTURE, INCLUDING
THE SPECIFIC NUMBER OF POSITIONS, TERMS, AND VOTING PROCEDURES.

(3) THE BOARD SHALL RETAIN AS NONVOTING MEMBERS THE
MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

DELEGATES WHO REPRESENT THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT WHERE A DISTRICT
CORPORATION IS ESTABLISHED.

(4) (I) BOARD SEATS SHALL BE ELECTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH AN
ELECTION PROCESS THAT IS ESTABLISHED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE
COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DISTRICT~~ ~~IS~~
~~LOCATED.~~

(II) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE ELECTION PROCESS
SHALL REFLECT THE DIVERSITY OF BUSINESSES AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS IN
THE DISTRICT.

(C) FROM AMONG ITS MEMBERS, THE BOARD SHALL ELECT A CHAIR AND
OTHER OFFICERS.

(D) (1) A MAJORITY OF THE VOTING MEMBERS OF THE BOARD IS A
QUORUM.

(2) THE BOARD MAY ACT ON A RESOLUTION ONLY BY THE
AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF A MAJORITY OF THE VOTING MEMBERS.

(E) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD;
BUT

(2) SHALL BE REIMBURSED FOR EXPENSES INCURRED IN
PERFORMING THE MEMBER’S DUTIES.

(F) THE BOARD SHALL EXERCISE ITS POWERS BY RESOLUTION.

(G) THE BOARD SHALL FILE AN ANNUAL REPORT WITH THE GOVERNING
BODY OF THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ THAT
INCLUDES:

(1) A FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE PRECEDING YEAR;

(2) A PROPOSED OPERATING BUDGET FOR THE CURRENT FISCAL
YEAR;

(3) ANY PROPOSED REVISIONS TO THE BUSINESS PLAN; AND

(4) A NARRATIVE STATEMENT OR CHART SHOWING THE RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS IN COMPARISON TO STATED GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 608 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

12–906.

THE NET EARNINGS OF A DISTRICT CORPORATION MAY BENEFIT ONLY THE
DISTRICT CORPORATION.

12–907.

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS LIMITED BY ITS ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION, A
DISTRICT CORPORATION HAS ALL THE POWERS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) A DISTRICT CORPORATION MAY:

(I) RECEIVE MONEY FROM ITS INCORPORATING COUNTY OR
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, THE STATE, OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS, OR
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS;

(II) CHARGE FEES FOR ITS SERVICES;

(III) HAVE EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS AS THE DISTRICT
CORPORATION CONSIDERS NECESSARY; AND

(IV) USE THE SERVICES OF OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.

(B) A DISTRICT CORPORATION SHALL OPERATE AND EXERCISE ITS POWERS
SOLELY TO ACCOMPLISH ONE OR MORE OF THE LEGISLATIVE PURPOSES OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

12–908.

(A) THE FORMATION STEERING COMMITTEE SEEKING TO ESTABLISH A
DISTRICT CORPORATION SHALL SUBMIT APPROPRIATE DOCUMENTATION AS
DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION TO:

(1) THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY; AND

(2) IF THE PROPOSED DISTRICT IS LOCATED WITHIN A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION IN THE COUNTY, THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE MUNICIPAL
~~CORPORATION.~~

(B) THE APPROPRIATE DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL CONTAIN:

(1) A STATEMENT SETTING FORTH:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

(I) THE PROPOSED NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE DISTRICT
CORPORATION; AND

(II) THE STREET ADDRESS OF EACH OWNER OF NONEXEMPT
PROPERTY AND TO THE EXTENT REASONABLY ASCERTAINABLE, EACH COMMERCIAL
TENANT WITHIN THE PROPOSED DISTRICT;

(2) A STATEMENT EXPRESSING THE INTENT TO ESTABLISH A
DISTRICT CORPORATION THAT IS SIGNED BY OWNERS OF AT LEAST 51% OF THE
TOTAL NUMBER OF PARCELS OF NONEXEMPT PROPERTY AND, SUBJECT TO
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, A DESIGNATED BOARD MEMBER OF A
CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION WITHIN THE PROPOSED
DISTRICT;

(3) A PROPOSED 5–YEAR BUSINESS PLAN THAT CONTAINS:

(I) THE GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE PROPOSED DISTRICT;

(II) THE ANNUAL PROPOSED BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT TAX FOR THE PROPOSED DISTRICT’S COMMON OPERATIONS AND THE
FORMULA USED TO DETERMINE EACH MEMBER’S DISTRICT TAX; AND

(III) THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT AND THE NATURE OF START–UP
COSTS INCURRED BEFORE THE DISTRICT’S ESTABLISHMENT;

(4) A TAX ASSESSOR’S MAP OF THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE
PROPOSED DISTRICT;

(5) A LIST OF THE PROPOSED INITIAL BOARD OF THE PROPOSED
DISTRICT CORPORATION;

(6) THE PROPOSED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION AND THE BYLAWS
OF THE DISTRICT CORPORATION; AND

(7) FOR ALL NONEXEMPT PROPERTY WITHIN THE PROPOSED
DISTRICT:

(I) THE NAME AND MAILING ADDRESS OF EACH OWNER; AND

(II) THE MOST RECENT ASSESSED VALUE.

(C) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS TITLE,
SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A CONDOMINIUM OR

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 608 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION THAT IS LOCATED IN THE PROPOSED
DISTRICT MAY PETITION TO JOIN THE DISTRICT CORPORATION.

(2) A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION
DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY PETITION TO JOIN
THE DISTRICT ONLY IF:

(I) THE CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION IS GOVERNED BY A BOARD;

(II) THE BOARD VOTES TO JOIN THE DISTRICT CORPORATION;
AND

(III) THE BOARD HAS A REPRESENTATIVE MEMBER OF THE
BOARD SIGN THE APPROPRIATE DOCUMENTS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(2)
OF THIS SECTION.

(3) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE VOTES CAST UNDER SUBSECTION
(B)(2) OF THIS SECTION:

(I) A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION SHALL BE CONSIDERED A SINGLE PARCEL; AND

(II) THE DECISION REACHED BY THE BOARD SHALL
CONSTITUTE THE VOTE OF THE CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION.

(D) WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING ALL APPROPRIATE
DOCUMENTATION UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE GOVERNING BODY
OF THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ SHALL SCHEDULE
A PUBLIC HEARING ON THE APPLICATION.

12–909.

(A) AT LEAST 21 CALENDAR DAYS BEFORE THE PUBLIC HEARING, THE
GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~
SHALL PUBLISH NOTICE OF THE PUBLIC HEARING IN A NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL
CIRCULATION WITHIN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE PROPOSED DISTRICT.

(B) THE FORMATION STEERING COMMITTEE SEEKING TO ESTABLISH A
DISTRICT SHALL SEND NOTICE OF THE PUBLIC HEARING AND A SUMMARY OF THE
APPLICATION TO EACH OWNER OF NONEXEMPT PROPERTY AND TO THE EXTENT

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

REASONABLY ASCERTAINABLE, EACH COMMERCIAL TENANT OF NONEXEMPT
PROPERTY WITHIN THE PROPOSED DISTRICT BY THE EARLIER OF:

(1) AT LEAST 90 DAYS BEFORE THE PUBLIC HEARING; OR

(2) WHEN OWNERS OF AT LEAST 20% OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF
PARCELS OF NONEXEMPT PROPERTY EXPRESS THE INTENT TO ESTABLISH A
DISTRICT.

(C) BEFORE THE PUBLIC HEARING, THE APPLICATION SHALL BE MADE
AVAILABLE FOR REVIEW DURING NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS IN AT LEAST ONE
LOCATION IN THE PROPOSED DISTRICT.

(D) WITHIN 10 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE PUBLIC HEARING, IF THE
GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~
DETERMINES, IN THE SOLE DISCRETION OF THE GOVERNING BODY, THAT THE NEEDS
OF THE DISTRICT MEET A PURPOSE OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE GOVERNING BODY MAY
AUTHORIZE THE DISTRICT IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 12–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

12–910.

(A) WITHIN 10 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE AUTHORIZATION OF THE
DISTRICT BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~
CORPORATION IN THE COUNTY, THE DISTRICT CORPORATION SHALL PROVIDE THE
GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~
WITH A PRELIMINARY BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT TAX ROLL.

(B) (1) THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ SHALL IMPOSE A BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
TAX TO PROVIDE FUNDS FOR THE OPERATION OF THE DISTRICT.

(2) THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ SHALL IMPOSE ON MEMBERS OF THE DISTRICT WHO
ARE OWNERS OF NONEXEMPT PROPERTY THE DISTRICT TAX AT A RATE SPECIFIED
BY THE BOARD AND APPROVED BY THE GOVERNING BODY.

(3) THE TAX IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT COUNT
AGAINST A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION TAX CAP.

(C) THE DISTRICT TAX SHALL BE COLLECTED IN THE SAME MANNER AS
REAL PROPERTY TAXES ARE COLLECTED AND DISTRIBUTED EACH QUARTER TO THE
DISTRICT.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 608 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) A DISTRICT SHALL REIMBURSE THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY
~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ FOR THE COSTS INCURRED IN
COLLECTING THE DISTRICT TAX.

12–911.

(A) AN ESTABLISHED DISTRICT MAY EXPAND THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF
THE DISTRICT IF:

(1) A PETITION FOR INCLUSION IS SUBMITTED FROM OWNERS OF AT
LEAST 51% OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PARCELS OF NONEXEMPT PROPERTY AND,
SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A DESIGNATED BOARD MEMBER OF
A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION PROPOSED FOR
INCLUSION IN THE DISTRICT;

(2) THE PETITION UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS ACCEPTED
BY A MAJORITY VOTE OF THE BOARD OF THE DISTRICT CORPORATION; AND

(3) THE APPROPRIATE DOCUMENTS, AS APPLICABLE, ARE
SUBMITTED UNDER § 12–908 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND A HEARING IS HELD UNDER §
12–909 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS TITLE AND
SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A CONDOMINIUM OR
COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION THAT IS LOCATED IN THE PROPOSED
EXPANDED GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE DISTRICT MAY PETITION TO JOIN THE
EXPANSION.

(2) A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION
DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY PETITION TO JOIN
THE EXPANSION ONLY IF:

(I) THE CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION IS GOVERNED BY A BOARD;

(II) THE BOARD VOTES TO JOIN THE DISTRICT CORPORATION;
AND

(III) THE BOARD HAS A REPRESENTATIVE MEMBER OF THE
BOARD SIGN THE APPROPRIATE DOCUMENTS REQUIRED UNDER § 12–908 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

(3) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE VOTES CAST UNDER SUBSECTION
(A)(1) OF THIS SECTION:

(I) A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION SHALL BE CONSIDERED A SINGLE PARCEL; AND

(II) THE DECISION REACHED BY THE BOARD SHALL
CONSTITUTE THE VOTE OF THE CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION.

12–912.

(A) THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ IN WHICH A DISTRICT IS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
SHALL:

(1) REVIEW THE EFFECTIVENESS AND DESIRABILITY OF CONTINUING
THE DISTRICT EVERY 3 YEARS FROM THE TIME THE DISTRICT IS AUTHORIZED BY
LOCAL LAW UNDER § 12–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) DEVELOP POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR EVALUATING THE
DESIRABILITY OF CONTINUING THE DISTRICT IF REQUESTED BY MEMBERS OF THE
DISTRICT.

(B) IF THE CONTINUING EXISTENCE OF THE DISTRICT IS NOT APPROVED BY
THE GOVERNING BODY:

(1) THE DISTRICT SHALL CEASE TO EXIST AS DIRECTED BY THE
GOVERNING BODY; AND

(2) THE DISTRICT CORPORATION SHALL CONTINUE ITS EXISTENCE
ONLY AS LONG AS NECESSARY TO TERMINATE OPERATION IN A REASONABLE
MANNER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11