START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1149 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1149 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Medicaid Waiver Programs - Waitlist and Registry Reduction (End the Wait 
Act) 
 
   
This bill authorizes funding provided in the fiscal 2023 budget for Autism Waiver 
expansions to instead be used more broadly for Medicaid waiver expansions. A specified 
portion of funds must be used to provide community services to individuals waiting for 
services through the Community Pathways Waiver, the Community Supports Waiver, the 
Family Supports Waiver, the Brain Injury Waiver, the Home- and Community-Based 
Options Waiver, the Medical Day Care Services Waiver, and the Model Waiver for 
Medically Fragile Children. A portion of these funds may be used to expand provider 
capacity in these waivers and the Autism Waiver, including hiring and retaining staff and 
providers, increasing provider rates, and addressing other issues that limit provider 
capacity. The bill also authorizes funding included in the annual budget bill beginning in 
fiscal 2024 to reduce the waitlists for these waiver programs to be used to hire and retain 
providers. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill does not require any new funding but authorizes or requires funds 
already included in the FY 2023 budget (or required to be included in the budget beginning 
in FY 2024) to be used for a specific purpose, there is no net impact on State revenues or 
expenditures. Specifically, up to $20.0 million in the FY 2023 budget must be used to 
provide community services to individuals waiting for specified waiver services and a 
portion of that $20.0 million may be used to expand provider capacity. The FY 2024 budget 
as introduced does not include funding to reduce the waitlists for these waiver programs. 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1149/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 464 of 2022 requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
to develop plans to reduce the waitlists for seven specified waiver programs (the 
Community Pathways Waiver, the Community Supports Waiver, the Family Supports 
Waiver, the Brain Injury Waiver, the Home- and Community-Based Options Waiver, the 
Medical Day Care Services Waiver, and the Model Waiver for Medically Fragile Children) 
by 50%, beginning in fiscal 2024. MDH must also develop a plan to reduce the registry for 
the Autism Waiver that includes conducting eligibility determinations of individuals on the 
registry and, beginning in fiscal 2024, providing services to at least 50% of individuals 
determined eligible. By January 1, 2023, MDH must submit the plans to the Governor and 
specified committees of the General Assembly. Beginning in fiscal 2024, the Governor 
must include in the annual budget bill sufficient funds to carry out the Act.  
 
The plans must include (1) an assessment of whether each waiver program needs to recruit 
and retain new providers; (2) measures to recruit and retain providers to expand the 
capacity of the programs; (3) any changes in reimbursement rates needed to ensure provider 
capacity to provide services under the waiver programs; (4) the expected timeframe for 
conducting eligibility determinations for the Autism Waiver; (5) the expected timeframe 
for reducing the waitlist or registry for each waiver program by 50%; and (6) the projected 
cost of the measures to be implemented under the plans. 
 
The fiscal 2023 budget includes $30.0 million from the Dedicated Purpose Account to 
support Autism Waiver expansions. At least $10.0 million of the appropriation must be 
transferred by budget amendment in fiscal 2023 to the Maryland State Department of 
Education for students with disabilities with the intent to expand the current Autism Waiver 
by 1,350 slots. In August 2022, $10.0 million was transferred via budget amendment for 
this purpose. 
 
Chapters 10 and 11 of 2019, among other actions, require the Governor’s proposed budget 
to include specified rate increases for several types of health care providers. For fiscal 2021 
through 2026, the Governor’s proposed budget must include a 4.0% rate increase over the 
funding provided in the prior year’s legislative appropriation for provider reimbursement 
in Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s Health Program, including for home- and 
community-based services providers. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced plans to 
expedite the 4.0% annual rate increases required under Chapters 10 and 11 for fiscal 2025 
and 2026. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Up to $20.0 million included in the fiscal 2023 budget must be 
used to provide community services to individuals waiting for services through specified 
Medicaid waivers; a portion of that funding may be used to expand provider capacity. 
Many providers that serve the waivers are small businesses. To the extent funds are 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1149/ Page 3 
included in the fiscal 2024 budget and subsequent budgets, providers may additionally 
benefit.  
 
Additional Comments:  Pursuant to Chapter 464, MDH submitted a report in 
February 2023 on its plans and the funding required to reduce the waitlists or registries for 
the majority of the identified waivers by 50% by fiscal 2028. Per this report, current 
provider networks may not have the capacity to deliver services to the additional 
participants for each waiver program as there is a shortage of direct support professionals. 
To improve provider capacity and retain providers, MDH will need to implement provider 
recruitment strategies. MDH is currently assessing the impact of implementing 
Chapter 464 subject to a one-year delay given that recruiting needed staff will require 
several months. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced does not include funding to 
implement Chapter 464.  
 
MDH estimates that the overall cost to implement Chapter 464, including service costs, 
new personnel to support increased waiver participants, and other administrative costs, as 
well as the impact of expediting the 4.0% annual rate increases required under Chapters 10 
and 11 for fiscal 2025 and 2026 (included in the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced) totals 
just over $1.0 billion for fiscal 2023 through 2028, inclusive. On an annual basis, total costs 
(which are eligible for a 50% federal matching rate) are anticipated to be $17.7 million in 
fiscal 2023, $172.0 million in fiscal 2024, $187.5 million in fiscal 2025, $205.5 million in 
fiscal 2026, $222.4 million in fiscal 2027, and $238.9 million in fiscal 2028.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 622 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3