START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1188 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1188 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Utilities - Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity and Meter 
Aggregation 
 
 
This bill defines “generating station” in the Public Utilities Article and in so doing 
establishes that generating units or facilities that meet specified requirements may be 
constructed without obtaining a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) 
from the Public Service Commission (PSC). Subject to those requirements, up to 
14 megawatts of capacity can be installed without a CPCN. The bill also (1) makes a 
conforming change to align the capacity limit for generating stations with a requirement 
for certain solar systems to file an application for approval to construct a generating station 
with PSC and provide a 1.0% deposit and (2) codifies and expands the applicability of a 
requirement in PSC regulations that an electric company provide meter aggregation for 
certain eligible customer-generators. The bill specifies the intent of the General Assembly 
that the bill apply only to solar energy generating facilities and eligible 
customer-generators under the State’s net metering law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State government operations or finances, 
although PSC, the Department of Natural Resources, and the Maryland Department of the 
Environment may have fewer CPCN applications to review. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant impact on local government expenditures, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1188/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A generating station, as defined, does not include a generating unit or 
facility that is used to produce electricity, has a capacity of up to 2 megawatts, and is 
installed with equipment that prevents the flow of electricity to the electric grid during 
times when the electric grid is out service. (This portion of the definition generally aligns 
with the existing definition in regulation.) 
 
Additionally, a generating station does not include a combination of two or more 
generating units or facilities, located on the same property or adjacent properties, that 
(1) are used to produce electricity from a solar photovoltaic system or an eligible 
customer-generator that is subject to the State’s net metering law; (2) have individual 
capacities of up to 2 megawatts and a cumulative capacity of more than 2 megawatts, but 
not more than 14 megawatts; (3) are separately metered by the electric company; and (4) do 
not export electricity for sale on the wholesale market under an agreement with 
PJM Interconnection, LLC. 
 
An electric company is required to provide meter aggregation for an eligible 
customer-generator that submits a request, in writing, to the electric company for the 
provision of meter aggregation and (1) uses electrical service for agriculture; (2) is a 
nonprofit organization; (3) is a municipal or county government (or an affiliated 
organization); (4) is a unit of State government; or (5) is a public senior higher education 
institution. When an eligible customer-generator requests meter aggregation, the electric 
company must require the customer-generator to provide written allocation instructions 
describing how to distribute its excess generation credits to each account before the 
commencement of any meter aggregation. (Much of this requirement also aligns with PSC 
regulations, except for the addition of units of State government and public senior higher 
education institutions). 
 
Current Law:  “Generating station” is not defined in statute; however, PSC regulations 
(COMAR 20.79.01.02) define a “generating station” as property or facilities located in 
Maryland constituting an integral plant or generating unit for the production of electric 
energy, including any new production unit that would be added to an existing production 
plant. A generating station does not include a facility with up to 2 megawatts of capacity 
that has equipment installed to prevent the flow of electricity to the electric system during 
times when the system is out of service. 
 
For general information on the CPCN process, including information related to 
CPCN exemptions affected by the bill, please see the Appendix – Certificate of Public 
Convenience and Necessity. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1188/ Page 3 
Net Metering 
 
Net energy metering is the measurement of the difference between the electricity that is 
supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by an eligible 
customer-generator and fed back to the electric company over the eligible 
customer-generator’s billing period. PSC must require electric utilities to develop and 
make net metering tariffs available to eligible customer-generators. Generally, the 
generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may be up to 
2 megawatts. However, solar energy generating facilities on contiguous parcels of land and 
community solar systems may be up to 5 megawatts. There is a statewide net-metered 
capacity limit of 3,000 megawatts. 
 
An “eligible customer-generator” means a customer that owns and operates, leases and 
operates, or contracts with a third party that owns and operates a biomass, micro combined 
heat and power, solar, fuel cell, wind, or closed conduit hydroelectric generating facility 
that is (1) located on the customer’s premises or contiguous property; (2) interconnected 
and operated in parallel with an electric company’s transmission and distribution facilities; 
and (3) intended primarily to offset all or part of the customer’s own electricity 
requirements.  
 
PSC regulations require an electric company to provide meter aggregation for an eligible 
customer-generator that submits a request, in writing, to the electric company for the 
provision of meter aggregation and (1) uses electrical service for agriculture; (2) is a 
nonprofit organization or a nonprofit business; or (3) is a municipal or county government 
or its affiliated organizations. The electric company must require the customer-generator 
to provide written allocation instructions detailing how to distribute its excess generation 
credits to each account before the commencement of any meter aggregation.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill’s impact on local expenditures cannot be reliably estimated; 
however, in some jurisdictions, the impact may be significant. The impact varies by local 
jurisdiction and depends on a variety of factors, including a jurisdiction’s geography, its 
existing approach to electric generation projects, and the number and type of electric 
generating stations under consideration for construction in the jurisdiction. 
 
The bill enables a developer to bypass the CPCN process for a project that has more than 
2 megawatts of capacity (up to a maximum of 14 megawatts of capacity) by proposing to 
build multiple generating units that have individual capacities of up to 2 megawatts and are 
separately metered and meet other requirements. It is unknown to what extent developers 
will attempt to use this exemption, but the number of developers that do so could be 
significant (particularly for solar generation projects). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1188/ Page 4 
To the extent that the number of applications for CPCNs decreases under the bill, a local 
jurisdiction may have fewer CPCN cases to intervene in. On the other hand, if the bill’s 
changes lead to a significant increase in the number of electric generation projects in the 
State that bypass the CPCN process, a local government may feel compelled to more 
actively regulate and/or scrutinize such projects within its jurisdictional limits. A local 
government could incur significant expenditures if it (1) imposes new requirements on 
developers of electric generation projects; (2) employs engineers and other personnel to 
study and review prospective electric generation projects; or (3) hires external consultants 
to study a project’s possible environmental, economic, and/or socioeconomic impacts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 931 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1188/ Page 5 
Appendix – Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
 
General Overview 
 
The Public Service Commission (PSC) is the lead agency for licensing the siting, 
construction, and operation of power plants and related facilities in the State through 
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN). The CPCN process is 
comprehensive and involves several other State agencies, including the Department of 
Natural Resources (and its Power Plant Research Program), and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. Subject to limited exemptions described below, a person may not 
begin construction in the State of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or 
qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is first obtained from PSC. “Generating 
station” is not defined in statute; however, the PSC definition in regulation excludes a 
facility with up to 2 megawatts of capacity if it meets other specified requirements. 
 
The CPCN process, detailed further below, involves the notification of specified 
stakeholders, the holding of public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by 
State and local government entities, and the consideration of the project’s effects on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
In December 2020, PSC initiated a rulemaking (RM 72) to revise regulations governing 
CPCNs for generating stations. Updated regulations became effective in September 2021. 
Among other changes, the regulations contain additional information requirements – to 
assist in project evaluation – and allow for electronic submission and distribution of 
application materials. 
 
Notification Process 
 
Upon receipt of a CPCN application, PSC – or the CPCN applicant, if required by PSC – 
must immediately provide notice to specified recipients, including the executive and 
governing body of affected local governments, affected members of the General Assembly, 
and other interested persons. When providing the notice, PSC must also forward the CPCN 
application to each appropriate unit of State and local government for review, evaluation, 
and comment and to each member of the General Assembly who requests a copy. 
 
Public Hearing and Comment 
 
PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on a 
CPCN application in each county and municipality in which any portion of the construction 
of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or qualified generator lead line is 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1188/ Page 6 
proposed to be located. PSC must hold the hearing jointly with the governing body of the 
county or municipality and must provide weekly notice during the four weeks prior to the 
hearing, both in a newspaper and online, and must further coordinate with each local 
government to identify additional hearing notification options. PSC must ensure 
presentation and recommendations from each interested State unit and must allow 
representatives of each State unit to sit during the hearing of all parties. PSC must then 
allow each State unit 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing to modify the unit’s initial 
recommendations. 
 
Public Service Commission Considerations 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of 
(1) recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; (2) various aspects of the State 
infrastructure, economy, and environment; and (3) the effect of climate change on the 
project. For example, PSC must consider the effect of the project on the stability and 
reliability of the electric system and, when applicable, air and water pollution. There are 
additional considerations specifically for a generating station or an overhead transmission 
line. For example, PSC must consider the impact of a generating station on the quantity of 
annual and long-term statewide greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Generating Station Exemptions 
 
There are three general conditions under which a person constructing a generating station 
may apply to PSC for an exemption from the CPCN requirement: 
 
 
the facility is designed to provide onsite generated electricity, the capacity is up to 
70 megawatts, and the excess electricity can be sold only on the wholesale market 
pursuant to a specified agreement with the local electric company;  
 
at least 10% of the electricity generated is consumed onsite, the capacity is up to 
25 megawatts, and the excess electricity is sold on the wholesale market pursuant 
to a specified agreement with the local electric company; or  
 
the facility is wind-powered and land-based, the capacity is up to 70 megawatts, and 
the facility is no closer than a PSC-determined distance from the Patuxent River 
Naval Air Station, among other requirements. 
 
However, PSC must require a person who is exempted from the CPCN requirement to 
obtain approval from the commission before the person may construct a generating station 
as described above. The application must contain specified information that PSC requires, 
including proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the independent system 
operator. 

END OF PAGE 6