START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1146 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
 
House Bill 1146 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health and Maryland Health Care Commission - 
Dental Services - Survey and Regional Needs Assessment 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in consultation 
with the Maryland Hospital Association (MHA), to conduct a survey of hospitals to 
identify the availability of hospital operating room resources for dentist use, as specified. 
MDH and the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), jointly and in consultation 
with MHA and the Maryland Ambulatory Surgery Association, must conduct a regional 
needs assessment for dental procedures that require anesthesia or moderate sedation, as 
specified. MDH and MHCC, jointly and in consultation with MHA, must develop regional 
plans to ensure the availability of appropriate operating room space for the performance of 
dental procedures for Medicaid recipients. By December 1, 2023, MDH and MHCC, 
jointly and in consultation with MHA, must submit a report to specified committees of the 
General Assembly that includes the results of the survey and the regional needs assessment, 
as well as the regional plans.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH (and MHCC) can complete and submit (in consultation with specified 
entities) the required survey, regional needs assessment, and regional plans with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1146/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under federal requirements, comprehensive dental coverage is mandatory 
for children enrolled in Medicaid. However, dental benefits for Medicaid-eligible adults 
are optional. Prior to January 1, 2023, Medicaid dental coverage (provided through the 
Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program) was available to children younger than age 21, 
former foster care recipients younger than age 26, pregnant women age 21 and older, and 
adults enrolled in the Rare and Expensive Case Management program. Effective 
January 1, 2023, Medicaid provides dental coverage for all adults with incomes up to 133% 
of the federal poverty level. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2