START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1148 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1148 
(Delegate Moon, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Behavioral Health Care - Treatment and Access (Behavioral Health Model for 
Maryland) 
 
 
This bill (1) establishes a Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access; 
(2) creates a Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value-Based Purchasing Pilot Program; 
(3) extends for two years provisions relating to telehealth services; (4) requires the 
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) to study and make recommendations 
regarding telehealth; and (5) requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to apply 
for specified federal grant funds and inclusion in the state certified community behavioral 
health clinic (CCBHC) demonstration program. For fiscal 2025 through 2027, the 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $600,000 for the pilot 
program. The bill generally takes effect June 1, 2023. The pilot program takes effect 
October 1, 2023, and terminates November 30, 2027; the commission terminates 
June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. MDH general fund expenditures increase by $397,700 
in FY 2024 for the commission and pilot program; general fund expenditures in FY 2025 
through 2027 reflect the mandated appropriation and ongoing contractual staff costs. Any 
impact on overall Medicaid expenditures from continuing telehealth coverage is 
indeterminate. Special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) 
increase minimally in FY 2024 only, as discussed below. MDH can apply for federal grant 
funds and inclusion in the demonstration program, and MHCC can complete the required 
study, using existing budgeted resources. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation 
for FY 2025 through 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$397,700 
$723,300 
$728,700 
$734,300 
$59,400 
Net Effect 
($397,700) 
($723,300) 
($728,700) 
($734,300) 
($59,400) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1148/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for some local governments to continue 
to reimburse for certain telehealth services. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access 
 
The purpose of the 38-member commission is to make recommendations to provide 
appropriate, accessible, and comprehensive behavioral health services that are available on 
demand to individuals in the State across the behavioral health continuum. The Governor, 
the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House must jointly designate the chair 
of the commission. The commission must:   
 
 
assess behavioral health services in the State to identify needs and gaps in services 
across the continuum, as specified; 
 
examine methods for reimbursing behavioral health care services and make 
recommendations on the most effective forms of reimbursement to maximize 
service delivery; 
 
compile findings of State-specific needs assessments related to behavioral health 
services; 
 
review recommendations and reports of State commissions, workgroups, or task 
forces related to behavioral health care services; 
 
conduct a needs assessment on the State’s behavioral health care workforce, as 
specified; 
 
review trends and best practices from other states regarding policy and 
reimbursement strategies, as specified; 
 
examine and make recommendations related to the behavioral health of the geriatric 
and youth populations; 
 
examine and make recommendations to provide appropriate and adequate 
behavioral health services to individuals with developmental disabilities and 
complex behavioral health needs, specifically youth; 
 
assess the health infrastructure, facilities, personnel, and services available for the 
State’s forensic population and identify deficiencies, as specified; 
 
make recommendations on expanding behavioral health treatment access for the 
State’s court-ordered population; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1148/ Page 3 
 
make recommendations on action plans regarding the behavioral health care 
system’s capacity to prepare for and respond to future challenges, as specified; 
 
make recommendations to ensure that behavioral health treatment is provided in the 
appropriate setting, as specified; 
 
examine and review the use of harm reduction strategies to facilitate access to care; 
and 
 
examine methods to assist consumers in accessing behavioral health services. 
 
The commission must meet at least three times annually and establish workgroups, as 
specified. The workgroups must meet at least twice per year and include members of the 
commission. Workgroups may include individuals invited by the commission to serve on 
the workgroup. By December 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, each workgroup must report 
and make recommendations to the commission. 
 
By January 1, 2024, and annually thereafter, the commission must report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly on its findings and recommendations, including funding and 
legislative recommendations that are consistent with providing appropriate, accessible, and 
comprehensive behavioral health services that are available on demand to individuals in 
the State across the behavioral health spectrum. Any legislative recommendations that 
require funding must include an estimate of the funding required and information that 
supports that estimate. The commission report that must be submitted by January 1, 2024, 
must include the findings of specified needs assessments. 
 
MDH must provide staff for the commission. Members of the commission may not receive 
compensation but are entitled to reimbursement under standard State travel regulations. 
 
Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value-Based Purchasing Pilot Program 
 
“Behavioral health care coordination” means a person-centered, team-based activity 
designed to (1) assess and meet the needs of an individual with a behavioral health 
condition and (2) help the individual navigate the health care system effectively and 
efficiently.  
 
MDH must administer the pilot program, which must be operational for a three-year period 
(the pilot program terminates November 30, 2027). The purpose of the pilot program is to 
establish and implement an intensive care coordination model using value-based 
purchasing (VBP) in the specialty behavioral health system. MDH must identify at least 
500 adults whose behavioral health condition or functioning places them at risk of hospital 
emergency department utilization or inpatient psychiatric hospital admission. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1148/ Page 4 
A provider or network of providers selected to participate must (1) be licensed and in good 
standing with Medicaid; (2) have experience in providing community-based care 
coordination to specialty behavioral health program recipients; (3) use an electronic 
medical record for documenting care coordination activities and outcomes collection; and  
(4) have an automated data exchange with the State-designated health information 
exchange. 
 
MDH must (1) provide reimbursement on a per member per month basis for the behavioral 
health care coordination activities that are not otherwise covered by Medicaid; (2) collect 
outcomes data on recipients of health care services under the pilot program; and 
(3) evaluate the effectiveness of the VBP purchasing model by analyzing outcome 
measures, as specified. If necessary to implement the pilot program, MDH must apply for 
an amendment to the State’s § 1115 HealthChoice Demonstration. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2026, MDH must allocate a percentage of the mandated appropriation 
for the pilot program to reimbursement paid based on the achievement of specified outcome 
measures. In fiscal 2027, MDH must increase this percentage over the percentage allocated 
in fiscal 2026. 
 
By November 1, 2027, MDH must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on its 
findings and recommendations from the pilot program. 
 
Telehealth Provisions  
 
For purposes of Medicaid and commercial health insurance, the bill extends for 
two additional years – through June 30, 2025 – telehealth provisions that are in effect from  
July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2023. Accordingly, the definition of “telehealth” includes 
an audio-only telephone conversation between a health care provider and a patient that 
results in the delivery of a billable, covered health care service. The Medicaid program and 
health insurance carriers must provide reimbursement for services appropriately provided 
through telehealth on the same basis and at the same rate as if the health care service were 
delivered in person.  
 
MHCC must study and make recommendations regarding the delivery of health care 
services through telehealth, as specified, and report to the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024. 
 
Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics  
 
MDH must apply to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
(SAMHSA) at the Center for Mental Health Services for (1) federal planning, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1148/ Page 5 
development, and implementation grant funds related to CCBHCs for fiscal 2025 and 
(2) inclusion in the state CCBHC demonstration program for fiscal 2026. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Telehealth 
 
Chapters 70 and 71 of 2021 (the Preserve Telehealth Access Act of 2021) required MHCC 
to submit a report on the impact of providing telehealth services by December 1, 2022.  
MHCC contracted with the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago 
to develop a technical report issued in October 2022. The report’s findings were used by 
MHCC to develop telehealth coverage recommendations presented in a final report issued 
in December 2022. 
 
MHCC recommended maintaining provisions in the Acts to ensure coverage flexibilities 
for somatic and behavioral health, noting that audio-only care should continue for 
behavioral health treatment, but some use guidelines in coverage of telehealth for somatic 
care are warranted. Specifically, the State should allow: 
 
 
a health care provider capable of providing telehealth services using audio-visual 
technology to deliver services using audio-only technology;  
 
use of audio-only for somatic care in the event of an audio-visual technology failure, 
a request by the patient, or at the clinical discretion of a treating health care provider 
without requiring documentation in the clinical record; and 
 
unrestricted use of audio-only for behavioral health based on patient consent to 
receive care via audio-only technology. 
 
Regarding payment parity (reimbursing for a telehealth service on the same basis and at 
the same rate as if the service were delivered in person), MHCC proposed continuing 
payment levels for telehealth services relative to in-person care for 24 months. MHCC 
recommended studying payment parity for audio-visual and audio-only technologies and 
proposed that it submit a report to the General Assembly by December 1, 2024, that 
addresses:  
 
 
whether it costs more or less for providers to deliver telehealth;  
 
whether telehealth requires more or less clinical effort for a provider;  
 
whether there are aspects of telehealth that yield lower value, overuse, or conversely 
greater value that inform the debate on payment parity; and  
 
the adequacy of reimbursement for behavioral health services delivered in person 
and by telehealth. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1148/ Page 6 
Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics  
 
The federal CCBHC model is designed to ensure access to coordinated comprehensive 
behavioral health care. CCBHCs are required to serve anyone who requests care for mental 
health or substance use, regardless of their ability to pay, place of residence, or age. 
CCBHCs must meet standards for the range of services they provide and are required to 
get people into care quickly.  
 
CCBHCs must provide nine core services either directly or through designated 
collaborating organizations:  (1) crisis services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; (2) treatment 
planning; (3) screening, assessment, diagnosis, and risk assessment; (4) outpatient mental 
health and substance use services; (5) targeted case management; (6) outpatient primary 
care screening and monitoring; (7) community-based mental health care for veterans; 
(8) peer, family support, and counselor services; and (9) psychiatric rehabilitation services. 
CCBHCs also provide care coordination to help people navigate behavioral health care, 
physical health care, social services, and other systems.  
 
More than 450 CCBHCs operate nationally either through the federal CCBHC Medicaid 
Demonstration, through federal CCBHC Expansion (CCBHC-E) Grants, or through 
independent state programs. Six states operate under a Medicaid State Plan Amendment or 
§ 1115 waiver. Maryland currently has 5 CCBHCs funded by federal CCBHC-E grants 
that serve residents of Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access 
 
MDH must staff the commission, which, among other things, must assess behavioral health 
services in the State to identify needs and gaps in services; make recommendations on the 
most effective forms of reimbursement to maximize service delivery; conduct a workforce 
needs assessment; make recommendations related to the geriatric, youth, forensic, and 
court-ordered populations; and submit annual reports on the commission’s findings and 
recommendations, including legislative recommendations and funding estimates. The 
commission takes effect June 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2027. Given the significant 
work the commission is tasked with, MDH requires additional personnel.  
 
Therefore, MDH general funds increase by $121,107 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for a 
90-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date. MDH has determined that 
two regular full-time positions are needed. However, the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) advises that the added responsibilities of the commission are not permanent 
and, thus, may be performed by contractual employees. This estimate reflects the cost of 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1148/ Page 7 
hiring two health policy analysts advanced beginning September 1, 2023, to staff the 
commission. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. This estimate does not reflect any costs to provide commission 
members with expense reimbursements, as permitted under the bill. 
 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$106,119 
Operating Expenses 
    14,988 
Total FY 2024 Commission Personnel Expenditures 
$121,107 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The contractual positions 
terminate June 30, 2027, the termination date of the commission. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). 
 
Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value-Based Purchasing Pilot Program 
 
MDH must establish the VBP Pilot Program, which takes effect October 1, 2023, and 
operate the pilot program for a three-year period (fiscal 2025 through 2027). The pilot 
program terminates November 30, 2027, at which time MDH must submit a final report on 
its findings and recommendations. MDH advises that it will require additional personnel 
and a one-time consultant to implement the pilot program. 
 
Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $276,610 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the pilot program’s October 1, 2023 effective date. MDH has determined that 
two regular full-time positions are needed. However, DLS advises that the added 
responsibilities of the pilot program are not permanent and, thus, may be performed by 
contractual employees. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program administrator 
and one coordinator of special programs to evaluate VBP models, review consultant 
proposals, and implement and evaluate the pilot program. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, one-time contractual costs for a consultant to assist in the 
development of the pilot program (including developing rates and providing training), and 
ongoing operating expenses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1148/ Page 8 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
New Contractual Positions 
2.0 
- 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$96,792 
$122,326 
One-time Consultant  
165,000 
0 
Pilot Program Provider Reimbursement  
0 
475,533 
Operating Expenses 
    14,818 
      2,141 
Total Pilot Program Expenditures in FY 2024 and 2025 
$276,610 
$600,000 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
In fiscal 2025 through 2027, an annual mandated appropriation of $600,000 is provided for 
the pilot program. This analysis assumes that this appropriation covers ongoing personnel 
costs as well as provider reimbursement. The contractual positions terminate 
November 30, 2027, the date on which the pilot program terminates and the same month 
that the final report on the pilot program must be submitted.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the ACA. 
 
Telehealth Provisions  
 
Medicaid expenditures (and federal fund revenues) for specified telehealth services 
continue through fiscal 2025. Any impact on overall Medicaid expenditures from 
continuing coverage as specified under the bill is indeterminate. Special fund revenues 
increase minimally for MIA in fiscal 2024 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any 
additional workload for MIA can be absorbed with existing budgeted resources. There is 
no impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program.  
 
MHCC can complete the required study on the delivery of health care services through 
telehealth and report to the General Assembly using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics 
 
MDH advises that it plans to apply for a SAMHSA planning grant for the implementation 
of CCBHCs in fiscal 2025. Thus, MDH can apply for federal grant funds related to 
CCBHCs using existing budgeted resources. SAMHSA planning grants are funded at a 
65% federal matching rate. To the extent grant funds are received, MDH federal fund 
revenues increase in fiscal 2025. MDH also advises that it can apply for inclusion in 
SAMHSA’s state CCBHC demonstration program for fiscal 2026 using existing budgeted 
resources. This analysis does not reflect any cost associated with participation in the 
demonstration program. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1148/ Page 9 
Small Business Effect:  Health care providers can continue to receive reimbursement for 
telehealth services provided through audio-only conversations through fiscal 2025. 
Medicaid and carriers must reimburse health care providers for telehealth services on the 
same basis and at the same rate as if the service were delivered in person. Small business 
behavioral health providers may benefit from additional reimbursement under the VBP 
Pilot Program in fiscal 2025 through 2027. 
 
Additional Comments:  To the extent that expenditures on the pilot program improve 
individuals’ behavioral health and reduce the need for other behavioral health services 
(including emergency room visits and hospitalizations), overall expenditures are offset, 
potentially significantly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 637 and HB 935 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 582 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services; Department of Human Services; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9