START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1151 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1151 
(Delegate Bhandari, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Reimbursement for Services Rendered by a Pharmacist 
 
 
This bill requires Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), as well 
as specified insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance organizations 
(collectively known as carriers) to provide coverage for services rendered by a licensed 
pharmacist acting within the pharmacist’s scope of practice to the same extent as services 
rendered by any other licensed health care provider. For carriers, this requirement applies 
to policies and contracts that provide coverage for services within the scope of practice of 
a licensed pharmacist. Pharmacist reimbursement may not be conditioned on whether the 
licensed pharmacist is (1) employed by a physician, pharmacy, or facility or (2) acting 
under a physician’s orders. To implement these requirements for Medicaid and MCHP, the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must apply for and obtain any necessary Medicaid 
waivers or amendments by January 1, 2024. The bill applies to all policies, contracts, and 
health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after January 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent the bill results in increased billing for services already covered 
by Medicaid and MCHP, expenditures (51% federal funds, 49% general funds) increase by 
an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2024. Federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. No material impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare 
Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that reimbursement parity for pharmacists increases health 
insurance costs, expenditures for local governments that purchase fully insured plans may 
increase. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1151/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Pharmacists 
 
An individual must be licensed by the State Board of Pharmacy to practice pharmacy in 
the State. The practice of pharmacy includes compounding, dispensing, or distributing 
prescription drugs or devices; monitoring prescriptions; providing information, 
explanation, and recommendations to patients and health care practitioners about the safe 
and effective use of prescription drugs or devices; providing drug therapy management; 
administering vaccinations; prescribing and dispensing certain contraceptive medications 
and devices; and administering a self-administered drug to a patient. 
 
Pharmacist Reimbursement Workgroup 
 
Chapter 371 and 372 of 2022 required the Insurance Commissioner to establish a 
workgroup with specified stakeholders to identify options and requirements necessary for 
the reimbursement of pharmacists who provide medical services within their scope of 
practice and work setting. The report, submitted December 19, 2022, noted that, with 
respect to carriers, pharmacists are entitled to reimbursement for covered services within 
their scope of practice; however, claims are generally currently submitted by a supervising 
physician, facility, or pharmacy. The report recommended that language be added to 
Title 15, Subtitle 7 of the Insurance Article that states that, if a policy provides for 
reimbursement of a service within the lawful scope of practice of a pharmacist, the insured 
or any other person covered by the policy is entitled to reimbursement, and that it may not 
be a condition for payment that the pharmacist be employed by a physician, pharmacy, or 
facility, or under a physician’s orders. 
 
Medicaid and Maryland Children’s Health Program Coverage for Pharmacist Services 
 
Medicaid and MCHP must provide coverage for services, to the same extent as services 
rendered by any other licensed health care practitioner, rendered to an enrollee by a 
licensed pharmacist under (1) § 12-509 of the Health Occupations Article in administering 
self-administered medications, maintenance injectable medications, or injectable 
medications for treatment of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) or (2) § 12-511 of the 
Health Occupations Article in screening an enrollee and prescribing contraceptives for the 
enrollee. Currently, Medicaid does not require managed care organizations to cover 
services by pharmacists beyond the services associated with dispensing prescription 
medications and specific services mandated by statute. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1151/ Page 3 
Carrier Coverage of Pharmacy Services 
 
Individual, group, or blanket health insurance policies and contracts delivered or issued for 
delivery in the State by carriers that provide coverage for patient assessment regarding, and 
administration of, self-administered medications, maintenance injectable medications, and 
injectable medications for treatment of STIs must provide specified coverage for services 
rendered by a licensed pharmacist. Specifically, carriers must provide coverage for services 
rendered under § 12-509 of the Health Occupations Article to an individual who is covered 
under a policy or contract issued or delivered by the carrier. Coverage must be provided to 
the same extent as services rendered by any other licensed health care practitioner for 
patient assessment regarding and in administering self-administered medications, 
maintenance injectable medications, or injectable medications for treatment of STIs. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that it interprets the bill to require Medicaid/MCHP to 
reimburse a pharmacist for existing covered services that may be part of a pharmacists’ 
scope of practice, regardless of whether the pharmacist is employed by a physician, 
pharmacy, or facility or is acting under a physician’s orders. To the extent that the bill 
results in increased billing for services already covered by Medicaid and MCHP, 
expenditures (51% federal funds, 49% general funds) increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in fiscal 2024. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business pharmacies must be reimbursed for services within 
their scope of practice on the same basis as other health care practitioners. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 678 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1151/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4