START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1178 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1178 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Calvert County - Length of Service Award Program - Benefits 
 
 
This bill alters the Length of Service Award Program (LOSAP) in Calvert County. The bill 
authorizes the Calvert County Commissioners to approve an increase in the benefit amount 
that a qualified volunteer is eligible to receive that is equal to the percentage of the 
cost-of-living increase authorized for county employees. 
 
The bill also (1) increases the death benefit that Calvert County must grant to any qualified 
volunteer who dies in the line of duty from $6,000 to $10,000, as specified; (2) increases 
the maximum additional death benefit from $6,000 to $10,000 for a qualified volunteer 
who dies and has completed 25 years of certified service; and (3) increases the maximum 
burial benefit from $240 to $336, for each year of certified service that a volunteer who 
receives specified benefits is entitled to upon death. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Calvert County expenditures may increase by a minimum of $450,000 
annually beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. Calvert County revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  LOSAP in Calvert County is for qualified active volunteer members of the 
Calvert County volunteer fire, rescue, and emergency medical services departments. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1178/ Page 2 
In Calvert County, any individual who has reached the age of 50 and who has completed a 
minimum of 25 years of certified active volunteer service, in any combination, with any 
Calvert County volunteer fire company, volunteer rescue squad, or rescue dive team will 
receive benefits in the amount of $400 per month, for life. Chapter 154 of 2015 required 
an additional payment of $10 per month to the benefits for each full year of volunteer 
service in excess of 25 years. 
 
In the event any active volunteer who becomes permanently disabled during their service 
as a volunteer fireman, rescue squad member, or rescue dive team member, the volunteer 
is entitled to receive the benefits, as specified, and any other benefits the volunteer may be 
entitled to regardless of age or length of service. These benefits begin on the first day of 
the first month following the establishment of the permanency of the disability. The 
volunteer must be certified as permanently disabled by the Workers’ Compensation 
Commission or other competent medical authority as designated by the board of county 
commissioners. 
 
If a qualified volunteer who has completed 25 years of certified service dies, the qualified 
volunteer will receive a burial benefit up to $6,000. Additionally, in the event a volunteer 
who receives benefits under specified circumstances dies, the volunteer will receive a 
burial benefit up to $240 for each year of certified service. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Calvert County advises that expenditures related to annual 
LOSAP contributions may increase due to the bill authorizing the board of 
county commissioners to approve an increase in the benefit amount that a qualified 
volunteer is eligible to receive to correspond to the percentage of the cost-of-living increase 
authorized 
for 
county 
employees. 
Calvert 
County 
estimates 
its 
annual 
LOSAP contributions may increase by at least $450,000 annually, beginning in fiscal 2024, 
under the bill; however, the county would require a formal study in order to determine the 
actual amount of the increase. For comparison purposes, the county made approximately 
$1.1 million in LOSAP contributions in fiscal 2022. 
 
In addition, Calvert County’s expenditures may increase minimally due to the increase in 
payments of specified LOSAP death benefits under the bill; however, the county advises 
that over the last 40 years only two qualified volunteers have died in the line of duty. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1178/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3