START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1127 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1127 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Harford County - Advisory Plumbing Board 
 
 
This bill authorizes the governing body of Harford County to enact a local law providing 
for the membership and terms of office for the Advisory Plumbing Board. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  This bill reflects the current practice in Harford County for the appointment 
of members to the Advisory Plumbing Board. Harford County finances are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 16-7 of the Public Local Laws of Harford County establishes the 
composition, qualifications, and terms of the board members who are appointed to the 
Harford County Advisory Plumbing Board. The board is comprised of five members; the 
county health officer (or designee), three master plumbers, and a department head who is 
responsible for the enforcement of the plumbing code. Board members are appointed by 
the county executive and confirmed by the county council for terms coterminous with those 
of the county executive and county council. Additionally, any board member may succeed 
themself in office. The board members must also be residents of the county and their 
principal place of business must be located in the county. When a board member term 
comes to an end, or a vacancy occurs during a term, the county executive must appoint a 
replacement, confirmed by the county council in accordance with the county’s charter. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1127/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 947 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2