START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1156 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1156 
(Delegate R. Lewis, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Pharmacists - Therapy Management Contract - Form 
 
 
This bill authorizes a therapy management contract to be entered into orally or in writing 
(including in electronic form) and stipulates that, if entered into orally, the contract must 
be reduced to writing by the parties within 30 days. In accordance with these changes, the 
bill modifies the definition of “therapy management contract” by (1) repealing the 
requirement that a contract be written and (2) replacing the requirement that a contract must 
be signed by the parties with a requirement that a contract must be agreed upon by the 
parties. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 249 of 2002 created the Drug Therapy Management Program, 
which authorizes a physician and a pharmacist to enter into a therapy management contract 
that specifies treatment protocols that may be used to provide care to a patient. An 
authorized prescriber who has entered into such an agreement must submit specified 
documentation to the State Board of Pharmacy. 
 
A “therapy management contract” is a voluntary, written arrangement that is 
(1) disease-state specific; (2) signed by a licensed pharmacist, an authorized prescriber, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1156/ Page 2 
the patient receiving care from the physician and pharmacist; and (3) related to treatment 
using drug therapy, laboratory tests, or medical devices, as specified, for the purpose of 
improving patient outcomes. 
 
A therapy management contract must include (1) a statement that none of the parties 
involved have been coerced, given economic incentives (excluding normal reimbursement 
for services rendered), or involuntarily required to participate; (2) notice to the patient that 
the patient may terminate the contract at any time and the procedures for doing so;  
(3) a procedure for the authorized prescriber to periodically review the drugs modified 
pursuant to the contract or changed with the consent of the prescriber; and (4) reference to 
a protocol, which must be provided to the patient on request. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2