START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1109 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1109 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Economic Development - Business Improvement 
Districts  
PG 407-23 
 
 
This bill exempts Prince George’s County from the statewide business improvement 
district law and establishes a separate law solely for Prince George’s County that authorizes 
the county to establish business improvement districts. The bill specifies the procedures 
and requirements for establishing a district, including the creation of specified boards of 
directors and steering committees, public notification regarding the establishment of an 
improvement district, district expansion, funding, taxing authority, and the evaluation and 
termination of a business improvement district. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures may increase minimally due to 
additional 
public 
hearings 
for 
proposed 
business 
improvement 
districts. 
Prince George’s County local revenues and expenditures are further affected to the extent 
that the bill alters the number of business improvement districts established or expanded 
relative to current law, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses that are located in, or 
adjacent 
to, 
a 
business 
improvement 
district 
established 
or 
expanded 
in 
Prince George’s County due to the bill are affected, as discussed below. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1109/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 461 of 2010 authorized a county or municipality 
to establish business improvement districts, subject to specified conditions, as discussed 
below. Chapter 444 of 2017 exempted Montgomery County from the statewide business 
improvement district law and established a separate law solely for Montgomery County 
and its municipalities. 
 
General Purpose for Business Improvement Districts 
 
Current Law:  The purpose of the law authorizing the creation of business improvement 
districts is to promote the general welfare of residents, employers, property owners, and 
others within the districts. A local government may adopt a local law to create a business 
improvement district. 
 
The Bill:  No change for districts in Prince George’s County, except that the bill only 
applies to Prince George’s County and not municipalities in the county. 
 
Property Subject to Taxation in a Business Improvement District 
 
Current Law:  “Nonexempt property” means nonresidential real property that is not 
exempt from paying real property taxes. 
 
The Bill:  “Nonexempt property” means all real property that is not exempt from paying 
real property taxes except (1) condominium units and cooperative housing corporation 
units that exist on or before the date of establishment of a district; (2) homeowners 
associations; or (3) residential property with fewer than four dwelling units. However, a 
condominium or a cooperative housing corporation may petition to join a new or expanding 
business improvement district, subject to specified conditions. 
 
Business Improvement District Formation 
 
Current Law:  Documentation necessary to form a district must be sent to the governing 
body of the county and municipality, if applicable, in which the proposed district is located. 
The documentation must contain specified information, including (1) a statement 
expressing the intent to establish a district corporation that is signed by at least 80% of the 
owners of the total number of nonexempt property parcels within the proposed district and 
(2) a proposed three-year plan that contains information such as the proposed annual 
business improvement district tax and the proposed articles of incorporation and district 
corporation bylaws. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1109/ Page 3 
The Bill:  The documentation, which is submitted by the formation steering committee, 
must contain specified information including a statement expressing the intent to establish 
a district corporation that is signed by (1) owners of at least 51% of the total number of 
nonexempt property parcels within the proposed district and (2) in the case of a 
condominium or cooperative housing corporation, the signature of board member. 
 
Notwithstanding any other law, a condominium or cooperative housing corporation that is 
located in the proposed district may petition to join the district corporation if it is governed 
by a board, the board votes to join, and the board has a representative member sign the 
appropriate documents discussed above. For purposes of the 51% ownership thresholds 
required to establish a district corporation, a condominium or cooperative housing 
corporation is considered a single parcel, and the decision reached by the board constitutes 
the vote of the condominium or housing corporation. 
 
The proposed three-year plan requirement is changed to a five-year requirement, except 
that it no longer needs to include a list of the names and addresses of all commercial tenants 
within the proposed district. 
 
Current Law:  A local governing body is required to hold a public hearing within 45 days 
of receiving documentation from property owners seeking to establish the district. At least 
21 days before the hearing, the local governing body is required to publish notice of the 
hearing, and the property owners seeking to establish the district must send notice to 
nonexempt property owners and commercial tenants within the proposed district. Within 
10 days after the public hearing, if a local governing body determines that the needs of the 
district meet the purposes set forth in the law, the governing body must authorize the 
district. 
 
The Bill:  A formation steering committee seeking to establish a district must send notice 
of the public hearing and a summary of the application to each owner of nonexempt 
property and to the extent reasonably ascertainable, each commercial tenant of nonexempt 
property within the proposed district by the earlier of (1) at least 90 days before the public 
hearing or (2) when owners of at least 20% of the total number of parcels of nonexempt 
property express the intent to establish a district. If, within 10 days of the public hearing, 
Prince George’s County determines, in the sole discretion of the county, that the needs of 
the district meet a purpose set forth in the law, the governing body may authorize the 
district. 
 
Expansion of an Established Business Improvement District 
 
Current Law:  An established district may expand the geographic area of the district if (1) a 
petition for inclusion is submitted from at least 80% of the owners of the total number of 
parcels of nonexempt property in the geographic area proposed for inclusion in the district; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1109/ Page 4 
(2) the petition is accepted by a majority vote of the board of the district corporation; and 
(3) the appropriate documents, as applicable, are submitted to, and a hearing is held by, the 
appropriate local governing body. 
 
The Bill:  Requirements to expand an existing district in Prince George’s County are 
unchanged, except that the petition for inclusion must be submitted from (1) owners of at 
least 51% of the total number of nonexempt property parcels proposed for inclusion within 
the district and (2) a designated board member of a condominium or a cooperative housing 
corporation. Notwithstanding any other law, a condominium or cooperative housing 
corporation that is located in the proposed expanded geographic area of the district may 
petition to join the district corporation under the same conditions and subject to the same 
requirements as discussed above for district creation. 
 
District Corporation Board and Powers 
 
Current Law:  District corporations are governed by a five-member board of directors, 
which is appointed by members of the district according to procedures specified in the local 
law establishing the district. The board is required to file an annual report with the 
applicable local governing body that includes (1) a financial statement for the prior year; 
(2) a proposed operating budget; (3) information showing the goals and results of 
operations; and (4) any proposed business plan revisions. 
 
Except as limited by any articles of incorporation, a district corporation may (1) receive 
money from its incorporating local government, the State, other governmental units, or 
nonprofit organizations; (2) charge fees for its services; (3) employ individuals and hire 
consultants; and (4) use the services of other governmental units. 
 
The Bill:  Generally, a board of a district corporation consists of at least nine members. 
However, the county may determine a different number of members for the board if the 
district is connected with a business improvement district in another county or State or in 
the District of Columbia. A board must be representative of property owners, business 
owners, residents, and representatives of the local jurisdictions within the boundaries of 
the business improvement district. It is the responsibility of the initial board of the business 
improvement district to determine in the district’s bylaws the specific details pertaining to 
board structure, including the specific number of positions, terms, and voting procedures. 
A board must retain as nonvoting members, the members of the Maryland Senate and 
House of Delegates who represent the legislative district where a district corporation is 
established. Board seats must be elected in accordance with an election process that is 
established by the county where the district is located. To the extent practicable, the 
election process must reflect the diversity of businesses and other organizations in the 
district. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1109/ Page 5 
Local Government Authority and Requirements 
 
Current Law:  Subject to a public hearing, local governing bodies are authorized to adopt 
a local law creating a district. If a district is adopted, local governing bodies are required 
every three years to review the effectiveness and desirability of continuing the district. In 
addition, if requested by owners of nonexempt property within the district, local governing 
bodies are required to develop policies and procedures for evaluating the desirability of 
continuing the district. If the local governing body does not approve the continued 
existence of the district, the district will cease to exist as directed by the local governing 
body but will continue its existence only as long as necessary to terminate operations in a 
reasonable manner. 
 
The Bill:  No change for districts in Prince George’s County, except that the definition of 
nonexempt property is changed under the bill. The bill only applies to 
Prince George’s County and not municipalities in the county. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, Prince George’s County must hold a public hearing 
on a proposed business improvement district if the local jurisdiction receives, in addition 
to other documentation, a statement signed by owners of at least 51% of the total number 
of parcels of nonexempt property in the proposed district. This is a lower threshold than 
under current law, and, as such, local government expenditures for Prince George’s County 
may increase minimally due to additional public hearings. 
 
Under the bill, if Prince George’s County determines that the needs of the district meet a 
purpose of the business improvement district law, the county may adopt a local law 
approving the district. 
 
The effect on the number of business improvement districts ultimately established or 
expanded 
under 
the 
bill 
is 
unclear. 
The 
added 
flexibility 
provided 
to 
Prince George’s County to authorize – or not authorize – a proposed district may increase 
or decrease the number of districts ultimately approved under the bill, relative to current 
law. 
 
Therefore, Prince George’s County revenues and expenditures are affected to the extent 
that the bill increases or decreases the number of business improvement districts 
established or expanded relative to current law. The amount cannot be reliably estimated 
at this time. Any additional costs for business improvement district administration is 
recoverable through taxes on the assessable base of all nonexempt real property in the 
district, as authorized under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Currently, there are no business improvement districts in 
Prince George’s County. Small businesses are affected, potentially significantly, to the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1109/ Page 6 
extent that they are included in business improvement districts established or expanded 
under the bill, relative to current law. These businesses benefit from the services provided 
by the district, but they also pay additional taxes for those services. In addition, small 
businesses included in business improvement districts may benefit from the broadened tax 
base under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6