START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1125 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1125 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Transit - Grant Funding for Local Service - Alterations 
 
   
This bill codifies the Locally Operated Transit System Grant Program in the Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT). The purpose of the program is to provide funds to 
locally operated transit systems in the State. A locally operated transit system may only 
use program funds for authorized purposes, and MDOT may source funds from specified 
federal and State programs. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill generally codifies an existing program within MDOT. Overall 
funding is not affected. MDOT anticipates providing $104.4 million in locally operated 
transit system grants in FY 2024. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill generally codifies an existing program within MDOT.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A locally operated transit system may use funds received through the grant 
program for capital expenses, operating expenses, planning expenses, and any other 
eligible expense, as determined by MDOT. MDOT may source program funds from: 
 
 
federal public transportation program, including, among others, the Urbanized Area 
Formula Program, the Intercity Bus Program, and the State Large Urban Program; 
and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1125/ Page 2 
 
State public transportation programs, including State transit operating and capital 
matching funds, the State Americans with Disabilities Act Program, and the 
Statewide Special Transportation Assistance Program.  
 
Current Law:  While not generally required in statute, MDOT provides funding to locally 
operated transit systems through a variety of federal and State programs, including, among 
others, the federal Urbanized Area Formula Program, the federal Intercity Bus Program, 
the State Large Urban Program, and the State Americans with Disabilities Act Program. 
However, Washington Area Grants to Montgomery and Prince George’s counties to assist 
with the operations of their bus systems are required by law.  
 
Specifically, subject to appropriation requirements and budgetary provisions in statute, 
MDOT is authorized to provide grants to Montgomery and Prince George’s counties to 
assist with the service deficit of eligible local bus service; each county must apply annually 
for the grants, and the grants are contingent on MDOT’s approval of the applications. 
“Eligible local bus service” means a service that (1) previously replaced comparable 
service operated by the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, as well as any 
new service added after June 30, 1989, and (2) is operated by or on behalf of and in 
Montgomery or Prince George’s counties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 939 (Senator Watson) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Association 
of Counties; Baltimore, Harford, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; cities of College Park and Frostburg; Moody’s Analytics; IHS Markit; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan   
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2