START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1115 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1115 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Libraries – Regional Resource Centers – Governance Requirements 
 
 
This bill alters the governance structure of the three public libraries designated as regional 
resource centers (e.g., Eastern Shore, Southern Maryland, Western Maryland) by 
establishing a governing board for each regional resource center. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Changing the governance structure of the regional resource centers 
does not alter the State funding formulas for the centers or change the capital project 
approval process. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Changing the governance structure has no material impact on local 
funding for the regional resource centers. It is anticipated that any expense reimbursements 
for board members can be covered using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Location of Regional Resource Centers 
 
The bill repeals the requirements that, if possible, the library selected as the regional 
resource center be the strongest library in the region and located so as to be of greatest 
service to the entire region. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1115/ Page 2 
Regional Advisory Councils 
 
The bill establishes a regional advisory council for each regional resource center for the 
purpose of gathering information on the resource needs of its region and promoting the use 
of the regional resource center. The advisory council consists of the director of the regional 
resource center and the director of each member library system. 
 
Director of Regional Resource Center 
 
The bill establishes that the director of the regional resource center is the executive officer 
of the regional resource center. The director must be appointed by the governing board and 
serves at the pleasure of the governing board. The director must (1) be eligible for 
certification as a professional library director as specified; (2) have specified powers and 
duties; and (3) appoint, promote, fix salaries, assign duties, and terminate personnel of the 
regional resource center. 
 
The director must operate the regional resource center in accordance with the standards 
adopted by the State Library Board and the policies adopted by the governing board. The 
director must (1) prepare and submit for approval of the governing board the annual budget; 
(2) adopt and submit for the approval of the governing board reasonable rules and bylaws; 
and (3) make recommendations regarding property. 
 
Policies and Procedures of the Regional Resource Center 
 
The policies and procedures of the regional resource center must be recommended by the 
board of trustees of the library designated as the regional resource center and approved by 
the advisory council. 
 
Governing Boards 
 
The bill establishes a governing board for each regional resource center. For the 
Eastern Shore and Southern Maryland regional resource centers, the governing board 
consists of the following members:  (1) a library trustee from each participating library 
system; and (2) up to one member of the public from each area served by the participating 
library system. 
 
The initial members of the governing board must be appointed by the Regional Advisory 
Council; thereafter, the governing board must appoint future board members. 
 
For the Western Maryland regional resource center, the Board of Trustees of the 
Washington County Free Library serves as the governing board. In addition, the bylaws of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1115/ Page 3 
the Washington County Free Library govern the composition, appointment, qualifications, 
terms, and structure of the governing board. 
 
Board members may not receive compensation but are entitled to expense reimbursements 
in accordance with the rules, policies, and bylaws of the regional resource center. 
 
Board members serve five-year terms that begin July 1 and until a successor is appointed 
and qualifies. Board members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. An 
individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy serves for the remainder of that term until a 
successor is appointed and qualifies and may serve for an additional two terms. 
 
A governing board must elect a chair from among its members each year and may elect 
any other officers determined necessary. If a governing board elects a treasurer, the 
treasurer must be appropriately bonded. 
 
The bill establishes requirements for operation of the governing board, including that the 
board must meet at least once every three months and the board is subject to the Open 
Meetings Act. The bill establishes a process to remove members that fail to attend at least 
50% of the scheduled meetings, although the board may waive the resignation. 
 
The governing board must conduct specified duties including selecting and appointing, at 
the advice of the State Librarian, a professional librarian to serve as director of the regional 
resource center and approving the regional resource center budget. Further a board may 
conduct specified activities including selecting the location of and approving plans for the 
erection of regional resource center buildings, subject to the approval of the State Library 
Board and the Governor. 
 
In addition to other reports that may be required by the State Library Board, as specified, 
the board must keep records, cause an annual audit, and be subject to an audit by the Office 
of Legislative Audits. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Regional Resource Centers 
 
Regional resource centers serve Western Maryland (Hagerstown), Southern Maryland 
(Charlotte Hall), and the Eastern Shore (Salisbury). Each regional resource center must 
provide, through mutual cooperation and coordination, books, information, and other 
material and services that an individual library cannot provide adequately by itself. A 
region to be served by a regional resource center must have a population of at least 100,000. 
If possible, a library selected as a regional resource center must be the strongest library in 
the region and be located so as to be of greatest service to the entire region. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1115/ Page 4 
The regional resource centers must:   
 
 
make interlibrary loans of books and materials; 
 
supply collections and exhibits of specialized materials; 
 
provide consultant services; 
 
organize in-service training for library staff; and 
 
develop and operate cooperative services among libraries. 
 
The regional resource centers received State funding of $9.19 per resident of the region in 
fiscal 2023, which totaled $9.0 million, phasing up to $9.99 per resident beginning in 
fiscal 2027. Further the State must pay all capital expenses for each regional resource 
center. Capital projects must be approved by the State Library Board. The State must be 
reimbursed an amount determined by the State Library Board if the facility ceases to be 
used for a resource center or cooperative service program. 
 
Board of Advisors 
 
There is a board of advisors for each regional resource center. Each board must:   
 
 
gather information on the resource needs of its region and the State; 
 
before State funds are distributed to it, make an annual report to the State Library 
Board that evaluates and makes recommendations on the operation of the center; 
 
recommend to the board of trustees and the State Library Board policies and 
procedure for the development and use of the regional resource centers; 
 
promote the use of the regional resource center; 
 
make recommendations regarding property; and 
 
recommend plans for the regional resource center. 
 
The head of each regional resource center is the administrator of the library designated as 
the center. The administrator must operate the regional resource center under standards 
adopted by the State Library Board. The policies and procedures of the center must be 
recommended by the board of trustees and approved by the board of advisors. 
 
Open Meetings Act, Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A “public 
body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1115/ Page 5 
Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum of 
understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of education 
and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; a rule, 
resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others. 
 
Guidance provided by the Office of the Attorney General indicates that when the meeting 
“place” is a conference call, the public can be provided access through a call-in number or 
by access to a meeting room with a speakerphone. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 831 (Senator Hershey, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; Baltimore City; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland State Library Agency; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2023 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5