START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1165 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1165 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Alcohol and Tobacco Commission – Technical Corrections and Clarifications 
 
 
This bill makes numerous technical changes, including updating obsolete references to the 
previous authority of Comptroller’s Office to reference the authority of the Executive 
Director of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC). The bill makes changes to 
specify concurrent enforcement and regulatory authority over matters related to alcohol 
and tobacco in the State. The bill also repeals an obsolete reference to alcoholic beverage 
tax stamps. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practices. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Alcohol and Tobacco Commission’s Duties – Generally 
 
Chapter 12 of 2019 established ATC, beginning June 1, 2020, and transferred personnel, 
powers, duties, and responsibilities that relate to the regulation of alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco from the Comptroller’s Office (specifically the Field Enforcement Division 
(FED)) to ATC. Chapter 12 specified that all duties and responsibilities associated with 
FED’s alcoholic beverages and tobacco regulation functions must continue under ATC. 
Employees transferred under Chapter 12 retain any merit system and retirement status they 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1165/ Page 2 
may have on the date of transfer and must be transferred without any change or loss of pay, 
working conditions, benefits, rights, or status. Furthermore, Chapter 12 specified that files, 
furniture, fixtures, records, other properties, credits, liabilities, and obligations are retained 
by the appropriate entity under the transfer. 
 
Generally, ATC must (in addition to other powers and duties transferred from the Office 
of the Comptroller by Chapter 12): 
 
 
educate the public, by resource sharing and serving as an information clearinghouse, 
about specified topics related to the use of tobacco products and the consumption of 
alcoholic beverages; 
 
subject to federal approval, ensure that all alcoholic beverages sold in the State with 
an alcohol content exceeding 4.5% by volume bear a large and conspicuous label 
stating the percentage of alcohol content; 
 
conduct studies of the operation and administration of similar laws in other states or 
countries and federal laws that may affect the State’s alcoholic beverages or tobacco 
industries, as specified; and 
 
develop best practices for various topics related to alcoholic beverages regulation, 
including the reporting of aggregate data between local police and local licensing 
boards, the development of a public health impact statement for all changes to the 
State alcoholic beverages laws, and carrying out compliance checks for alcoholic 
beverages licensees at least once each year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2