START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1288 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1288 
(Delegate Charles) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Video Lottery Employee Licenses - Crimes of Moral Turpitude - Alterations 
 
 
This bill exempts an applicant for a video lottery employee license from disqualification 
for conviction, active parole, or probation within the prior seven years or current 
prosecution for any crimes involving moral turpitude under the laws of the United States 
or of any state, if the conviction, active parole, probation, or prosecution involves a 
nonviolent misdemeanor offense, other than a crime involving gambling, for which the 
applicant participated in and completed a problem-solving court program. Problem-solving 
courts are those under the Office of Problem-Solving Courts, or a comparable program 
from another court system. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the qualifications for video lottery employee licenses is not 
anticipated to significantly alter the number of license applications and, thus, associated 
administrative costs and fee revenues are not substantially affected. Court system caseloads 
and costs are not anticipated to be substantially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To be employed by a video lottery operation licensee, an individual must 
hold a valid video lottery employee license or temporary video lottery employee license 
issued by the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC). SLGCC must deny 
a video lottery employee license to an applicant for several causes, including but not limited 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1288/ Page 2 
to the applicant’s (1) conviction, active parole, or probation for any crime involving moral 
turpitude or gambling under the laws of the United States or any state within the prior 
seven years or (2) current prosecution for any crime involving moral turpitude or gambling 
under the laws of the United States or any state, but at the request of the applicant, SLGCC 
may defer a decision on the application during the pendency of the charge. 
 
While there is no specific provision of Maryland law that defines moral turpitude, a 1996 
Attorney General’s opinion described a crime of moral turpitude as a crime “for which 
fraudulent intent is a requisite element of proof.” Black’s Law Dictionary defines “moral 
turpitude” as “conduct that is contrary to justice, honesty, or morality” and especially “an 
act that demonstrates depravity.” 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Altering the qualifications for video lottery operation employee 
licenses is not anticipated to significantly alter the number of license applications received 
by SLGCC. If the bill does alter the number of applications received, fee revenues will 
cover any associated additional costs. 
 
The Administrative Office of the Courts advises that the bill may increase requests for 
access to problem-solving courts in Maryland, but that the exact impact is difficult to 
project due to the uncertainty in the potential increase in requests and the involvement of 
related parties such as the local state’s attorney or the public defender’s office. However, 
the Judiciary does not anticipate that the bill would have a significant fiscal or operational 
impact on the trial courts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1288/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3