START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1200 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1200 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Elections - Election Judges - Minimum Compensation 
 
 
This bill establishes specified minimum compensation levels for election judges, including 
higher minimum compensation for returning election judges. The bill requires the State 
Board of Elections (SBE) to reimburse each local board of elections for half of the extra 
compensation that is paid to each returning election judge. The bill also requires SBE to 
develop and provide to the local boards a marketing campaign to recruit individuals to 
serve as election judges. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $1.6 million to 
$2.1 million annually, beginning in FY 2024. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, collectively, by approximately 
$3.2 million to $3.8 million annually, beginning in FY 2024. Revenues are not affected. 
This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Minimum Compensation 
 
The bill establishes that the compensation for each election judge who has not previously 
served as an election judge must be at least $250 per day for each Election Day and each 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1200/ Page 2 
early voting day actually served. For each election judge who has previously served as an 
election judge, the compensation for each Election Day and each early voting day actually 
served must be at least $100 more per day than the compensation provided to an election 
judge who has not previously served as an election judge. SBE must reimburse each local 
board of elections for $50 of the extra compensation that is paid to each returning election 
judge (who has previously served as an election judge). The bill also requires that an 
election judge be paid at least $50 for each course of instruction the election judge 
completes. 
 
The county governing body must provide sufficient funding to meet the minimum 
compensation levels required by the bill. Within the limits authorized by the county 
governing body, a local board may fix the compensation of election judges above the 
minimum compensation levels required by the bill. 
 
“Compensation” includes stipends for transportation, training, and bonus payments. 
 
The bill repeals existing county-specific provisions that set, in certain counties, the 
compensation or minimum compensation for election judges for each day served and/or 
the compensation for completing a course of instruction. 
 
Recruitment Marketing Campaign 
 
The bill requires SBE to develop and provide to the local boards a marketing campaign to 
recruit individuals to serve as election judges in polling places in the State. The marketing 
campaign must (1) disseminate information on the importance of election judges; 
(2) disseminate information on how to apply to be an election judge, eligibility 
requirements, and compensation; and (3) target diverse voter populations, including 
multilingual individuals. 
 
Current Law:  A local board of elections is authorized to fix the compensation of election 
judges within limits authorized by the county’s governing body. State law, however, 
specifies compensation rates, or minimum compensation rates, for election judges in 
certain counties (Allegany, Baltimore, Calvert, Harford, Prince George’s, and Washington) 
and Baltimore City, which are $250 per day or lower for each day served and $50 or lower 
for completing a course of instruction. An election judge must be paid for each 
Election Day and each early voting day that the election judge serves. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $1.6 million to 
$2.1 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2024, reflecting: 
 
 
the cost of reimbursing the local boards of elections for $50 of the minimum 
$100 extra compensation paid to each returning election judge (approximately 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1200/ Page 3 
$1.0 million to $1.4 million annually, based on information and assumptions 
discussed below, under Local Fiscal Effect); and 
 
SBE’s 50% share of the costs of developing and implementing the marketing 
campaign to recruit individuals to serve as election judges (approximately 
$0.6 million to $0.7 million annually). 
 
SBE indicates that the costs of an effective marketing campaign to recruit individuals to 
serve as election judges are expected to range from $1,250,000 to $1,350,000 in 
fiscal 2024. Those costs are assumed to be split evenly between the State and local boards 
of elections in accordance with current cost-sharing between the State and local boards. 
The estimated costs account for digital communication efforts and television and radio 
advertising, including efforts targeted toward diverse voter populations, including 
multilingual individuals. This estimate assumes that SBE develops and implements the 
marketing campaign on behalf of the local boards, with the assistance of a public relations 
team, which will allow for consistent messaging and enable SBE to monitor and track 
advertising placements in order to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of the marketing 
campaign. Similar marketing campaign costs are expected to be incurred in subsequent 
fiscal years. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, collectively, by 
approximately $3.2 million to $3.8 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2024, reflecting: 
 
 
the increase in compensation paid to election judges in counties that currently have 
election judge compensation rates lower than $250 per day (for each Election Day 
and each early voting day served) and/or course of instruction compensation rates 
below $50 ($1.6 million annually); 
 
the remaining $50 local board cost of the minimum $100 extra compensation paid 
to each returning election judge, after the $50 reimbursement from SBE 
(approximately $1.0 million to $1.4 million annually); 
 
one-time development costs billed to the local boards by SBE for modifications to 
the election judge module in the statewide voter registration system needed to track 
returning election judges and ensure they are paid appropriately ($18,300); and 
 
the local boards’ 50% share of the costs of the marketing campaign to recruit 
individuals to serve as election judges (approximately $0.6 million to $0.7 million 
annually, discussed above, under State Fiscal Effect).  
 
This estimate is based on the following information and assumptions: 
 
 
information provided by the Maryland Association of Election Officials on 
anticipated election judge compensation rates and course of instruction 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1200/ Page 4 
compensation rates in each county for the 2024 primary election (which includes 
compensation increases in certain counties that are pending budget approval);  
 
information collected by SBE in the past regarding levels of election judge staffing 
for early voting and Election Day in each county; 
 
an assumption that 50% to 75% of the election judge shifts (days) worked, are shifts 
worked by returning election judges, requiring the higher compensation rate;  
 
an assumption that local boards of elections with current planned compensation 
rates for the 2024 primary election that are higher than the $250 per day minimum 
rate pay returning election judges $100 more in comparison to the current planned 
compensation rates (and do not reduce the compensation rate for first-time judges 
to a lower rate that is still at or above the $250 minimum in order to achieve the 
$100 difference in pay between first-time and returning election judges); 
 
the election judge module in the statewide voter registration system is currently used 
by most local boards of elections to manage their election judge process, allowing 
them to track recruitment, assign judges to voting locations, and track and report 
information needed to pay election judges; and 
 
an assumption that the costs of the marketing campaign to recruit individuals to 
serve as election judges are split evenly by the State and local boards in accordance 
with current cost-sharing. 
 
The impact in fiscal 2024 and future years may be less than the amounts estimated to the 
extent that counties with current planned compensation rates for election judges below the 
minimum rates required by the bill increase their compensation rates for the 2024 or future 
elections even in the absence of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 327 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 925 (Senator A. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
State Board of Elections; Maryland Association of Election Officials; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1200/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 18, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5