START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 516

Chapter 516

(House Bill 1225)

AN ACT concerning

Real Estate Brokers – Disability or Death and Termination of Employment of a
Broker

FOR the purpose of requiring an adult family member to submit a death certificate or
evidence of disability to the State Real Estate Commission before the family member
may carry on the business of a disabled or deceased licensed real estate broker;
authorizing a certain business to designate a licensed real estate broker to provide
real estate brokerage services under certain circumstances; providing for the
designation and approval of licensed real estate brokers, subject to the surrender of
license certificates and pocket cards of terminated real estate brokers, under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to the disability or death of licensed real estate
brokers and the termination of employment of licensed real estate brokers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 17–101(a), (d), (i), and (l) and 17–511(a)(1) and (2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 17–319
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 17–319.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

17–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) “Commission” means the State Real Estate Commission.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 516 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) “Licensed real estate broker” means, unless the context requires otherwise, a
real estate broker who is licensed by the Commission to provide real estate brokerage
services.

(l) “Provide real estate brokerage services” means to engage in any of the
following activities:

(1) for consideration, providing any of the following services for another
person:

(i) selling, buying, exchanging, or leasing any real estate; or

(ii) collecting rent for the use of any real estate;

(2) for consideration, assisting another person to locate or obtain for
purchase or lease any residential real estate;

(3) engaging regularly in a business of dealing in real estate or leases or
options on real estate;

(4) engaging in a business the primary purpose of which is promoting the
sale of real estate through a listing in a publication issued primarily for the promotion of
real estate sales;

(5) engaging in a business that subdivides land that is located in any state
and sells the divided lots; or

(6) for consideration, serving as a consultant regarding any activity set
forth in items (1) through (5) of this subsection.

17–319.

(a) In this section, “disability” means a total and permanent disability that
renders a broker unable to perform real estate brokerage services.

(b) (1) Subject to [the provisions of] PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
AND subsection (c) of this section, on the disability or death of a licensed real estate broker,
any adult member of the family of the disabled or deceased broker may carry on the
business of the disabled or deceased broker for up to 6 months for the purposes of closing
and terminating the business.

(2) (I) A FAMILY MEMBER UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY NOT CARRY ON THE BUSINESS OF A DISABLED OR DECEASED
LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER UNTIL THE DEATH CERTIFICATE OR EVIDENCE OF
THE DISABILITY HAS BEEN PROVIDED TO THE COMMISSION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 516

(II) IF A DEATH CERTIFICATE OR EVIDENCE OF DISABILITY IS
NOT PROVIDED TO THE COMMISSION WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME, THE BUSINESS
MAY DESIGNATE ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER
TO PROVIDE REAL ESTATE BROKERAGE SERVICES FOR THE BUSINESS UNDER §
17–319.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(c) To qualify to carry on the business of a disabled or deceased real estate broker,
a family member shall:

(1) surrender the license certificate and pocket card of the disabled or
deceased real estate broker to the Commission; and

(2) submit to the Commission any information or documentation required
by the Commission.

(d) (1) The Commission shall reissue the license of a disabled or deceased real
estate broker to a family member who qualifies to carry on the business of the broker under
subsection (c) of this section.

(2) The term of the reissuance shall be 6 months.

(e) Before the end of the 6–month period for carrying on the business of a disabled
or deceased real estate broker, an individual may qualify for the license of the disabled or
deceased broker if:

(1) the individual is a member of the immediate family of the disabled or
deceased broker;

(2) the individual has been continuously licensed as a real estate
salesperson for the immediately preceding 3 years;

(3) regardless of whether the individual has met the educational
requirements for a real estate broker license under § 17–305 of this subtitle, the individual
passes the real estate broker’s examination under § 17–306 of this subtitle;

(4) the individual surrenders the real estate salesperson license certificate
and pocket card of the individual to the Commission; and

(5) there has been compliance with the requirements of subsection (c) of
this section.

(f) The Commission shall reissue the license of a disabled or deceased real estate
broker to an individual who qualifies for the license of the broker under subsection (e) of
this section.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 516 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(g) (1) An individual who qualifies for and is reissued the license of a disabled
or deceased real estate broker may hold the license for up to 4 years from the time of
reissuance without meeting the educational requirements for a real estate broker license
under § 17–305 of this subtitle.

(2) Subject to the 4–year restriction under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
an individual who has been reissued the license of a disabled or deceased real estate broker
is responsible for renewing the license as required under § 17–314 of this subtitle.

(3) If an individual who has been reissued the license of a disabled or
deceased real estate broker does not meet the educational requirements for a real estate
broker license within the 4–year period, the license shall expire automatically at the end of
that period.

(4) If an individual who has been reissued the license of a disabled or
deceased real estate broker meets the educational requirements for a real estate broker
license within the 4–year period, the individual may continue to hold the license and may
renew the license under § 17–314 of this subtitle.

17–319.1.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, IF A LICENSED REAL
ESTATE BROKER IS TERMINATED BY A BUSINESS FOR ANY REASON, THE BUSINESS
MAY DESIGNATE ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER
TO PROVIDE REAL ESTATE BROKERAGE SERVICES FOR THE BUSINESS.

(B) (1) IF THE LICENSE CERTIFICATE AND POCKET CARD OF A
TERMINATED REAL ESTATE BROKER ARE SURRENDERED TO THE COMMISSION, THE
COMMISSION SHALL APPROVE THE DESIGNATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.

(2) IF THE LICENSE CERTIFICATE AND POCKET CARD OF A
TERMINATED REAL ESTATE BROKER ARE NOT SURRENDERED TO THE COMMISSION,
THE COMMISSION SHALL APPROVE THE DESIGNATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION ONLY IF:

(I) THE DESIGNATED LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER IS IN
GOOD STANDING WITH THE COMMISSION;

(II) THE BUSINESS NOTIFIES THE COMMISSION OF THE REASON
FOR THE TERMINATION OF THE REAL ESTATE BROKER; AND

(III) THE DESIGNATION OF THE LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER
COMPLIES WITH ALL APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 516

(C) A LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER WHO HAS BEEN DESIGNATED BY A
BUSINESS UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO ALL OF THE
APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE THAT RELATE TO REAL ESTATE BROKERS.

17–511.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Business” means a person or entity, regardless of legal structure,
through which real estate brokerage services are provided.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5