START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1217 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1217 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Required 
Coverage for Biomarker Testing 
 
 
This bill requires insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers), beginning January 1, 2024, and Medicaid 
(including managed care organizations (MCOs)), beginning July 1, 2025, to provide 
coverage for “biomarker testing” for the purpose of diagnosis, treatment, appropriate 
management, or ongoing monitoring of a disease or condition that is supported by medical 
and scientific evidence. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must submit a 
specified report on Medicaid and biomarker testing by December 1, 2024. The Maryland 
Health Care Commission (MHCC) must report on the impact of providing biomarker 
testing by December 1, 2025. The bill takes effect January 1, 2024; the bill’s insurance 
provisions apply to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, 
or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH and MHCC can submit the required reports using existing budgeted 
resources. Medicaid expenditures (60% federal funds, 40% general funds) increase by an 
indeterminate but potentially significant amount beginning in FY 2026 to cover biomarker 
testing, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. Expenditures are 
likely offset by indeterminate savings. Minimal special fund revenue increase for the 
Maryland Insurance Administration in FY 2024 only from the $125 rate and form filing 
fee. Review of form filings can be handled with existing budgeted resources. There is no 
impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. This bill 
may increase the cost of an entitlement program beginning in FY 2026. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent the mandate increases the cost of health insurance, 
expenditures for local governments that purchase fully insured medical plans may increase. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1217/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Coverage of Biomarker Testing 
 
“Biomarker” means a characteristic that is objectively measured and evaluated as an 
indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic 
responses to a specific therapeutic intervention, including known gene-drug interactions 
for medications being considered for use or already being administered and includes gene 
mutations, characteristics of genes, or protein expression. 
 
“Biomarker testing” is the analysis of a patient’s tissue, blood, or other biospecimen for 
the presence of a biomarker, the results of which (1) provide information that may be used 
in the formulation of a treatment or monitoring strategy that informs a patient’s outcome 
and impacts the clinical decision and (2) include both information that is actionable and 
some information that cannot be immediately used in the formulation of a clinical decision. 
“Biomarker testing” includes single-analyte tests, multi-plex panel tests, protein 
expression, and whole exome, whole genome, and whole transcriptome sequencing. 
 
Coverage of biomarker testing must include testing (1) cleared or approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA); (2) required or recommended for an 
FDA-approved drug to ensure the insured or enrollee is a good candidate for the drug 
treatment; (3) required or recommended through a warning or precaution for an 
FDA-approved drug to identify whether an insured or enrollee will have an adverse 
reaction to the drug treatment or dosage; (4) covered under a Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services national coverage determination or Medicare administrative contractor 
local coverage determination; or (5) supported by nationally recognized clinical practice 
guidelines, as specified. 
 
Coverage must be provided in a manner that limits disruptions in care, including the need 
for multiple biopsies or biospecimen samples. Coverage may be subject to the 
annual deductibles, copayments, or coinsurance requirements imposed by a carrier for 
similar coverage under the same health insurance policy or contract but may not be greater 
than those imposed for similar coverage. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 1, 2024, MDH must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
the following:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1217/ Page 3 
 
the fiscal impact of the biomarker testing coverage required under the bill on 
Medicaid’s policy on biomarker testing coverage for specific cancers during 
fiscal 2024; 
 
any available data on use of biomarker testing by race and ethnicity in Medicaid; 
 
the anticipated fiscal and access impacts of expanding Medicaid coverage for 
biomarker testing in fiscal 2026, as specified under the bill;  
 
whether to establish a cap on the amount of reimbursement for biomarker testing 
coverage and, if recommended, the recommended cap amount and the anticipated 
fiscal and access issues of establishing the cap; and 
 
recommendations on any legislative changes to the bill’s requirements relating to 
Medicaid, including MCOs. 
 
By December 1, 2025, MHCC must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the  
House Health and Government Operations Committee on the impact of providing coverage 
of biomarker testing, including an analysis of the impact of providing access to individuals 
based on race, gender, age, and public or private insurance. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 
10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services in the following 
categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; (3) hospitalization; 
(4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use disorder services, 
including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and 
habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness 
services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services, including dental and 
vision care. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that it is in the process of implementing Medicaid 
coverage of biomarker testing for cancer treatment when used to determine if a specific 
medication or therapy will be more effective in treatment, thereby guiding clinical 
management. MDH will cover tests that are FDA-approved, approved by Medicare, and 
meet specific National Comprehensive Cancer Network cancer guidelines. The testing 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1217/ Page 4 
facility must meet Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments Standards, and the 
companion drug or therapy must be approved by FDA and Medicare. 
 
Under the bill, beginning July 1, 2025, Medicaid, subject to the limitations of the State 
budget and as permitted by federal law, must provide coverage for biomarker testing for 
all diseases and conditions (if the use of the testing is supported by medical and scientific 
evidence), including autoimmune diseases, cardiovascular diseases, kidney diseases, 
infectious diseases, metabolic diseases, and behavioral health. As many of these diseases 
and conditions are prevalent in the Medicaid population, and an individual may require 
more than one biomarker test for certain diseases or conditions or need tests for more than 
one disease or condition in a year, MDH anticipates a significant fiscal impact. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, as of December 2022, there were 1,586,005 Medicaid 
enrollees. Should 1% of enrollees receive one biomarker test at a cost of $1,700 per test, 
Medicaid expenditures increase by almost $27.0 million on an annual basis. MDH advises 
that uptake of biomarker testing could be as high as 25% of Medicaid enrollees (at an 
estimated total annual cost of $429.6 million) and that 10% of Medicaid enrollees younger 
than age 18 with an emergency department visit will receive a biomarker test (at an 
estimated total annual cost of $30.6 million). 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that coverage of biomarker testing is likely 
offset by savings (or cost avoidance) as the tests are intended to diagnose, treat, and manage 
diseases and conditions; facilitate the use of more effective and targeted health care 
treatments; and help avoid use of therapies that may be unsafe or ineffective for specific 
patients. However, any such savings and, thus, the net impact on Medicaid expenditures 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 805 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1217/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5