START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1219 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1219 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Educator Shortage Reduction Act of 2023 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes the Teacher Development and Retention Program as a 
pilot program to encourage college students to pursue teaching careers and makes a number 
of additional changes related to the recruitment and retention of teachers, including 
prekindergarten teachers, and school-based mental health professionals. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023; the Teacher Development and Retention Program terminates 
June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $15.0 million in FY 2024 due to 
contingent funding in the FY 2024 budget, $10.0 million of which is allocated to the newly 
established Teacher Development and Retention Fund for stipends and administration. 
Based on one set of assumptions, general fund expenditures increase by an additional 
$694,100 in FY 2024 for program evaluation costs, the data dashboard, and information 
technology (IT) contract costs. General fund expenditures are maintained at $5.2 million 
in FY 2025 and 2026 due to other program constraints and elimination of one-time costs. 
Special fund expenditures increase commensurate with most costs of the pilot program. 
Special fund revenues increase when additional general funds are required to maintain the 
program. Higher education revenues and expenditures may increase, as discussed below. 
Out-years reflect termination of the pilot program and staffing costs continuing. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$10.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$2.1 
Higher Ed Rev. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$15.7 
$5.2 
$5.2 
$0.2 
$2.4 
SF Expenditure 
$1.3 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$4.2 
$4.2 
Higher Ed Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($7.0) 
($6.4) 
($6.4) 
($4.4) 
($4.6) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1219/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local school systems can likely report the required information using 
existing resources; however, resources may be directed from current priorities. Local 
school revenues are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
disagrees with this assessment as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the bill (1) changes alternative teacher preparation programs; 
(2) requires teacher preparation programs to set recruitment and retention goals; 
(3) requires establishment of an educator dashboard; (4) delays – by two years – 
requirements for highly qualified prekindergarten teachers and teaching assistants; 
(5) expands the eligibility for – and renames – the Nancy Grasmick Teacher Award within 
the Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program (LARP) to include specified 
mental health professionals and makes other changes to the award; (6) makes changes to 
the Maryland Teaching Fellows scholarship; and (7) establishes the Teacher Development 
and Retention Program and related special fund. 
 
Alternative Teacher Preparation Programs 
 
The bill expands the entities that may establish an alternative teacher preparation program 
to include an institution of higher education or a nonprofit organization. The bill also 
expands what constitutes a “partner school” for a teacher preparation program to include 
an eligible prekindergarten provider. 
 
Under the bill, an alternative teacher preparation program for an early childhood education 
certification must require each participant to successfully (1) complete a teacher training 
practicum or (2) satisfy criteria established by the Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE) that evaluate the knowledge and skills from prior learning relating to 
early childhood education. MSDE, in collaboration with institutions of higher education, 
must establish standards for and criteria to evaluate the knowledge and skills from prior 
learning relating to early childhood education, including from a registered apprenticeship. 
 
Goals for the Recruitment and Retention of Teachers 
 
MSDE, in collaboration with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC), must 
establish specific goals for the recruitment and retention of teachers in teacher preparation 
programs throughout the State. MSDE must work with a teacher preparation program that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1219/ Page 3 
fails to meet the goals to develop an action plan that demonstrates how the teacher 
preparation program will do so. 
 
Maryland Educator Recruitment, Retention, and Diversity Dashboard 
 
MSDE must establish, by January 1, 2025, and then maintain a Maryland Educator 
Recruitment, Retention, and Diversity Dashboard. The dashboard must include 
demographic information and key data points regarding (1) certificated and noncertificated 
personnel in public schools and (2) prospective educators within teacher preparation 
programs throughout the State who are participating in teacher internships. The dashboard 
may not include any demographic information that could be used to identify specific 
individuals (i.e., any demographic that is less than 5% of the relevant population may be 
reported simply as “<5%”). 
 
By December 1, 2024, and each December 1 thereafter, each local board of education must 
report to MSDE demographic and job status information on educators employed by, and 
teacher interns placed in, the public schools within the jurisdiction of the local board during 
the previous school year. Each local board of education must report the information 
disaggregated by specified categories, including school, race, and status on the career 
ladder. 
 
High Staff Qualifications for Prekindergarten Teachers and Teaching Assistants 
 
The bill delays by two years, to the 2027-2028 school year, the requirement that specified 
prekindergarten providers have specified high staff qualifications (described under Current 
Law) for teachers and teaching assistants. 
 
Student Loan Repayment for Mental Health Professionals 
 
The bill expands eligibility for the Nancy Grasmick Teacher Award within the 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP to include any mental health professional who provides mental 
health services in public schools and is employed by a local school system or a local health 
department to provide school health services through an agreement with a local board of 
education. “Mental health professional” includes a school psychologist, resource 
psychologist, psychologist coordinator, social worker, social worker supervisor, school 
counselor, or mental health coordinator. Thus, the Nancy Grasmick Teacher Award is 
renamed the Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award. 
 
The bill makes several changes to eligibility requirements for the award. The bill repeals 
the requirement that, to be eligible, a teacher must have received the highest performance 
evaluation rating for the most recent year available. The bill expands the loans eligible for 
repayment, for a mental health professional, to include any accredited college or university. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1219/ Page 4 
As with teachers, to receive a Nancy Grasmick Award, a mental health professional much 
have provided mental health services in a public school for at least two years as specified. 
In addition, the bill removes the cap on the percentage of LARP awards that can be 
Nancy Grasmick awards. 
 
The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) within MHEC must publicize the 
availability of the program to eligible mental health professionals in an effort to recruit and 
retain mental health professionals to public schools in the State. 
 
Teaching Fellows for Maryland Scholarship Program 
 
The bill significantly modifies the Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship, allowing 
more students to qualify and changing the parameters of their related service obligation. 
 
Service Obligation:  Under the bill, the Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship 
encompasses students who pledge to work as public school or public prekindergarten 
teachers in the State upon completion of their studies at (1) a high-needs school, as 
identified by MSDE or (2) in a grade level or content area in which there is a shortage of 
qualified educators, as identified by MSDE. Under the current program, the service 
obligation is limited to teaching at schools that have at least 50% of their students eligible 
for free or reduced-price meals (FRPM), which is repealed by the bill in favor of the 
high-needs school and grade level and content areas to be identified by MSDE. 
 
Each year, MSDE must submit to OSFA separate lists of high-needs schools as well as 
grade levels and content areas in which there are a significant proportion of teacher 
vacancies and teachers teaching in a grade level or content area other than the grade level 
or content area in which they are certificated. 
 
The service obligation for undergraduate recipients is modified from one year for every 
year of award to two years for everyone, regardless of how many years an award was 
received. 
 
If a recipient is unable to perform the service obligation requirement because there are no 
available positions in a qualifying school, grade level, or content area, the recipient may 
work in any public school or public prekindergarten program in the State. If a recipient 
performs the service obligation by teaching at a school or in a grade level or content area 
previously identified as high needs that is no longer identified as such, the recipient may 
continue to teach in that school, grade level, or content area without being required to repay 
the scholarship funds. 
 
Also, a recipient of a Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship who is performing the 
service obligation in effect before the July 1, 2023 effective date of the bill must be 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1219/ Page 5 
considered compliant with the terms of the scholarship award and may not be required to 
repay the scholarship funds. 
 
Eligibility and Awards:  In selecting awardees for a Teaching Fellows for Maryland 
scholarship, OSFA must give preference to applicants, as specified, who have been 
employed in a public school or a publicly funded prekindergarten within the last five years. 
 
The bill changes some of the eligibility requirements for the scholarship. Specifically, it 
repeals the requirement that a recipient be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a 
Maryland high school and broadens the academic requirements, such that, under the bill, a 
recipient must only continue to make satisfactory progress toward a degree and maintain 
the standards of the institution. 
 
Accordingly, the bill alters the renewal requirements for the scholarship by repealing the 
requirement that a renewal recipient continue to be a Maryland resident or have graduated 
from a Maryland high school. The bill further alters the renewal requirements to conform 
with the initial renewal requirements established under the bill. 
 
OSFA must focus on publicizing the scholarship (1) at historically Black colleges and 
universities in the State; (2) to teaching assistants and other educational support staff 
currently working in public schools and publicly funded prekindergarten programs; and 
(3) in a manner that promotes the program to students who are members of groups that are 
underrepresented in the teaching profession. OSFA must collaborate with MSDE in 
publicizing the scholarship. 
 
Teacher Development and Retention Program 
 
The bill establishes the Teacher Development and Retention Program as a pilot program 
(in effect for six years until it terminates June 30, 2029) to incentivize a cohort of students 
to pursue a career in the teaching profession. Its stated purpose is to provide support to 
eligible individuals who ultimately pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a teacher 
employed full time in a high-needs school, grade level, or content area in the State in which 
there is a shortage of teachers, as identified by MSDE. More specifically, the program must 
provide financial support (i.e., initial stipend and internship stipend) to eligible individuals 
interested in pursuing a career in the teaching profession, beginning by offering eligible 
individuals a one-time stipend for participation in an experiential learning opportunity in a 
classroom and concluding by placing those individuals in high-needs schools, grade levels, 
or content areas. 
 
OSFA must establish eligibility criteria for the program, including requirements for an 
applicant to (1) be enrolled in the first or second year at an institution of initial eligibility 
(where at least 40% of the attendees receive federal Pell Grants) in an associate or 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1219/ Page 6 
bachelor’s degree program and (2) before receiving an educator internship stipend 
established by the bill, pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a teacher employed full time 
in a high-needs school, grade level, or content area in which there is a shortage of teachers, 
as identified by MSDE, for a minimum of two years. 
 
OSFA must administer the program, including developing processes for eligible 
individuals to apply for the program and for awarding stipends to those who meet the 
eligibility criteria. OSFA must give preference to applicants who have been employed in a 
public school or a publicly funded prekindergarten program within the last five years. 
 
Initial Stipend:  Over a three-year period, specifically from the 2023-2024 school year 
through the 2025-2026 school year, a recipient who is selected for support under the 
program must receive an initial stipend to support the recipient’s participation in an 
experiential learning opportunity in a public school or publicly funded prekindergarten 
classroom. The experiential learning opportunity must (1) occur within the first or second 
year of the recipient’s enrollment in an institution of initial eligibility (where at least 40% 
of the attendees receive federal Pell Grants) and (2) contribute to the education of the 
students in the classroom in which the recipient participates. The purpose of the initial 
stipend is to nurture in the recipient a passion for becoming a teacher. If the institution of 
initial eligibility has a written agreement with a public partner school or publicly funded 
prekindergarten program for a teacher training program, as specified, then the recipient’s 
experiential learning opportunity must be in a classroom within the partner school. OSFA 
must determine the amount of the initial stipends awarded. 
 
Internship Stipend:  Subsequently, over another three-year period, specifically from the 
2026-2027 school year through the 2028-2029 school year, a program recipient is eligible 
for an internship stipend if the program recipient (1) is currently enrolled in a teacher 
preparation program at an institution of higher education in the State that, through its course 
of study, leads to a Maryland professional teacher’s certificate (accordingly, a recipient 
may have transferred from an institution of initial eligibility to another institution); (2) is 
currently engaged in an internship or a practicum providing direct experience working with 
students in a public school or publicly funded prekindergarten program as part of the 
recipient’s course of study; (3) continues to make satisfactory progress toward a degree 
and maintain the standards of the institution; and (4) pledges to fulfill a service obligation 
for two years as a teacher employed full time in a high-needs school, grade level, or content 
area in which there is a shortage of teachers, as identified by MSDE. A program recipient 
who meets the requirements receives an internship stipend of up to $20,000 for a 10-month 
educator internship. If the recipient of an internship stipend does not fulfill the service 
obligation, the recipient must repay MHEC the internship stipend funds received, as 
specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1219/ Page 7 
Service Obligation:  In order to ensure that program recipients fulfill the service obligation, 
MSDE must submit to OSFA a list of (1) high-needs schools in which there are a significant 
proportion of teacher vacancies and teachers teaching in a grade level or content area other 
than the grade level or content area in which they are certificated and (2) grade levels and 
content areas in which there are a significant proportion of teacher vacancies and teachers 
teaching in a grade level or content area other than the grade level or content area in which 
they are certificated. 
 
Evaluation:  By July 1, 2028, MHEC must hire an independent consultant to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the pilot program in attracting new teachers to the profession. By 
January 1, 2029, MHEC must report the results of the evaluation to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. 
 
Funding and Special Fund:  Funding for the program is as provided in the State budget. 
However, the Teacher Development and Retention Fund is established as a special, 
nonlapsing fund that is administered by MHEC. The fund consists of (1) money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (2) interest earnings of the fund; and (3) any 
other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be 
used only to administer the program and provide support to recipients under the program. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Teacher Preparation Programs 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Chapter 36 of 2021) established requirements for 
teacher preparation programs at institutions of higher education and alternative teacher 
preparation programs, including course content, teacher training practicums, and mentor 
teacher selection criteria. Teacher training practicums must be of a specified duration, set 
to increase within five years from enactment, and developed in collaboration with local 
school systems and nonpublic schools. Practicums are to be designed to give participants 
exposure to diverse teaching opportunities, similar to teaching experiences in a variety of 
schools with diverse student populations across the State. In selecting partner schools for 
practicums, priority must be given to schools in the same community as the teacher 
preparation program. 
 
Alternative teacher preparation programs are programs established by a local board of 
education and approved by the State Superintendent of Schools that lead to a participant 
receiving a Resident Teacher Certificate issued by MSDE and include teaching 
assignments with supervision and mentoring by a qualified teacher. A “partner school” is 
a local school system, nonpublic school, or nonpublic special education school that has a 
written partnership agreement with an institution of higher education or alternative teacher 
preparation program to provide a teacher training practicum. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1219/ Page 8 
High Staff Qualifications for Prekindergarten Teachers 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future also established that all prekindergarten providers 
eligible for specified funding must include structural elements that are evidence-based and 
nationally recognized as important for ensuring program quality. Beginning with the 
2025-2026 school year, an eligible prekindergarten provider must have high staff 
qualifications for teachers and teaching assistants. Teachers must hold, at a minimum 
(1) State certification for teaching in early childhood education or (2) a bachelor’s degree 
in any field and be pursuing residency through the Maryland Approved Alternative 
Preparation Program, which includes early childhood coursework, clinical practice, and 
evidence of pedagogical content knowledge. Teaching assistants must have at least (1) a 
child development associate certificate or (2) an associate degree. 
 
Loan Assistance Repayment Program – Generally  
 
LARP provides loan repayment assistance in exchange for certain service commitments to 
help ensure that underserved areas of the State have sufficient numbers of primary care 
physicians, physician assistants, dentists, lawyers, police officers, and other professionals 
serving those areas or low-income families. The program is subdivided into the 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP, the Maryland Dent-Care LARP, the Maryland LARP for 
Physicians and Physician Assistants, and the Maryland LARP for Police Officers. 
Individuals must have received a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a 
college or university in the State or a school of law or have received a Resident Teacher 
Certificate from MSDE after completing an approved alternative teaching preparation 
program. Except for the Maryland LARP for Police Officers, they must also be employed 
full time in State or local government or in a nonprofit organization that assists 
low-income, underserved residents or underserved areas in the State. For the 
Maryland LARP for Police Officers, individuals must obtain employment as a police 
officer in the State for at least two years and satisfy any other criteria OSFA establishes. 
 
Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
 
The Janet L. Hoffman LARP is administered by OSFA to assist in the repayment of any 
higher education loan owed by an individual who:   
 
 
(1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college or 
university in the State, or a law school or (2) receives a Resident Teacher Certificate 
from MSDE after completing an approved alternative teaching preparation program; 
 
obtains eligible employment; 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1219/ Page 9 
 
receives an income less than the maximum eligible total income levels established 
by the office, including any additional sources of income; and 
 
satisfies any other criteria established. 
 
Eligible employment fields include lawyers, degree- or diploma-holding registered nurses, 
licensed clinical therapists, physical and occupational therapists, social workers, speech 
pathologists, and teachers. A licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed 
clinical marriage and family therapy counselor, or a licensed clinical professional 
counselor whose practice is located in a high-need geographic area of the State as 
determined by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may receive assistance under 
the program. 
 
For the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, awards are determined by an applicant’s overall reported 
educational debt at the time of application. Award funds are distributed annually over a 
three-year period as long as the recipient remains eligible and continues to submit the 
required annual employment, lender, and tax documentation by the deadline. 
 
Chapter 496 of 2012 established the Nancy Grasmick Teacher Award within 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP for Maryland public school teachers who have taught in Maryland 
for at least two years in (1) science, technology, engineering, or mathematics subjects or 
(2) a school in which at least 75% of the students are enrolled in the free and reduced-price 
meal program. A teacher must also have received the highest performance evaluation rating 
for the most recent year available. 
 
Teaching Fellows for Maryland Scholarship Program 
 
The Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship may only be used at a public senior 
(i.e., four-year) higher education institution with a department, school, or college of 
education or at a private nonprofit institution of higher education with a certificate of 
approval from MHEC that has a department, school, or college of education that agrees to 
provide recipients with a specified matching grant. The matching grant provided by a 
private nonprofit institution of higher education for an undergraduate or graduate student 
must be the lesser of (1) 100% of the annual cost of tuition and mandatory fees at the 
University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP) or (2) 50% of the cost of tuition 
and mandatory fees at the private nonprofit institution of higher education. The scholarship 
may not be used at a community college. 
 
If an eligible institution enrolls at least 15 recipients of a Teaching Fellows for Maryland 
scholarship, the institution must develop and implement an enriched honors program of 
education that is responsive to exceptional dedication and merit-based accomplishment in 
the study of education and preparation for the teaching profession. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1219/ Page 10 
Eligibility Criteria:  To be eligible for a Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship, an 
individual must have graduated from a Maryland high school or be a Maryland resident. 
An applicant must have earned an overall grade point average of at least 3.3 on a 4.0 scale 
or its equivalent either in high school or as an undergraduate, as applicable. In addition, an 
applicant must achieve at least (1) 500 on the reading and math portions of the SAT, with 
a combined score of at least 1100 on the reading and math portions of the SAT; (2) a 
composite ACT score of 25; or (3) 50% on the graduate record examination. OSFA in 
MHEC is required, to the extent practicable, to award scholarships in a manner that reflects 
ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity. 
 
Service Obligation Requirements:  For each year a scholarship is awarded, a teaching 
fellow under the program must complete the service obligation at a public school or public 
prekindergarten program that has at least 50% of the students in the school eligible for 
FRPM. However, if a recipient is unable to perform the service obligation because there 
are no available positions in a school that has at least 50% of its students eligible for FRPM, 
the recipient may work in any public school or public prekindergarten program in the State. 
 
Award Amount:  The annual award amount at a public four-year institution in the State that 
has a department, school, or college of education must be 100% of the equivalent annual 
tuition, mandatory fees, and room and board of a resident undergraduate student or 
graduate student, as appropriate, at the public four-year higher education institution.  
 
For private nonprofit institutions of higher education in the State that have a department, 
school, or college of education and agree to provide the specified matching grant, the 
annual award amount must be 100% of the room and board of a resident undergraduate or 
graduate student, as appropriate, at the eligible private nonprofit institution of higher 
education and the lesser of (1) 100% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory fees 
of a resident undergraduate student or graduate student, as appropriate, at UMCP or 
(2) 50% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory fees of a resident undergraduate or 
graduate student, as appropriate, at the eligible private nonprofit institution of higher 
education 
 
Use of Scholarship Funds:  A Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship may be used for 
tuition, mandatory fees, and room and board at any eligible institution. 
 
The amount the Governor is required to appropriate to the Teaching Fellows for Maryland 
scholarship program escalates from at least $12.0 million in fiscal 2024 to at least 
$18.0 million in fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter. 
 
Background:  As in other states, Maryland’s local school systems are currently 
experiencing a shortage of both teachers and noninstructional staff. As of May 2022, there 
were almost 2,000 open teaching positions, accounting for 3.2% of teacher positions 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1219/ Page 11 
statewide. Teacher preparation, recruitment, retention, and retirement are all reasons for 
teacher shortages; for noninstructional staff, low wages and high turnover are the primary 
factors. Although Maryland is investing in long-term solutions to address teacher shortages 
through the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future, and local school systems have offered 
incentives to encourage staff retention, vacancies persist. 
 
In Maryland, an insufficient supply of new teachers and a high number of teachers exiting 
the profession have resulted in a significant number of teacher vacancies. 
 
Over the past 10 years, Maryland experienced a 33% decrease in total enrollment in teacher 
preparation programs. Due to this decrease, the supply of teachers is not keeping pace with 
local school system demand, a trend seen across the United States. Since the 2017-2018 
school year, approximately 9% of Maryland teachers have not returned to teach in 
Maryland in the following year, excluding teachers who moved between local school 
systems or schools. This pattern continued in the 2021-2022 school year, with 
5,516 Maryland teachers (8.8%) exiting teaching at the end of the school year. Of that 
amount, 2,163 (39%) voluntarily resigned; 1,406 (26%) left for education-related 
employment; 1,132 (21%) retired; and 815 (14%) exited for other reasons or were 
terminated. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by a total of $15.7 million in 
fiscal 2024, which includes $15.0 million in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly that is contingent on the enactment of the Maryland Educator Shortage 
Act (Senate Bill 893/House Bill 1219). These expenditures include:   
 
 
$10.0 million for the Teacher Development and Retention Fund; 
 
$5.0 million for the Grasmick Teacher Award – Janet L. Hoffman LARP; and 
 
based on one set of assumptions, $694,067 for costs not covered by budgeted funds, 
program evaluation costs, the data dashboard, and one-time IT contract costs. 
 
These budgeted and additional general fund expenditures are shown in Exhibit 1 and 
discussed in greater detail by agency in the discussion that follows. 
 
General fund expenditures are maintained at $5.2 million in fiscal 2025 and 2026 due to 
the elimination of one-time costs and an existing requirement for Janet L. Hoffman LARP 
awards, unchanged by the bill, to be provided for three years. Out-year general fund 
expenditures reflect ongoing program evaluation costs and $75,000 for annual data 
dashboard maintenance, the termination of the pilot program on June 30, 2029, and staffing 
costs continuing. If more than one cohort is awarded under the LARP for Grasmick awards, 
then even more additional funding is required. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1219/ Page 12 
This estimate assumes that the $10.0 million in general funds for the Teacher Development 
and Retention Program Fund capitalizes the special fund and is available to support the 
program in fiscal 2024 and future years; accordingly, special fund revenues increase by 
$10.0 million in fiscal 2024. Based on one set of assumptions explained in further detail 
below, the pilot program (excluding related program evaluation costs) is estimated to cost 
a total of $16.3 million over the life of the program; thus, a total of $6.3 million in 
additional general funds are assumed to be required to capitalize the special fund to support 
the program, spread across fiscal 2028 and 2029. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Total Fiscal 2024 General Fund Expenditures 
 
Teacher Development and Retention Fund1 
$10,000,000 
Nancy Grasmick Award2 
5,000,000 
Program Evaluation 
175,000 
Additional MDCAPS Programing3 
19,067 
Total FY 2024 MHEC General Fund Expenditures 
$15,194,067 
Data Dashboard 
$500,000 
Total FY 2024 MSDE General Fund Expenditures 
$500,000 
Total FY 2024 General Fund Expenditures 
$15,694,067 
 
MDCAPS:  Maryland College Aid Processing System 
MHEC:  Maryland Higher Education Commission 
MSDE:  Maryland State Department of Education 
 
1 Included in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly. 
2 Included in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly. 
3 One-time programming costs for Maryland College Aid Processing System, exclude $45,000 in 
programing costs for the Teacher Development and Retention Program, as this amount is assumed to be 
eligible to be covered by the $10.0 million in budgeted funds. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Special fund expenditures increase by an estimated $1.3 million in fiscal 2024, increasing 
to $4.2 million in fiscal 2027 (reflecting an assumed $20,000 for each of the internship 
stipends) and ceasing in fiscal 2030 (reflecting the June 30, 2029 termination date). Higher 
education revenues and expenditures may also increase, as discussed below. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1219/ Page 13 
This estimate reflects budgeted funding and the costs of (1) developing and maintaining 
the data dashboard; (2) administering and evaluating the Teacher Development and 
Retention Program; (3) paying stipends under that pilot program; (4) the need for ongoing 
funding for Grasmick awards due to the additional funding provided in the fiscal 2024 
budget; and (5) procuring one-time IT updates of the Maryland College Aid Processing 
System (MDCAPS) to reflect changes to the Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship 
and Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award within the Janet L. Hoffman 
LARP. 
 
Maryland State Department of Education – Data Dashboard 
 
MSDE advises that the cost to establish the diversity dashboard is estimated at $500,000 
with an annual maintenance cost of $75,000. Accordingly, general fund expenditures 
increase by $500,000 in fiscal 2024 to ensure completion by the deadline and $75,000 
annually thereafter. 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $15.0 million in 
general fund appropriations for MHEC:  $10.0 million for the Teacher Development and 
Retention Fund and $5.0 million for the Nancy Grasmick Award – Janet L. Hoffman LARP, 
all contingent on the enactment of the Maryland Educator Shortage Act 
(Senate Bill 893/House Bill 1219). In addition, MHEC general fund expenditures increase 
by an estimated $194,067 in fiscal 2024 due to the program evaluation costs for that year 
($175,000) and one-time IT costs ($19,067) that are not budgeted (and, in the case of 
program evaluation costs, not eligible to be covered with the special fund). Thus, overall 
MHEC general fund expenditures increase by $15.2 million in fiscal 2024. As discussed 
further below, MHEC general fund expenditures are assumed to be maintained at 
$5.1 million for at least two years. 
 
The $10.0 million in general funds budgeted in fiscal 2024 for the Teacher Development 
and Retention Fund capitalizes the new special fund, with unexpended monies carrying 
forward each year, and equates to approximately two-thirds of assumed expenditures for 
stipends through June 30, 2029. Additional general funds are needed to cover all related 
pilot program costs, most of which run through the special fund as well:  the balance of 
expenditures for stipends (another $5.2 million in total); administrative costs, which are an 
allowable expense under the special fund (another $1.1 million in total); and program 
evaluation costs each year, which are not allowable special fund expenditures (another 
$1.0 million in total). Accordingly, when the $10.0 million in the new special fund is 
exhausted, an additional $6.3 million in general funds to further capitalize the special fund 
is required ($2.1 million in fiscal 2028 and $4.2 million in fiscal 2029). Thus, special fund 
revenues increase in fiscal 2024 – by $10.0 million – and again in fiscal 2028 and 2029. 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 1219/ Page 14 
Special fund expenditures increase from fiscal 2024 through 2029 due to program costs 
incurred each year, as explained below. 
 
 
Teacher Development and Retention Program 
 
Most costs associated with the new pilot program are expected to be covered with monies 
from the new special fund. However, as noted below, program evaluation costs are 
assumed to be covered directly with general fund expenditures each year. 
 
Staffing:  MHEC advises that it requires two additional full-time regular staff to administer 
the new Teacher Development and Retention Program. Although the program is temporary, 
it lasts for more than five years, so regular (rather than contractual) staff are appropriate. 
Accordingly, this estimate reflects the cost of hiring a staff specialist and an administrative 
officer beginning July 1, 2023. Further, even though the pilot program terminates, the new 
positions do not; instead, these staff are assumed to be redirected to other MHEC priorities. 
 
Eligibility:  The pilot program consists of initial (and subsequent internship) stipends for 
individuals who begin their teacher preparation at an institution in the State where at least 
40% of the attendees receive a federal Pell Grant. MHEC publishes the percentage of 
attendees who receive a federal Pell Grant; as shown in Exhibit 2, in 2019-2020 (the latest 
data available), eight institutions of higher education had at least 40% of attendees 
receiving a federal Pell Grant:  two community colleges; four public four-year institutions; 
and two private nonprofit institutions. In 2021, approximately 1,150 students were enrolled 
in teacher preparation programs in these eight institutions. 
 
 
Exhibit 2  
Institutions of Higher Education with  
40% or More of Undergraduates Receiving a Federal Pell Grant in 2019-2020 
 
Institution 
% Receiving Pell Grant 
Bowie State University 
49.0% 
Coppin State University 
58.6% 
Garrett College 
41.6% 
Hood College 
40.5% 
Morgan State University 
51.6% 
University of Baltimore 
40.6% 
University of Maryland Eastern Shore 
50.6% 
Washington Adventist University 
46.8% 
Wor-Wic Community College 
42.5% 
 
Source:  Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 1219/ Page 15 
 
Stipends:  The amount of the initial stipend must be established by OSFA, and the 
internship stipend must be, at most, $20,000 for a 10-month educator internship. The bill 
specifically mentions that the program is for a cohort of students and that participation 
begins with a one-time stipend (the initial stipend) leading to eventual placement in a 
teaching position. Therefore, this analysis is based on the following assumptions:   
 
 
as stated in the bill, initial stipends are distributed in the 2023-2024, 2024-2025, and 
2025-2026 school years and internship stipends are distributed in the 2026-2027, 
2027-2028, and 2028-2029 school years; 
 
300 students, or roughly one-quarter of all students enrolled in likely eligible teacher 
education programs receive an initial stipend each of the three years it is distributed; 
 
likewise, accounting for attrition due to the service commitment, it is assumed that 
200 students receive an internship stipend each of the three years it is distributed; 
 
initial stipends are set at $3,500 and internship stipends are set at $20,000, the 
maximum allowed; and 
 
only individuals who receive the internship stipend in the first year (2026-2027 
school year) with be able to fulfill the two-year service obligation prior to the 
termination of the pilot program (and the evaluation of the pilot program). 
 
Thus, under the above set of assumptions, as shown in Exhibit 3, annual payments for the 
stipend are assumed to be $1.1 million in fiscal 2024 through 2026 increasing to 
$4.0 million in fiscal 2027 through 2029. Accordingly, stipend payments are assumed to 
total $15.2 million over the six years they are paid. The bill states that initial stipends are 
to be distributed for three years (2023-2024 through 2025-2026 school years) and 
internship stipends are to be distributed for three years (2026-2027 through 2028-2029 
school years). 
 
Actual costs will vary from this estimate depending on a number of factors, including 
(1) the institutions eligible for the pilot program based on the percentage of attendees 
receiving the federal Pell Grant (as the eligible institutions may change each year); (2) the 
number of eligible students and the proportion who apply for stipends; (3) the amount 
established by OSFA for initial stipends; (4) the retention rate for the pilot program; and 
(5) whether internship stipends are set at the maximum allowed, $20,000, or a lower 
amount is determined to be more appropriate. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 1219/ Page 16 
 
Exhibit 3 
Teacher Development and Retention Program 
Recipients and Payment of Stipends 
Fiscal 2024-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 
Recipients1 
 
 
Initial 
300 
300 
300 
 
 
Internship 
200 
200 
200 
Stipends Paid2 
 
 
Initial 
$1.05 
$1.05 
$1.05 
 
 
Internship 
$4.00 
$4.00 
$4.00 
Cumulative Paid 
$1.05 
$2.10 
$3.15 
$7.15 
$11.15 
$15.15 
 
1 Based on the number of students enrolled in teacher preparation programs at institutions with 40% or more 
of attendees receiving a federal Pell Grant and assumed attrition due to the service commitment. As stated 
in the bill, initial stipends are distributed in the 2023-2024, 2024-2025, and 2025-2026 school years (which 
equate to fiscal 2024 through 2026) and internships stipends are distributed in the 2026-2027, 2027-2028, 
and 2028-2029 school years (which equate to fiscal 2027 through 2029). 
2 Reflect an assumed $3,500 initial stipend and a $20,000 internship stipend. The bill requires the internship 
stipend be up to $20,000 per recipient. 
 
Notes:  Reflects one set of assumptions. Pilot program terminates July 1, 2029 (fiscal 2029). 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Programming:  Further, MHEC expenditures increase by $45,000 in fiscal 2024 for 
one-time IT contractual costs to update MDCAPS with the new program. 
 
Evaluation:  MHEC must hire an independent consultant to evaluate the effectiveness of 
the Teacher Development and Retention Program in attracting teachers to the profession. 
The bill requires that the evaluator be retained on or before July 1, 2028. DLS believes that 
a rigorous evaluation requires that evaluation design and data collection begin in the 
first year of the pilot program, so annual evaluation costs of between $100,000 and 
$300,000 are included in the estimate, beginning with $175,000 in fiscal 2024. Total costs 
for program evaluation over the six years of the pilot program are estimated to cost 
approximately $1.0 million. As these costs are not eligible to be covered by the new special 
fund, additional general fund expenditures are needed each year. 
 
Special Funding:  The bill establishes a special fund for the Teacher Development and 
Retention Program which may be used only to administer the program and provide support 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 1219/ Page 17 
to recipients. It is assumed that all general funds for these purposes are distributed to the 
special fund. The fiscal 2024 budget includes $10.0 million in general funds for the Teacher 
Development and Retention Fund, contingent on the enactment of Senate Bill 893/House 
Bill 1219. Accordingly, these general funds capitalize the special fund in fiscal 2024 and 
cover special fund expenditures that year, with unexpended monies carried forward for use 
in subsequent years. Thus, special fund revenues increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2024. 
Special fund expenditures increase each year according to the costs of the program that are 
allowed expenses under the fund. 
 
Based on the assumptions described above and excluding expenditures associated with the 
ongoing program evaluation (which are assumed to be covered directly with general funds), 
special fund expenditures increase by $1.3 million in fiscal 2024, increasing to $4.2 million 
in fiscal 2027 and ceasing in fiscal 2030 due to the pilot program terminating at the end of 
fiscal 2029. Through the duration of the program (fiscal 2024 through 2029), special fund 
expenditures are estimated to total $16.3 million:  $15.2 million in stipend costs and 
$1.1 million in administrative costs. Thus, general fund expenditures totaling $6.3 million 
are required across fiscal 2028 and 2029 to further capitalize the special fund in order to 
support program expenditures for stipends and administrative costs in those years. The 
special fund terminates when the pilot program does – on June 30, 2029 (at the end of 
fiscal 2029). Actual special fund revenues and expenditures depend primarily on the design 
of the stipend program and the factors discussed above. 
 
MHEC special fund expenditures of $1.3 million in fiscal 2024 account for the bill’s 
July 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate includes salaries and fringe benefits, initial 
stipend payments that year, one-time start-up costs, contractual costs for MDCAPS 
programming, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$163,730 
Initial Stipend Payments 
1,050,000 
MDCAPS Programming 
45,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
       14,818 
Total FY 2024 MHEC Special Fund Expenditures 
$1,273,548 
 
Future year special fund expenditures reflect annual salary increases and employee 
turnover, annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, payment of initial or internship 
stipends (depending on the year), and termination of the pilot program on June 30, 2029 
(accordingly, the positions become general funded beginning in fiscal 2030). 
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 1219/ Page 18 
 
Nancy Grasmick Awards 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million for the 
Nancy Grasmick Award – Janet L. Hoffman LARP, contingent on the enactment of the 
Maryland Educator Shortage Act (Senate Bill 893/House Bill 1219), which is in addition 
to the approximately $1.4 million included for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP in the budget 
as introduced. It is assumed that the $5.0 million contingent on this legislation is used for 
the expanded eligibility for Nancy Grasmick awards and the $1.4 million is used to make 
awards to other individuals currently eligible for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP. In 
fiscal 2022, 130 awards totaling $847,910 were made under the Janet L. Hoffman LARP; 
thus, average awards were approximately $6,500 per individual. Therefore, assuming 
similar amounts of awards, approximately 770 additional Nancy Grasmick awards can be 
made in fiscal 2024; the number of additional grant awards may vary if the size of the 
awards changes to reflect additional funding. It is assumed that all of the $5.0 million is 
spent in fiscal 2024 because there is no special fund for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP; any 
unspent funds otherwise revert to the general fund.  
 
Because awards are to be made for three years, this analysis further assumes that the 
$5.0 million funding in the fiscal 2024 budget (which, as noted above, is assumed to be 
fully expended) triggers the need for at least the same level of funding in both fiscal 2025 
and 2026 to ensure that all recipients in fiscal 2024 continue to receive their awards the 
following two years. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million in 
fiscal 2025 and 2026 as well. If more than one cohort is funded, then the need for additional 
funding is cumulative and ongoing. That impact has not been accounted for in this estimate. 
In addition, MHEC general fund expenditures increase by $11,440 in fiscal 2024 for 
one-time IT contractual costs to update MDCAPS. 
 
 
Teaching Fellows for Maryland Scholarship 
 
The Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship program has not been fully utilized. Over 
the past three fiscal years, the program has awarded scholarships totaling $1.8 million in 
fiscal 2021, $1.9 million in fiscal 2022, and a projected $4.1 million in fiscal 2023. With a 
mandated appropriation of $12.0 million for the program in fiscal 2024, any increase in the 
number of awards made due to expanding the eligibility criteria for the scholarship is not 
anticipated to require any additional expenditures beyond one-time contractual costs of 
$7,627 in general funds to update MDCAPS (the mandated appropriation is not authorized 
to be used for program administration). 
 
Teacher Preparation Programs at Higher Education Institutions 
 
Higher education expenditures at public four-year institutions of higher education likely 
increase due to the requirements related to teacher preparation programs, but a reliable 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 1219/ Page 19 
estimate is not feasible as it depends on several factors. For example, it is not known what 
goals MSDE will establish for teacher preparation programs and whether those programs 
will have to expand or adjust their programming to meet the goals. 
 
Higher education revenues also likely increase from more teacher certification candidates 
enrolling in their programs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill delays by two years, to the 2027-2028 school year, the 
requirement that specified prekindergarten providers (some of which are small businesses) 
meet specified high staff qualifications for teachers and teaching assistants. This delay 
likely increases the number of individuals eligible to teach and assist in prekindergarten 
classes for two years, until the new requirements take effect. 
 
Additional Comments:  DLS advises that the $10.0 million contingent funding in the 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly for the Teacher Development and 
Retention Fund is appropriated to Aid to Education within MSDE rather than MHEC, 
which is where the program and related special fund reside. That contingent funding 
includes a restriction on transferring it by budget amendment (or otherwise) to any other 
purpose. Nevertheless, because the funding is specifically for the fund established by the 
bill, this analysis assumes such a transfer to MHEC would be allowable as it is for the same 
purpose. Accordingly, the analysis reflects that funding as being for MHEC. 
 
To the extent that additional students attending a private nonprofit institution receive a 
Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship, private nonprofit higher education revenues 
decrease due to the requirement that these institutions provide a matching grant as 
specified. 
 
MSDE advises that limiting the data dashboard to “prospective educators within teacher 
preparation programs throughout the State who are participating in teacher internships,” 
will not include those students who have enrolled but do not make it to the internship, 
which is a critical data point in understanding the teacher preparation pipeline. 
 
It is unclear whether recipients of an initial stipend in the first cohort who are in their 
sophomore year in college can qualify for an internship stipend under the bill. For instance, 
most college sophomores who receive initial stipends during the 2023-2024 school year 
will graduate from college in May/June 2026. Under the bill, the first set of internship 
stipends is awarded during the 2026-2027 school year (after they will have graduated), and 
eligibility criteria for the internship stipend include requirements that recipients be enrolled 
in a teacher preparation program at an institution of higher education in the State and be 
making satisfactory progress toward a degree. Students who have already graduated are 
not likely to satisfy these criteria. The Department of Legislative Services notes that, 
although receipt of an initial stipend is not explicitly a prerequisite for being awarded an 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 1219/ Page 20 
internship stipend, it is assumed to be one due to other language in the bill. Accordingly, 
the second cohort of recipients of initial stipends may ultimately be the group that receives 
most of the first round of internship stipends. The inability of some recipients of initial 
stipends to be awarded internship stipends may affect the pilot program’s success in 
recruiting and retaining new teachers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 893 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Department of Budget and 
Management; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 7, 2023 
Enrolled - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 9, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - May 9, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 1219/ Page 21 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Educator Shortage Act of 2023 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 1219 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 21