START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1274 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1274 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Health) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Employees' Retirement and Pension Systems - Reemployment Earnings 
Limitation - COVID-19 Exemption 
 
 
This emergency departmental bill reinitiates and extends for up to two years an exemption 
for State retirees who are rehired by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for 
specified purposes from a statutory earnings limitation that applies to retirees of the State 
Retirement and Pension System (SRPS). Specifically, if a State retiree is rehired by MDH 
for no more than five years to assist in the administration of federally funded grants related 
to the COVID-19 pandemic or to serve on the COVID Unified Command, the retiree is 
exempt from an offset to their retirement benefit if their earnings exceed statutory limits. 
The bill applies retroactively to January 1, 2020, and terminates December 31, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since the bill applies in a limited number of cases, it has no material effect 
on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. Any offsets already taken in 2023 must be 
repaid to affected retires who were rehired. No effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1274/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, SRPS retirees who receive a retirement benefit from the State 
may be reemployed, except that they may not be reemployed by the State or any 
participating SRPS employer within 45 days of retiring. In most cases, retirees who are 
rehired by the same employer for whom they worked at the time of retirement are subject 
to a cap on their earnings. The purpose of the cap, which is the member’s average final 
compensation (AFC) at the time of retirement, is to ensure that a retiree does not earn more 
in retirement than the retiree earned as an active member with the same employer. If the 
sum of a retiree’s earnings and initial retirement allowance exceed the earnings cap, the 
retiree is subject to a dollar-for-dollar offset of the retirement benefit for any amount that 
exceeds the cap. For members who retire directly from State service, the State is regarded 
as a single employer, so reemployment with any State agency activates the benefit 
reduction. 
 
Statute includes several broad exemptions from the benefit reduction for retirees who: 
 
 
have been retired for at least five years; 
 
retired with an AFC of less than $25,000 and are reemployed on a permanent, 
temporary, or contractual basis; or 
 
are serving in any specified elected position. 
 
There are also targeted exemptions for correctional officers, State police officers, nurses, 
and judges, as well as teachers and principals. 
 
The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2021 (Chapter 150) included an 
exemption that was very similar to the one in this bill. That exemption terminated 
December 31, 2021, but was renewed for an additional year (through December 31, 2022) 
by Chapters 57 and 58 of 2022. 
 
Background:  MDH advises that, under the initial exemption granted by the BRFA of 
2021, it hired about five retirees, some of whom continue to be employed in various 
capacities to assist in managing the State’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
The State Retirement Agency has consistently advised that the actuary does not account 
for foregone benefit reductions in calculating pension system liabilities. 
 
Additional Comments:  As the previous exemption terminated year-end 2022, the retirees 
who continue to work for MDH have been subject to an offset in 2023. Because the bill 
applies the exemption retroactively to January 1, 2020 (the starting date for the initial 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1274/ Page 3 
exemption), any such offset taken must be repaid. Also, additional retirees may be rehired 
by MDH, without an offset, if their assignments fall within the parameters of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 417 and SB 402 of 2022 (enacted as Chapters 57 and 58 of 2022). 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; State Retirement Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1274/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Employees’ Retirement and Pension Systems – Reemployment 
 
 
 
Earnings Limitation – COVID-19 Exemption 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 1274 
 
PREPARED BY:  
Department of Health  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
_____ WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 4