START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1237 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1237 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Judiciary 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Special Education - Judicial Actions - Attorney's Fees and Related Costs 
 
 
This bill authorizes a court to award reasonable attorney’s fees and related costs, including 
expert witness fees and costs, to the parent of a child with a disability, if the parent prevails 
in a proceeding that is held to resolve disputes about the identification, evaluation, or 
educational placements of children with disabilities or the provision of a free appropriate 
public education. However, such an award may not be made after the date a written offer 
of settlement is made to the parent, under certain conditions, unless the parent was 
substantially justified in rejecting the settlement offer. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expenditures of State agencies involved in due process proceedings under 
the bill are not significantly affected. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Beginning in FY 2024, some local school systems each year may be required 
to cover attorney’s fees and other costs awarded under the bill. The total amount awarded 
will vary considerably each year. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The award of reasonable attorney’s fees and related costs by a court to a 
parent prevailing in a proceeding generally may not be made after the date a written offer 
of settlement is made to the parent if:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1237/ Page 2 
 
the settlement offer is made to the parent more than 14 days before the start of the 
proceeding; 
 
the settlement offer is not accepted within 14 days; and 
 
the court finds the relief finally obtained by the parent is not more favorable to the 
parent than the settlement offer. 
 
Nevertheless, if the parent was substantially justified in rejecting the settlement offer and 
is the prevailing party, an award of attorney’s fees may be made. 
 
Current Law:  The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires 
that a child with disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least 
restrictive environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student 
turns 21 years old, in accordance with an individualized family service plan (IFSP) or 
individualized education program (IEP) specific to the individual needs of the child. An 
IFSP is for children with disabilities from birth up to age 3, and up to age 5 under 
Maryland’s Extended IFSP Option if a parent chooses the option. An IEP is for students 
with disabilities from age 3 through 21. Local school systems are required to make a free 
appropriate public education available to students with disabilities from age 3 through 21. 
However, the State, under its supervisory authority required by IDEA, has the ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring that this obligation is met. 
 
Chapter 233 of 2006 established a Maryland process for resolution sessions that can be 
used to settle disputes about the identification, evaluation, and educational placements of 
children with disabilities, consistent with IDEA provisions for dispute resolution. Before 
conducting a due process hearing, the parent must have an opportunity to resolve a due 
process complaint at a resolution session. The Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE) must make staff available to assist a parent in understanding the 
mediation process. 
 
A parent of a child with a disability or a public agency may request mediation to resolve 
any disagreement regarding the child’s special education services or program, including 
mediation to resolve a due process complaint filed by a parent against a public agency. 
A parent of a child with disabilities may file a due process complaint with Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH) and the public agency. Similarly, the public agency may 
file a due process complaint with OAH and the parent. OAH appoints an administrative 
law judge to conduct a due process hearing. The decision of the administrative law judge 
must be made on substantive grounds based on whether a child has received a free 
appropriate public education. 
 
Maryland regulations authorize (but do not require) the courts to award reasonable 
attorney’s fees to the prevailing party in a due process dispute under circumstances 
described in specified provisions of the IDEA statute and related regulations 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1237/ Page 3 
(20 U.S.C. § 1415(i)(3) and 34 C.F.R. § 300.517). IDEA authorizes the federal 
District Court for Maryland or the State circuit court in the county in which the child resides 
to award reasonable attorney’s fees as part of the costs to the prevailing party, which may 
be the parent, or may be a State or local agency if the parent’s complaint or cause of action 
is found to be frivolous or presented for any improper purpose (e.g., to increase the cost of 
litigation). The award amount must be based upon the prevailing rates in the community in 
which the action or proceeding arose for the kind and quality of services furnished. 
 
State Expenditures:  The public agency involved in the due process proceeding incurs the 
costs of any awarded attorney’s fees and related costs. The number of students with 
disabilities under the direct supervision of a State agency (as opposed to a local school 
system) is small. It is assumed that in many years there will be no instances in which a 
parent prevails in a proceeding involving a State agency and that the number of instances 
is not likely to be much above one per year. 
 
It is further assumed that the prospect of recouping attorney’s fees and some related costs 
does not generate a significant increase in the number of hearings that are brought to full 
adjudication in a given year. 
 
Local Expenditures:  In the great majority of due process proceedings covered by the bill, 
the local education agency is a party to the dispute (along with the parent). Therefore, any 
award of attorney’s fees and related costs under the bill is at the expense of the local school 
system. However, MSDE advises that the substantial majority of relevant disputes are 
settled prior to or within the OAH hearing stage of dispute resolution. As OAH is not 
considered a court, the bill does not apply to these proceedings. It is assumed that in 10 or 
fewer cases each year the parent may be the prevailing party and be awarded attorney’s 
fees and related costs. School systems with relatively large special education student 
populations are more likely to be liable for attorney’s fees and related costs in any given 
year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 405 of 2021 and HB 184 and SB 783 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Department of Education; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1237/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4