START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1272 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1272 
(Delegates Bagnall and Rosenberg) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Insurance Commissioner Enforcement - Specialty Mental Health 
Services and Payment of Claims - Sunset Extension 
 
   
This emergency bill extends the termination date for provisions of law that (1) require the 
Maryland Insurance Commissioner to enforce clean claims laws for the administrative 
services organization (ASO) that administers the Medicaid specialty mental health system; 
(2) subject an ASO to certain clean claims requirements; and (3) specify certain actions the 
Insurance Commissioner must take regarding enforcement of clean claims provisions. The 
termination provisions are extended for two additional years to May 18, 2025.    
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) can continue to enforce 
clean claims provisions for the remainder of FY 2023 and in FY 2024 and 2025 using 
existing budgeted resources. MIA special fund revenues may increase by an indeterminate 
amount in FY 2023, 2024 and 2025 to the extent fines are assessed.       
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 151 and 152 of 2021 require the Insurance Commissioner to 
enforce a provision of law that specifies that § 15-1005 of the Insurance Article (which 
governs clean claims) applies to the delivery system for specialty mental health services 
established for Medicaid managed care organization enrollees and administered by an 
ASO. An ASO that administers the specialty mental health system is subject to (1) the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1272/ Page 2 
requirement to pay interest on unpaid clean claims; (2) specified current law fines and 
penalties for certain violations of clean claims requirements; and (3) the 
Insurance Commissioner’s enforcement authority in connection with any investigation or 
examination of potential violations of clean claims provisions.  
 
If the Insurance Commissioner determines that an ASO will use State funds or otherwise 
pass on the cost of any interest or penalty to the State, the Commissioner may not require 
payment of interest or impose a fine or penalty on the ASO. If the Insurance Commissioner 
investigates a complaint that an ASO violated clean claims requirements, any findings must 
be provided to the Maryland Department of Health. If the Insurance Commissioner 
conducts an examination of an ASO, the Commissioner must submit the examination report 
to specified committees of the General Assembly. Chapters 151 and 152 terminate 
May 18, 2023 (two years from the date of enactment). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the prior 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2