START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1225 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1225 
(Delegate Howard) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Real Estate Brokers - Disability or Death and Termination of Employment of a 
Broker 
 
  
This bill requires the family member of a disabled or deceased real estate broker to submit 
a death certificate or evidence of the disability to the State Real Estate Commission in order 
to carry on the business of the disabled or deceased individual. If a death certificate or 
evidence of disability is not provided, the business may designate another licensed real 
estate broker to provide real estate brokerage services for the business, as specified. The 
bill also establishes a process for redesignating the license of a terminated real estate 
broker. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. The State 
Real Estate Commission can implement the bill’s changes with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a licensed real estate broker is terminated by a business for any reason, 
the business may designate another licensed real estate broker to provide brokerage 
services for the business. 
 
If the license certificate and pocket card of a terminated broker are surrendered to the 
commission, the commission must approve the designation in accordance with any 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1225/ Page 2 
applicable laws and regulations. If the certificate and pocket card are not surrendered to the 
commission, then the commission must approve the designation only if: 
 
 
the designated broker is in good standing with the commission; 
 
the business notifies the commission of the reason for the termination; and 
 
the designation of the broker complies with applicable laws and regulations. 
 
A broker who has been designated under this process is subject to all applicable 
requirements the Maryland Real Estate Brokers Act. 
 
Current Law:  Subject to certain requirements, on the disability or death of a licensed real 
estate broker, any adult member of the family of the disabled or decreased broker may 
carry on the business of the disabled or deceased broker for up to six months for purposes 
of closing and terminating the business. 
 
To qualify to carry on the business, a family member must (1) surrender the license 
certificate and pocket card of the disabled or deceased real estate broker and (2) submit to 
the commission any information or documentation required by the commission. 
 
The commission must subsequently reissue the license to the qualified family member for 
six months. Before the end of that period, an individual may qualify for the license of the 
disabled or deceased broker if: 
 
 
the individual is an immediate family member; 
 
the individual has been continuously licensed as a real estate salesperson for the 
immediately preceding three years; 
 
the individual passes the required real estate broker’s examination (regardless of 
whether the individual has met the educational requirements for a license); 
 
the individual surrenders his or her real estate salesperson license certificate and 
pocket card; and 
 
complied with specified requirements. 
 
If the individual meets these requirements, the commission must reissue the license of a 
disabled or deceased real estate broker to the qualified individual. 
 
The license may be held for up to four years from the time of reissuance without meeting 
real estate broker licensing educational requirements; the individual is responsible for 
properly renewing the license. 
 
If the educational requirements are not met within the four-year period, the license expires 
automatically at the end of that period. However, if the individual meets the educational 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1225/ Page 3 
requirements, then the person may continue to hold the license and pursue a standard 
renewal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 7, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3