START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1244 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1244 
(Delegate Attar, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Holocaust Remembrance Day 
 
  
This bill requires the Governor to annually proclaim January 27 as Maryland Holocaust 
Remembrance Day. The proclamation must declare the day (1) as a day of reflection, 
recollection, and determination for Maryland families, educators, religious communities, 
political bodies, and media to remember the human tragedy that is the Holocaust and  
(2) a pledge to spread the lessons and the reality of the Holocaust to future generations in 
an effort to ensure that we never forget and bear witness to the mass slaughter of human 
beings as a consequence of prejudice, bigotry, ignorance, and hate. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Commemorating Maryland Holocaust Remembrance Day does not 
affect governmental finances.   
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Sixteen official commemorative days, seven months, and one week are 
recognized in State law, as shown in Exhibit 1. The Governor also must issue a 
proclamation each year encouraging citizens and other individuals to observe a moment of 
silence at 3:00 p.m. on Memorial Day to unite in remembrance and commemorate the 
heroic acts and efforts of Marylanders who have served and died in the U.S. Armed Forces.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1244/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Official Commemorative Days and Months in Maryland 
 
Asian Lunar New Year Day1 
January/February 
Black History Month 
February 
Irish-American Heritage Month 
March 
Women’s History Month 
March 
Tuskegee Airmen Commemoration Day2 
March 
Welcome Home Vietnam Veterans Day 
March 30 
Crime Victim and Advocate Commemorative Day 
April 3 
John Hanson’s Birthday3 
April 13 
National Healthcare Decisions Day 
April 16 
Maryland Centenarians Day4 
May 
Negro Baseball League Day5 
May 
Law Day U.S.A. 
May 1 
Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Services Workers Day6 
June 
Chesapeake Bay Awareness Week7 
June 
Maryland Charter Day 
June 20 
Thurgood Marshall Day 
July 2 
Caribbean Heritage Month 
August 
Hispanic Heritage Month8 
September/October 
German-American Heritage Month 
October 
South Asian American Heritage Day 
October 2 
Poetry Day 
October 15 
American Indian Heritage Month 
November 
Maryland Emancipation Day 
November 1 
Annapolis Charter Day 
December 17 
 
1 Day designated as new year on the Asian lunar calendar. 
2 Commemorated on the fourth Thursday in March. 
3 John Hanson served as the first president of the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation 
from 1781 to 1782. 
4 Commemorated on the second Thursday in May. 
5 Commemorated on the second Saturday in May. 
6 Commemorated on the first Sunday in June. 
7 Commemorated during the second week in June. 
8 Commemorated from September 15 to October 15. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1244/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 842 (Senator Kramer, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Samuel A. Kebede 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3