START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1300 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1300 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Child Care - Criminal Background Investigations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters statutory provisions related to criminal background 
investigations for specified individuals who care for, supervise, or otherwise have specified 
access to children. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes do not materially affect State finances or alter State 
operations; however, the changes are intended to ensure that State law conforms to federal 
requirements and that designated entities may continue to secure national criminal history 
records checks (CHRC) as required. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes do not materially affect local finances or alter local 
operations but are intended to enable certain local entities to continue to secure national 
CHRCs as required. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment 
as discussed below. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In general, the bill alters numerous provisions under Part V of Title 5,  
Subtitle 5 of the Family Law Article that govern when certain individuals who care for, 
supervise, or otherwise have access to children are required (or authorized) to secure a 
CHRC. While numerous alterations represent only stylistic or technical changes, the bill 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1300/ Page 2 
notably (1) specifies that a facility (instead of the employee or other individual) must apply 
to DPSCS/the Central Repository for a national and State CHRC for an employee (or other 
individual); (2) specifies that in accordance with provisions within the Criminal Procedure 
Article, the Central Repository must forward criminal history record information (CHRI) 
to the employee, employer, individual, or volunteer and the authorized agencies, as 
specified; (3) repeals an authorization for a local department of social services to request 
that a location other than a designated State or local law enforcement agency perform a 
federal name‐based check for specified individuals when a child is placed in an emergency 
out-of-home placement; and (4) requires a child to be removed immediately from an 
emergency out‐of‐home placement if an individual who is required to submit a name-based 
check refuses to submit the follow-up fingerprints. 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository 
(CJIS-CR) is established by the Criminal Procedure Article, §§ 10-213 et seq., within 
DPSCS to collect, manage, and disseminate Maryland CHRI for criminal justice and 
noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. For national CHRCs, 
CJIS-CR collects the fee and submits the requests for national CHRI to the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) electronically. 
 
In general, employees and employers who work in specified facilities and who care for or 
supervise children (or have access to children who are cared for or supervised in the 
facility) are required to apply for a national and State CHRC at any designated law 
enforcement office in the State or other location approved by DPSCS. Among the facilities 
requiring CHRCs are child care centers, family child care homes, schools, foster care 
homes, and recreation centers that primarily serve minors. Contractors or subcontractors 
must also require employees that will have direct, unsupervised, and uncontrolled access 
to children in one of the specified facilities to obtain a CHRC. Employers and local 
departments of social services may require volunteers at the facility to obtain a CHRC. 
 
Statutory provisions also authorize a local department of social services, if a child is placed 
in an emergency out‐of‐home placement, to request that a designated State or local law 
enforcement agency or other location approved by DPSCS perform a federal name-based 
check on specified individuals, such as adults residing in the home. Within  
15 calendar days after the local department receives the results of the name‐based check, 
the local department must submit fingerprints on the individual. Within 15 calendar days 
after the date on which the name‐based check was performed, DPSCS must perform a 
CHRC. A child must be removed immediately from an out‐of‐home placement if any 
individual required to submit to a name‐based check refuses to comply with the statutory 
provisions. 
 
DPSCS advises that it has been notified by the FBI that certain provisions within the Family 
Law Article regarding CHRCs are not in compliance with federal requirements; the bill’s 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1300/ Page 3 
changes are intended to bring the State into compliance. According to DPSCS, federal law 
only authorizes national background checks to be disseminated to authorized entities. The 
bill therefore specifies that (1) facilities are to apply to DPSCS/CJIS‐CR for national and 
State CHRCs and (2) in accordance with specified provisions of the Criminal Procedure 
Article, the Central Repository must forward the employee’s, employer’s, individual’s, or 
volunteer’s CHRI to the employee, employer, individual, or volunteer and the authorized 
licensing, registration, approval, or certification agency. Pursuant to § 10‐219 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article, the Central Repository may not disseminate CHRI except in 
accordance with applicable federal law and regulation. The bill also makes necessary 
changes to statutory provisions regarding the use of name‐based checks to ensure 
compliance with federal requirements. 
 
According to DPSCS, it has been informed by the Department of Human Services that 
certain requests for national background checks have been denied because of the existing 
statutory language not meeting federal requirements. 
 
Small Business Effect:  As noted above, the bill is intended to conform statutory language 
regarding CHRCs to federal requirements; otherwise, according to DPSCS, specified 
entities will no longer have the ability to continue to secure required national background 
checks. Accordingly, DLS advises that the bill has a meaningful impact on small businesses 
(particularly child care providers) that are required to have background checks performed 
on certain individuals within their facilities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 21, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer K. Botts 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1300/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL 
Family Law – Child Care – Criminal Background Investigations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 1300 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jennifer Beskid, DPSCS 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
_____ WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4