START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

Chapter 144

(House Bill 1300)

AN ACT concerning

Family Law – Child Care – Criminal Background Investigations

FOR the purpose of altering provisions relating to criminal background investigations for
certain individuals who care for or supervise children; requiring certain facilities to
apply to the Central Repository for a national and State criminal history records
check for each employee, employer, individual, or volunteer; and generally relating
to child care and criminal background investigations.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 5–550 through 5–554, 5–554.1, and 5–559
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Family Law
Section 5–555
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Family Law
Section 5–555
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Family Law

5–550.

(a) In this Part V of this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(B) “AUTHORIZED AGENCY” MEANS A STATE, COUNTY, OR MUNICIPAL
GOVERNMENT AGENCY.

(C) “CENTRAL REPOSITORY” MEANS THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
INFORMATION SYSTEM CENTRAL REPOSITORY OF THE DEPARTMENT.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(b)] (D) “Conviction” means a plea or verdict of guilty or a plea of nolo
contendere.

(E) “CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK” MEANS A RECORDS CHECK OF
THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION MAINTAINED BY THE CENTRAL
REPOSITORY OR THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

[(c)] (F) “Department” means the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services.

[(d)] (G) (1) “Employee” means a person that for compensation is employed to
work in a facility identified in § 5–551 of this subtitle and who:

(i) cares for or supervises children in the facility; or

(ii) has access to children who are cared for or supervised in the
facility.

(2) “Employee” includes [a person who]:

(i) A PERSON WHO:

1. participates in a pool described in subsection [(e)(2)]
(H)(2) of this section;

[(ii)] 2. for compensation will be employed on a substitute or
temporary basis to work in a facility identified in [§ 5–551(b)(1) or (2)] § 5–551(A)(1) OR
(2) of this subtitle; and

[(iii)] 3. will care for or supervise children in the facility or will
have access to children who are cared for or supervised in the facility; AND

(II) A CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR WHO WILL HAVE
DIRECT, UNSUPERVISED, AND UNCONTROLLED ACCESS TO CHILDREN IN A FACILITY
IDENTIFIED IN § 5–551(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) “Employee” does not include any person employed to work for
compensation by the Department of Juvenile Services.

[(e)] (H) (1) “Employer” means an owner, operator, proprietor, or manager of
a facility identified in § 5–551 of this subtitle who has frequent contact with children who
are cared for or supervised in the facility.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

(2) For purposes of [§§ 5–551(g), 5–554(a)(2)(i) and (c)(1)(i) and (2)] §§
5–551(F), 5–554(1), 5–555(B) AND (E), and 5–557 of this subtitle, “employer” includes a
child care resource and referral center, an association of registered family child care
providers, and an association of licensed child care centers to the extent that the center or
association establishes and maintains a pool of individuals who are qualified to work as
substitute or temporary employees in a facility identified in [§ 5–551(b)(1) or (2)] §
5–551(A)(1) OR (2) of this subtitle.

(3) “Employer” does not include a State or local agency responsible for the
temporary or permanent placement of children in a facility identified in § 5–551 of this
subtitle.

(I) “LOCAL DEPARTMENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 1–101(H) OF
THIS ARTICLE.

[(f)] (J) “Private entity” means a nongovernmental agency, organization, or
employer.

[(g)] (K) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional
Services.

5–551.

[(a) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, an employee and
employer in a facility identified in subsection (b) of this section and individuals identified
in subsection (c) of this section shall apply for a national and State criminal history records
check at any designated law enforcement office in this State or other location approved by
the Department.]

[(b)] (A) The following facilities shall require employees and employers to obtain
a criminal history records check under this Part V of this subtitle:

(1) a child care center required to be licensed under Title 9.5, Subtitle 4 of
the Education Article;

(2) a family child care home or large family child care home required to be
registered under Title 9.5, Subtitle 3 of the Education Article;

(3) a child care home required to be licensed under this subtitle or under
Title 9 of the Human Services Article;

(4) a child care institution required to be licensed under this subtitle or
under Title 9 of the Human Services Article;

(5) a juvenile detention, correction, or treatment facility provided for in
Title 9 of the Human Services Article;
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) a public school as defined in Title 1 of the Education Article;

(7) a private or nonpublic school required to report annually to the State
Board of Education under Title 2 of the Education Article;

(8) a foster care family home or group facility as defined under this subtitle;

(9) a recreation center or recreation program operated by the State, a local
government, or a private entity primarily serving minors;

(10) a day or residential camp, as defined in Title 10, Subtitle 16 of the Code
of Maryland Regulations, primarily serving minors; or

(11) a home health agency or residential service agency licensed by the
Maryland Department of Health and authorized under Title 19 of the Health – General
Article to provide home– or community–based health services for minors.

[(b–1) A contractor or subcontractor shall require an employee that will have direct,
unsupervised, and uncontrolled access to children in a facility listed in subsection (b) of this
section to obtain a criminal history records check under this Part V of this subtitle.]

[(c)] (B) The following individuals shall obtain a criminal history records check
under this Part V of this subtitle:

(1) an individual who is seeking to adopt a child through a child placement
agency;

(2) an individual who is seeking to become a guardian through a local
department;

(3) an individual whom the juvenile court appoints as a guardian of a child;

(4) an adult relative with whom a child, committed to a local department,
is placed by the local department;

(5) any adult known by a local department or the State Department of
Education to be residing in:

(i) a family child care home or large family child care home required
to be registered under this title;

(ii) a home where informal child care, as defined in child care subsidy
regulations adopted under Title 13A of the Code of Maryland Regulations, is being provided
or will be provided to a child who does not reside there;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

(iii) a home of an adult relative of a child with whom the child,
committed to a local department, is placed by the local department;

(iv) a foster care home or child care home required to be approved
under this title;

(v) a home of an individual seeking to adopt a child through a child
placement agency; or

(vi) a home of an individual seeking to become a guardian through a
local department;

(6) an individual who agrees to provide, or to continue providing, informal
child care, as defined in child care subsidy regulations, adopted under Title 13A of the Code
of Maryland Regulations; and

(7) if requested by a local department:

(i) a parent or guardian of a child who is committed to the local
department and is or has been placed in an out–of–home placement within the past year;
and

(ii) any adult known by the local department to be residing in the
home of the parent or guardian.

[(d)] (C) An employer at a facility under subsection [(b)] (A) of this section may
require a volunteer at the facility to obtain a criminal history records check under this Part
V of this subtitle.

[(e)] (D) A local department may require a volunteer of that department who
works with children to obtain a criminal history records check under this Part V of this
subtitle.

[(f)] (E) An employer at a facility not identified in subsection [(b)] (A) of this
section who employs individuals to work with children may require employees, including
volunteers, to obtain a criminal history records check under this Part V of this subtitle.

[(g)] (F) An employer, as defined in [§ 5–550(e)(2)] § 5–550(H)(2) of this
subtitle, shall require an employee, as defined in [§ 5–550(d)(2)] § 5–550(G)(2) of this
subtitle, to obtain a criminal history records check under this Part V of this subtitle.

[(h)] (G) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a person
who is required to have a criminal history records check under this Part V of this subtitle
shall pay for:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) the mandatory processing fee required by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation for a national criminal history records check;

(ii) reasonable administrative costs to the Department, not to exceed
10% of the processing fee; and

(iii) the fee authorized under § 10–221(b)(7) of the Criminal
Procedure Article for access to Maryland criminal history records.

(2) A volunteer under subsection [(d), (e), or (f)] (C), (D), OR (E) of this
section who volunteers for a program that is registered with the Maryland Mentoring
Partnership is [not required to pay for costs or fees under paragraph (1)(ii) and (iii) of this
subsection] REQUIRED TO PAY ONLY THE MANDATORY PROCESSING FEE REQUIRED
BY THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION FOR A NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK.

[(i)] (H) (1) An employer or other party may pay for the costs borne by the
employee or other individual under subsection [(h)] (G) of this section.

(2) The local department shall reimburse:

(i) an adult residing in a foster care home for the costs borne by the
individual under subsection [(h)] (G) of this section; and

(ii) an individual described in subsection [(c)(7)(ii)] (B)(7)(II) of this
section for the costs borne by the individual under subsection [(h)] (G) of this section.

5–552.

(a) [(1)] On or before the 1st day of actual employment OF AN EMPLOYEE, [an
employee] A FACILITY IDENTIFIED IN § 5–551 OF THIS SUBTITLE shall apply to the
Department for a [printed statement] NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK FOR AN EMPLOYEE.

[(2)] (B) On or before the 1st day of actual operation of a facility identified
in § 5–551 of this subtitle, an employer shall apply to the Department for a [printed
statement] NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

[(3) (i)] (C) Before an individual may be approved to provide or to
continue providing informal child care, as defined in child care subsidy regulations adopted
under Title 13A of the Code of Maryland Regulations, the individual shall apply to the
Department for a [printed statement] NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

[(ii) An individual who was approved before January 1, 2014, to
provide informal child care and who intends to continue providing informal child care on or
after that date has until June 30, 2014, to apply to the Department for a printed statement.]

[(4)] (D) Within 5 days after a local department places a child who is
committed to the local department with an adult relative, an individual identified in [§
5–551(c) or (e)] § 5–551(B) OR (D) of this subtitle shall apply to the Department for a
[printed statement] NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

[(b) As part of the application for a criminal history records check, the employee,
employer, and individual identified in § 5–551(c), (d), (e), or (f) of this subtitle shall submit:

(1) except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a complete set of
legible fingerprints at any designated State or local law enforcement office in the State or
other location approved by the Department;

(2) the disclosure statement required under § 5–553 of this subtitle; and

(3) payment for the costs of the criminal history records check.

(c) The requirement that a complete set of legible fingerprints be submitted as
part of the application for a criminal history records check may be waived by the
Department if:

(1) the application is submitted by a person who has attempted to have a
complete set of fingerprints taken on at least 2 occasions;

(2) the taking of a complete set of legible fingerprints is not possible
because of a physical or medical condition of the person’s fingers or hands;

(3) the person submits documentation satisfactory to the Department of
the requirements of this subsection; and

(4) the person submits the other information required for a criminal history
records check.]

5–553.

[As part of the application process for a criminal history records check, the] THE
employee, employer, and individual identified in [§ 5–551(c), (d), (e), or (f)] § 5–551(B), (C),
(D), OR (E) of this subtitle shall complete and sign a sworn statement or affirmation
disclosing the existence of a criminal conviction, probation before judgment disposition, not
criminally responsible disposition, or pending criminal charges without a final disposition.

5–554.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(a) (1) (i) The Department shall conduct the criminal history records check
and issue the printed statement provided for under this Part V of this subtitle.

(ii) It shall update an initial criminal history records check for an
employee, employer, or individual identified in § 5–551(c), (d), (e), or (f) of this subtitle and
issue a revised printed statement in accordance with federal law and regulations on
dissemination of FBI identification records.

(2)] The Department shall adopt regulations requiring:

[(i)] (1) employers to verify periodically the continuing
employment of an employee and the continuing assignment of a volunteer;

[(ii)] (2) State or local agencies that license, register, approve, or
certify any of the facilities identified in [§ 5–551(b)] § 5–551(A) of this subtitle to verify
periodically the continuing licensure, registration, approval, or certification of a facility or
the continuing assignment of individuals identified in [§ 5–551(e)] § 5–551(D) of this
subtitle; and

[(iii)] (3) child placement agencies that place a child as described in
[§ 5–551(c)] § 5–551(B) of this subtitle to verify periodically the continuing participation
or presence of individuals identified in [§ 5–551(c)] § 5–551(B) of this subtitle.

[(3) The employee, employer, volunteer, or other individual identified in §
5–551 of this subtitle is not responsible for payment of any fee to update criminal history
records checks.

(b) (1) The Department shall provide an initial and a revised statement of the
applicant’s State criminal record to:

(i) the recipients of the printed statement specified in subsection (c)
of this section; and

(ii) the State Department of Education if the applicant is:

1. an employee of, or an adult resident in, a child care center
that is required to be licensed or to hold a letter of compliance under Title 9.5, Subtitle 4 of
the Education Article;

2. an employee of, or an adult resident in, a family child care
home or large family child care home that is required to be registered under Title 9.5,
Subtitle 3 of the Education Article; or

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

3. an individual who provides or agrees to provide informal
child care or an adult who resides in a home where informal child care is being provided or
will be provided to a child who does not reside there.

(2) The Department shall distribute the printed statement in accordance
with federal law and regulations on dissemination of FBI identification records.

(c) (1) Upon completion of the criminal history records check of an employee,
the Department shall submit the printed statement to:

(i) the employee’s current or prospective employer at the facility or
program;

(ii) the employee; and

(iii) for an employee of a child care center that is required to be
licensed or to hold a letter of compliance under Title 9.5, Subtitle 4 of the Education Article
or an employee of a family child care home that is required to be registered under Title 9.5,
Subtitle 3 of the Education Article, the State Department of Education.

(2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, upon
receiving a written request from an employee, the Department shall submit the printed
statement to additional employers, if the criminal history records check was completed
during the prior 180 days.

(ii) Upon receiving a written request from a student teacher
employed under § 6–107 of the Education Article, the Department shall submit the printed
statement to additional employers if the criminal history records check was completed
during the prior 365 days.

(3) Upon completion of the criminal history records check of an employer,
the Department shall submit the printed statement to:

(i) the appropriate State or local agency responsible for the
licensure, registration, approval, or certification of the employer’s facility; and

(ii) the employer.

(4) Upon completion of the criminal history records check of an individual
identified in § 5–551(c), (d), (e), or (f) of this subtitle, the Department shall submit the
printed statement to the appropriate child placement or registering agency.

(5) A printed statement issued under this section is valid in any county in
the State.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) Information obtained from the Department under this Part V of this subtitle
shall be confidential and may be disseminated only to the individual who is the subject of
the criminal history records check and to the participants in the hiring or approval process.

(e) Information obtained from the Department under this Part V of this subtitle
may not:

(1) be used for any purpose other than that for which it was disseminated;
or

(2) be redisseminated.

(f) Information obtained from the Department under this Part V of this subtitle
shall be maintained in a manner to ensure the security of the information.]

5–554.1.

The State Department of Education shall conduct a cross–reference check, including
cross–referencing the individual and the individual’s address, with the central registry of
registrants transmitted weekly by the Department under § 11–713 of the Criminal
Procedure Article, of:

(1) an employee, employer, or individual identified in [§ 5–551(b)(1), (b)(2),
or (c)(5)(i)] § 5–551(A)(1) OR (2) OR (B)(5)(I) of this subtitle; and

(2) an individual who provides or agrees to provide informal child care, as
defined in child care subsidy regulations adopted under Title 13A of the Code of Maryland
Regulations.

[5–555.

An individual may contest the finding of a criminal conviction, a probation before
judgment disposition, a not criminally responsible disposition, or pending charge reported
in a printed statement in accordance with §§ 10–223 through 10–228 of the Criminal
Procedure Article.]

5–555.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONDUCT THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS
CHECKS REQUIRED UNDER THIS PART V OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THE FACILITIES IDENTIFIED IN § 5–551(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE
SHALL APPLY TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY FOR A NATIONAL AND STATE
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK FOR EACH EMPLOYEE, EMPLOYER,
INDIVIDUAL, OR VOLUNTEER.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

(2) AS PART OF AN APPLICATION FOR A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS
CHECK, A FACILITY IDENTIFIED IN § 5–551(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL SUBMIT TO
THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY:

(I) A LEGIBLE SET OF THE EMPLOYEE’S, EMPLOYER’S,
INDIVIDUAL’S, OR VOLUNTEER’S FINGERPRINTS TAKEN IN A FORMAT APPROVED BY
THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AND THE DIRECTOR OF THE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION;

(II) THE FEE AUTHORIZED UNDER § 10–221(B)(7) OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE FOR ACCESS TO STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS; AND

(III) THE MANDATORY PROCESSING FEE REQUIRED BY THE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION FOR A NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK.

(3) IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 10–201 THROUGH 10–229 OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE, THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY SHALL FORWARD
THE EMPLOYEE’S, EMPLOYER’S, INDIVIDUAL’S, OR VOLUNTEER’S CRIMINAL
HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION TO:

(I) THE EMPLOYEE, EMPLOYER, INDIVIDUAL, OR VOLUNTEER;
AND

(II) THE AUTHORIZED AGENCIES REQUIRED TO LICENSE,
REGISTER, APPROVE, OR CERTIFY THE FACILITY IDENTIFIED IN § 5–551(A) OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL UPDATE AN INITIAL CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK FOR AN EMPLOYEE, EMPLOYER, OR INDIVIDUAL IDENTIFIED IN §
5–551(B), (C), (D), OR (E) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND ISSUE AN UPDATED RECORDS
CHECK IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE AN APPLICANT’S INITIAL AND
UPDATED STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD TO:

(1) THE RECIPIENTS OF THE STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD
SPECIFIED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(2) THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IF THE APPLICANT IS:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) AN EMPLOYEE OF OR AN ADULT RESIDENT IN A CHILD CARE
CENTER THAT IS REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED OR TO HOLD A LETTER OF COMPLIANCE
UNDER TITLE 9.5, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE;

(II) AN EMPLOYEE OF OR AN ADULT RESIDENT IN A FAMILY
CHILD CARE HOME OR LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME THAT IS REQUIRED TO BE
REGISTERED UNDER TITLE 9.5, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE; OR

(III) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO PROVIDES OR AGREES TO PROVIDE
INFORMAL CHILD CARE OR AN ADULT WHO RESIDES IN A HOME WHERE INFORMAL
CHILD CARE IS BEING PROVIDED OR WILL BE PROVIDED TO A CHILD WHO DOES NOT
RESIDE THERE.

(E) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
ON RECEIVING A WRITTEN REQUEST FROM AN EMPLOYEE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
DISSEMINATE THE NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK TO
AUTHORIZED AGENCIES IF THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK WAS
COMPLETED DURING THE PRIOR 180 DAYS.

(2) ON RECEIVING A WRITTEN REQUEST FROM A STUDENT TEACHER
EMPLOYED UNDER § 6–107 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
DISSEMINATE THE NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK TO
AUTHORIZED AGENCIES IF THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK WAS
COMPLETED DURING THE PRIOR 365 DAYS.

(F) INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE:

(1) IS CONFIDENTIAL;

(2) MAY NOT BE DISSEMINATED; AND

(3) MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE PURPOSES AUTHORIZED BY THIS
SUBTITLE.

(G) THE SUBJECT OF A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE MAY CONTEST THE CONTENTS OF THE NATIONAL AND STATE CRIMINAL
HISTORY RECORDS CHECK ISSUED BY THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AS PROVIDED IN
§ 10–223 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

5–559.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 144

(a) In this section, “emergency out–of–home placement” means an out–of–home
placement in which a local department places a child in the home of a private individual,
including a neighbor, friend, or relative, as a result of a sudden unavailability of the child’s
primary caretaker.

(b) (1) If a child is placed in an emergency out–of–home placement, a local
department may request that a designated State or local law enforcement agency in the
State [or other location approved by the Department] perform a federal name–based check
on any individual described in [§ 5–551(c)(4), (5)(iii), and (7)(ii)] § 5–551(B)(4), (5)(III),
AND (7)(II) of this subtitle.

(2) The designated agency described in paragraph (1) of this subsection
may provide the results of the name–based check to the local department.

(3) Within 15 calendar days after the local department receives the results
of the name–based check, the local department shall submit a complete set of fingerprints
to the Department for each individual described in paragraph (1) of this subsection on
whom a name–based check was performed.

(4) Within 15 calendar days [after the date on which the name–based check
was performed] AFTER THE NAME–BASED CHECK, the Department shall perform a
criminal history records check, in accordance with [§ 5–554] § 5–555 of this subtitle.

(c) A child shall be removed immediately from an emergency out–of–home
placement if any individual required to submit to a name–based check [fails to comply with
this section] REFUSES TO SUBMIT THE FOLLOW–UP FINGERPRINTS.

(d) When the placement of a child in a home is denied as a result of a name–based
criminal history records check of an individual and the individual contests that denial, the
individual shall submit to the local department:

(1) a complete set of fingerprints; and

(2) written permission allowing the local department to forward the
fingerprints to the Department for submission to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

(e) An individual who is required to submit to a criminal history records check
under this section shall pay the fees required under [§ 5–551(h)] § 5–551(G) of this
subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
the section affected.
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 144 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14