START OF PAGE 1
 
  HJ 4 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Joint Resolution 4 
(The Speaker) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
Rules 
 
Locating the New Federal Bureau of Investigation Headquarters in Maryland 
 
 
This joint resolution urges the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) to select for 
the new Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) headquarters one of the two finalist sites 
located in Maryland. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Compliance with the joint resolution does not directly affect State finances 
or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Compliance with the joint resolution does not directly affect local finances 
or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Generally, FBI enforces federal law and investigates 
criminal activity including terrorism, cybercrime, white collar crimes, public corruption, 
civil rights violations, and other major crimes. The J. Edgar Hoover Building in 
Washington, DC is the current FBI headquarters (among other satellite offices in the area). 
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) reported in November 2011 that the 
current FBI headquarters does not fully support the FBI’s long-term security, space, and 
building condition requirements. GAO further reported, among other solutions, the need 
for the creation of a new consolidated FBI headquarters. The FBI concurred with GAO’s 
recommendations in that report. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HJ 4/ Page 2 
As noted in the preamble, GSA and FBI are still in the process of selecting a location for a 
new consolidated FBI headquarters. The U.S. Congress directed GSA in the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2022 to select a new headquarters site from 
three finalist sites:  Greenbelt, Maryland; Landover, Maryland; and Springfield, Virginia. 
 
Additional Comments:  Though the joint resolution does not have a direct fiscal impact 
on State or local finances, Prince George’s County advises of significant economic benefits 
should GSA and FBI choose the county as the home for the new FBI headquarters. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SJ 5 (The President and Senator A. Washington) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; U.S. Government Accountability 
Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - April 3, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2