START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 67 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 67 
(Senator Beidle) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Clerks of the Circuit Courts - Civil Commissions - Presentation and Reporting 
 
   
This bill amends statutory provisions relating to the duties of a clerk of a circuit court 
regarding civil commissions and the requirements for appointees to a civil commission.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice.    
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice.    
 
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under existing statute, when the Governor issues a civil 
commission and the Secretary of State delivers the commission to the clerk of a 
circuit court, the clerk immediately must deliver the commission to the person to whom 
the commission is directed and who applies for the commission. The bill requires the 
appointee to contact the clerk to coordinate a time and place for the clerk to administer the 
appointee’s oath of office and present the commission.  
 
Existing statutory provisions in the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article and the 
General Provisions Article require, at least once a month, the clerk of a circuit court to 
report to the Secretary of State the name and office of each officer who has taken an oath 
before the clerk. The bill replaces these requirements to report at least once a month with 
requirements to report regularly.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 67/ Page 2 
In addition, the bill repeals obsolete requirements in statute (1) prohibiting the clerk of a 
circuit court from administering the oath of office to any officer until the officer has paid 
the tax on the officer’s commission that is required by law and (2) specifying the dates 
when the clerk must pay to the Treasurer all money received for taxes on commissions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2