START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 10 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 10 
(Senators Bailey and Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of Natural Resources – Documents – Digital or Electronic Issuance 
 
   
This bill expands a requirement – that the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) make 
available and issue certain licenses and stamps in a digital or electronic format – to apply 
to all licenses, stamps, permits, registrations, and certificates issued by the department, 
with specified exceptions. The bill correspondingly expands an authorization for an 
individual to satisfy any requirement to possess or display those documents by possessing 
or displaying the documents in a digital or electronic format; however, requirements under 
State law or regulations to attach, affix, or display numbers, stickers, or decals associated 
with a license, stamp, permit, registration, or certificate on a vehicle, vessel, dock, or gear 
still apply. The bill expresses the General Assembly’s intent that any licenses, stamps, 
permits, registrations, or certificates that cannot be issued in a digital or electronic format 
because of federal restrictions be issued in a digital or electronic format whenever the 
restrictions are eliminated. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill can be implemented with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 286 of 2021 requires DNR to make available and, on request, issue 
any license or stamp authorized under specified provisions (that require or authorize 
angler’s licenses, trout stamps, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing licenses, special 
charter boat licenses, special commercial fishing pier licenses, and hunting licenses and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 10/ Page 2 
stamps) in a digital or electronic format. With the exception of an annual special 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license, which must be permanently affixed to a 
boat, Chapter 286 allows for an individual to satisfy any requirement under the Natural 
Resources Article of the Maryland Code to possess or display those licenses or stamps by 
possessing or displaying the document in a digital or electronic format as provided by 
DNR. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 545 of 2021 as introduced; the bill was amended and enacted as Chapter 286. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1238 (Delegate Hornberger, et al.) - Rules and Executive 
Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2