START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 53 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 53 
(Senator Kagan) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Maryland Nonprofit Development Center Program - Nonprofit, Interest-Free, 
Micro Bridge Loan (NIMBL) Account - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include a $1.0 million appropriation in the annual budget 
bill for fiscal 2024 to the Maryland Nonprofit Development Center Program Fund 
(MNDCPF) to be used for loans under the Nonprofit Interest-Free, Micro Bridge Loan 
(NIMBL) account. If the appropriation is not included in the fiscal 2024 budget bill, then 
the Governor must include it in the fiscal 2025 budget bill. The bill repeals the discretionary 
distribution of up to 5.0% of Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account 
(SMWOBA) funds, not to exceed $1.0 million annually, to the NIMBL account. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures for the Department of 
Commerce increase by $1.0 million in FY 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase correspondingly as funds are received and used for authorized purposes in 
FY 2025 and increase beginning as early as FY 2026 as loans are repaid and new loans are 
issued. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2025.   
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1.0 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.0 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($1.0) 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 53/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Nonprofit Development Center Program within Commerce 
is charged with assisting the economic growth and revitalization of nonprofit entities in the 
State. The program must do so by providing (1) grants for training and technical assistance 
services and (2) bridge loans to nonprofit entities that have received written confirmation 
of funding from government grants or contracts but have not yet received the funding. 
 
The program operates out of MNDCPF. The NIMBL account within that fund is used to 
provide no-interest bridge loans of up to $25,000 to eligible nonprofit entities, subject to 
specified requirements. In addition to other sources, the account consists of money received 
from SMWOBA transfers:  up to 5.0% of SMWOBA funds received from VLT proceeds, 
capped at $1.0 million, each fiscal year. When the NIMBL account balance reaches 
$1.0 million, any money in excess of that amount must be transferred to SMWOBA. 
 
Video Lottery Terminal Proceeds 
 
The distribution of video lottery terminal (VLT) proceeds differs by each video lottery 
facility. However, a small percentage of gross VLT proceeds is distributed to SMWOBA 
each fiscal year to provide investment capital and loans to small, minority, and women-
owned businesses in the State. 
 
Grants from SMWOBA go to eligible fund managers to provide investment capital and 
loans to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the State. Fund managers must 
allocate at least 50% of available funds to eligible businesses in the jurisdictions and 
communities surrounding the State’s video lottery facilities. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill specifies that the Governor must include an appropriation of 
$1.0 million to MNDCPF for fiscal 2024 in the annual budget bill to be used for loans made 
under the NIMBL account. If the appropriation is not included in the fiscal 2024 budget 
bill, then the Governor must include it in the fiscal 2025 budget bill. As legislation enacted 
in the 2023 session cannot mandate funding until fiscal 2025, funding in the fiscal 2024 
budget bill would have been discretionary. Nevertheless, the fiscal 2024 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly does not include such an appropriation to MNDCPF, which 
means that the Governor must include the funding in the fiscal 2025 budget bill. This 
estimate assumes funding is provided for fiscal 2025, and not as a fiscal 2024 deficiency 
appropriation. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $1.0 million in 
fiscal 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures for MNDCPF increase 
correspondingly as funds are received and used to provide loans under NIMBL. While this 
estimate assumes funds are expended in the year they are received, actual expenditures 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 53/ Page 3 
may occur over several years. Commerce advises that program demand has historically 
ranged from $100,000 to $300,000 per year. 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures further increase beginning as early as fiscal 2026 
as loans made with the additional NIMBL funds are repaid and that revenue is used to make 
additional loans. Commerce can administer these funds with existing resources, although 
a substantial and permanent increase in loan volume would require an additional staff, paid 
for with general funds. 
 
Funds in excess of $1.0 million in the NIMBL account must be transferred to SMWOBA; 
this analysis assumes the fund balance is depleted by the end of fiscal 2024 so no funds are 
transferred. However, to the extent that the NIMBL account exceeds $1.0 million in any 
fiscal year, excess funds are transferred to SMWOBA. Transfers, if any, will depend on 
the timing of the funding provided under the bill and the loans issued and repaid under 
NIMBL. 
 
The bill repeals the discretionary distribution of up to 5.0% of SMWOBA funds, not to 
exceed $1.0 million annually, to the NIMBL account beginning in fiscal 2024. 
SMWOBA’s allocation of VLT revenue is projected to be more than $20.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 and thereafter. Repealing this provision is likely to have little practical effect, 
since the NIMBL account has historically received minimal funding through the 
distribution. Still, special fund revenues for the NIMBL account decrease by up to 
$1.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2024.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Eligible fund managers provide investment capital and loans to 
small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the State with funds from SMWOBA. 
By repealing the discretionary distribution from SMWOBA, SMWOBA funds increase by 
up to $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 and thereafter, though as described above, the actual effect 
is likely significantly less. Funds in excess of $1.0 million in NIMBL must also be 
transferred to SMWOBA, which is a possibility due to the mandated appropriation under 
the bill. Therefore, some small businesses may receive additional SMWOBA funds 
beginning as early as fiscal 2024.   
 
Additional Comments:  Nonprofits are not considered small businesses for purposes of 
fiscal and policy notes; however, small nonprofits benefit from additional funding available 
under the NIMBL program. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 53/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 245 and HB 256 of 2022 and SB 376 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 84 (Delegate Forbes) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 10, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4