START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 48 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 48 
(Senator Lam) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Disaster Service and Uniformed Services Leave Modernization Act of 2023 
 
 
This bill (1) expands the applicability of disaster service leave for State employees; 
(2) grants appointing authorities additional authority to award this type of leave; 
(3) expands military administrative leave for “military” members to instead apply to 
“uniformed services” members, as defined by federal law; and (4) clarifies the definition 
of emergency manager in reference to the Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management (MDEM). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or 
finances; however, in limited circumstances, agency expenditures may increase minimally 
to provide coverage for employees on leave, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Disaster Service Leave 
 
On request, a State employee may be entitled to disaster service leave with pay if the 
employee is a member of the Civil Air Patrol, U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, Maryland 
voluntary organizations active in a disaster, a volunteer emergency medical services 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 48/ Page 2 
department, a volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue company or volunteer rescue 
squad, or a community emergency response team. During a prolonged or recurrent disaster, 
and if doing so would be in the best interest of the State, an employee’s appointing authority 
may (1) waive the eligibility requirements for disaster service leave, including the 
requirement that the employee obtain approval before using the leave and (2) increase the 
number of days of disaster service leave that an employee may use. 
 
Military and Uniformed Services Leave 
 
Various references to military administrative leave for training and active duty are instead 
changed to uniformed services administrative leave, using the federal definition of 
uniformed services. The changes expand eligibility for this type of leave to additional types 
of federal service instead of only military service. Existing procedures, processes, and 
limitations on this type of leave continue to apply. 
 
Specifically, the bill references two sections of federal law defining “uniformed services” 
in different ways. Both sections include in the definition the Armed Forces; the Army 
National Guard and the Air National Guard when engaged in active duty for training, 
inactive duty training, or full-time National Guard duty; the commissioned corps of the 
Public Health Service; and any other category of persons designated by the President of 
the United States in time of war or national emergency. However, the following individuals 
are only included in one of the two definitions:  
 
 
the commissioned officer corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration; 
 
system members of the National Urban Search and Rescue Response System during 
a period of appointment into federal service, as specified; 
 
intermittent personnel who are appointed into Federal Emergency Management 
Agency service, as specified, or train for such service; and 
 
an appointee of the National Disaster Medical System under specified 
circumstances. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
In reference to MDEM, “emergency manager” means an individual whose primary duty of 
employment is to execute the mission of emergency management. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 48/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Disaster Service Leave 
 
On request, any State employee may be entitled to disaster service leave with pay if the 
employee is certified by the American Red Cross as a disaster service volunteer and the 
American Red Cross requests the services of the employee during certain disasters. An 
employee may use up to 15 days of disaster service leave in any 12-month period only after 
obtaining approval from the employee’s appointing authority. For purposes of 
workers’ compensation and the Maryland Tort Claims Act, an employee on disaster service 
leave is not considered a State employee. 
 
Military Administrative Leave 
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may provide, by regulation, for leave with pay 
for up to 15 days for military training or active military duty in a reserve unit of the 
Armed Forces or in the organized militia. 
 
For all State employees, military administrative leave may be provided to an employee 
who is activated for military duty. Such an employee is entitled to leave in an amount 
sufficient to compensate the employee, during each pay period for which the employee is 
eligible to receive the military administrative leave, for the difference between the 
employee’s active-duty base salary and the employee’s State base salary or direct wages. 
This compensation may not exceed an employee’s State base salary or direct wages. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding the State’s military and uniform services leave policy 
and disaster service leave policy does not directly affect State expenditures for most State 
agencies, since regular employee salaries are already budgeted. Additionally, State 
agencies do not generally hire temporary employees when employees are on leave. 
 
However, in limited circumstances, particularly if an employee takes disaster service leave 
during an emergency and the affected State agency is directly affected by the emergency 
(for example, if the State were affected by an earthquake and a number of Maryland 
Department of Transportation employees were to take disaster service leave), the affected 
agency may incur coverage costs for overtime or a loss of productivity. Even so, any such 
cost, if realized, is likely be minimal; MDEM advises that, during emergencies, it works 
closely with the Department of Budget and Management and other State agencies to ensure 
there are enough employees to support State emergency operations while also enabling 
employees to take disaster service leave when appropriate. 
 
Additional Comments:  As noted above, the bill references two different definitions of 
“uniformed services” when determining the individuals for which the bill’s uniformed 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 48/ Page 4 
service leave policy applies. The Department of Legislative Services advises that it is 
unclear whether the leave applies (1) only for an individual whose position is included in 
both definitions or (2) for an individual whose position is included in either definition. 
 
In either case, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances for 
the reasons discussed above. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4