START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  SB 61 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 61 
(Senator Bailey, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Property Tax Credit - Public Safety Officer 
 
 
This bill alters a local option property tax credit for specified public safety officers by 
requiring local governments to define public safety officer for purposes of eligibility for 
the credit. The bill also repeals the $2,500 limit on the amount of the property tax credit 
that may be provided. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies to taxable years 
beginning after June 30, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
FY 2024 to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit, the changes to 
existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the 
property tax credit, and local jurisdictions increase the maximum amount of the property 
tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 686 of 2017 authorized county and municipal governments to 
grant a property tax credit for dwellings owned by specified public safety officers. The 
amount of the property tax credit may not exceed $2,500 and the amount of property tax 
imposed on the dwelling. County and municipal governments may establish, by law, the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 61/ Page 2 
amount of the property tax credit, the duration of the property tax credit, and additional 
eligibility requirements for public safety officers to qualify for the property tax credit. 
 
Chapter 654 of 2018 altered the calculation of the property tax credit by specifying that the 
tax credit may not exceed the lesser of $2,500 or the amount of property tax imposed on 
the dwelling. 
 
Chapter 164 of 2019 altered the eligibility criteria of the property tax credit by adding 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission police officers and 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission police officers who live in Montgomery or 
Prince George’s counties to the definition of public safety officers who are eligible 
recipients of the property tax credit.  
 
Chapters 239 and 240 altered the eligibility criteria of the property tax credit by adding 
volunteer emergency medical technicians to the definition of public safety officers who are 
eligible recipients of the property tax credit. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues may decrease beginning 
in fiscal 2024, to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit, the changes 
to existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for 
the property tax credit, and local jurisdictions increase the maximum amount of the 
property tax credit. Depending on the jurisdiction, the revenue decrease may be significant. 
The amount of the revenue decrease depends on the number of eligible homeowners, the 
value of residential property tax assessments, local property tax rates, and the maximum 
property tax credit amount. 
 
Since this bill provides local governments with full flexibility in determining which public 
safety officers in their jurisdiction qualify for the property tax credit and the amount of the 
property tax credit that will be provided, local governments will be able to determine the 
actual fiscal impact on their jurisdiction.  
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the 
County Revenue Outlook report. A copy of the report is available on the Department of 
Legislative Services website. 
 
Local Governments Providing the Public Safety Property Tax Credit 
 
Several local governments currently provide the property tax credit to public safety officers 
including three counties (Anne Arundel, Howard, and Queen Anne’s) and the 
City of Annapolis. Information on the extent to which the property tax credit has been 
granted in these jurisdictions is provided below. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 61/ Page 3 
 
Anne Arundel County 
 
In Anne Arundel County, 693 individuals will receive the property tax credit in fiscal 2023 
at a total cost of $1.5 million. The following chart shows the number of individuals 
receiving the property tax credit over the past five years and the total cost to the county 
government. 
 
 
Property Tax Credit – Public Safety Officers 
Anne Arundel County 
 
Fiscal 
Number of 
Properties 
Total Amount of 
Tax Credit 
2019 
703 
$1,445,026 
2020 
730 
$1,540,777 
2021 
758 
$1,627,338 
2022 
729 
$1,620,872 
2023 
693 
$1,532,513 
 
Source:  Anne Arundel County 
 
 
 
Howard County 
 
In Howard County, 163 individuals received the property tax credit in fiscal 2022 at a total 
cost of $385,111. The following chart shows the number of individuals receiving the 
property tax credit over the past four years and the total cost to the county government. 
 
 
Property Tax Credit – Public Safety Officers 
Howard County 
 
Fiscal 
Number of 
Properties 
Total Amount of 
Tax Credit 
2019 
192 
$197,500 
2020 
192 
$411,668 
2021 
182 
$426,360 
2022 
163 
$385,111 
 
Source:  Howard County 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 61/ Page 4 
 
Queen Anne’s County 
 
Queen Anne’s County has provided a property tax credit for volunteer fire members for 
the past three years. Last year, the credit was provided to 182 individuals and totaled 
$337,040. 
 
 
City of Annapolis 
 
According to the City of Annapolis, there are 10 city residents who receive the current 
property tax credit, with the average tax credit totaling $1,863 per residence. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 132 of 2022, SB 277 of 2021, and SB 303 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 599 (Delegate Hartman, et al.) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, Queen Anne’s, and 
Worcester counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Association of Counties; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4