START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 32 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 32 
(Senator Brooks, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Property Tax - Exemption for Dwellings of Disabled Veterans - Application 
 
   
This bill alters the application requirements for a specified property tax exemption for a 
dwelling house owned by a disabled veteran or surviving spouse of a disabled veteran. The 
bill adds a rating decision of the disabled veteran’s disability from the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs, including the effective date of the rating decision, to the types of 
supporting documents that can be included with the property tax exemption application. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The requirements of the bill can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The real property owned by disabled veterans, as their legal residence, is 
exempt from taxation if specified requirements are met. A disabled veteran is an individual 
who is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active 
service in any branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. To qualify for the tax exemption, the 
disabled veteran must have a 100% service-connected disability rating. Real property 
owned by the surviving spouse of a disabled veteran and the surviving spouse of an 
individual who died in the line of duty while in active military, naval, or air service of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 32/ Page 2 
United States is exempt from taxation. In addition, a home owned by the surviving spouse 
of a veteran of the U.S. Armed Forces who receives Dependency and Indemnity 
Compensation from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is eligible for a property tax 
exemption under specified circumstances.  
 
A disabled veteran or a surviving spouse of a disabled veteran must apply for a property 
tax exemption by providing to the Supervisor of Assessments (1) a copy of the disabled 
veteran’s discharge certificate from active military, naval, or air service and (2) on the form 
provided by the department, a certification of the disabled veteran’s disability from the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. The disabled veteran’s certificate of disability may 
not be inspected by individuals other than (1) the disabled veteran or (2) appropriate 
employees of the State, a county, or a municipality. 
 
Chapters 195 and 196 of 2022 authorize an individual to submit an application to SDAT 
for a specified property tax exemption for disabled veterans and surviving spouses for a 
specific dwelling house the individual intends to purchase before purchasing the dwelling 
house. Following receipt of the application, SDAT must process the application and send 
the applicant a letter stating (1) that the application is preliminarily approved or 
preliminarily denied and (2) if the application is preliminarily approved, the amount of the 
tax exemption for the dwelling the individual intends to purchase. An individual who is 
issued a letter preliminarily approving the exemption must receive the exemption for the 
dwelling referenced in the letter after becoming the owner of the dwelling without having 
to file another application. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2