START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 688

Chapter 688

(Senate Bill 127)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center – Student FAFSA Data – Reporting
Requirement

FOR the purpose of altering a certain reporting requirement to require the Maryland
Longitudinal Data System Center to report certain student Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) data to certain committees of the General Assembly
by a certain date in certain years; requiring the Maryland Higher Education
Commission to provide the Center with access to student FAFSA data; and generally
relating to the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center and reporting of student
FAFSA data.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–212(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–212(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–212.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “FAFSA” means the Free Application for Federal Student Aid.

(3) “MSFAA” means the Maryland State Financial Aid Application.

(c) (1) On or before [July 1] DECEMBER 15 each year, beginning in 2023 and
ending in 2028, [each county board shall report to] the Maryland Longitudinal Data System
CENTER SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE SENATE EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND
ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS ENERGY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE, THE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 688 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS
COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, on:

(i) The number of students who completed and submitted the
FAFSA in the immediately preceding school year;

(ii) The number of students who did not complete and submit the
FAFSA in the immediately preceding school year; and

(iii) The number of students who completed the FAFSA by the
deadline for eligibility for State financial aid.

(2) [A county board shall report the data required under paragraph (1) of
this subsection, disaggregated by high school.] THE MARYLAND LONGITUDINAL DATA
SYSTEM SHALL DISAGGREGATE THE INFORMATION REPORTED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BY COUNTY AND OTHER STUDENT SUBGROUPS.

(3) [On or before October 1 each year, beginning in 2023 and ending in
2028, the Maryland Longitudinal Data System shall disaggregate the information reported
under this subsection and submit a report to the Senate Education, Health, and
Environmental Affairs Committee, the House Appropriations Committee, and the House
Committee on Ways and Means, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article.] THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE THE MARYLAND LONGITUDINAL DATA
SYSTEM CENTER WITH ACCESS TO STUDENT FAFSA DATA:

(I) IN THE FEDERAL STUDENT AID INTERNET GATEWAY; AND

(II) COLLECTED BY THE OFFICE OF STUDENT FINANCIAL AID.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2