START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 791

Chapter 791

(Senate Bill 156)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Prince George’s County Reentry Employment
Incentive Program – Funding

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor, in certain fiscal years, to include in the annual
budget bill certain funding to the Prince George’s County Office of the County
Executive to be used for the Prince George’s County Reentry Employment Incentive
Program; and generally relating to reentry employment incentives in Prince George’s
County.

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 16–505
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

16–505.

(A) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2025 THROUGH 2028, THE GOVERNOR
SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $500,000 TO
THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY OFFICE OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE TO BE USED
FOR THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY REENTRY EMPLOYMENT INCENTIVE
PROGRAM UNDER § 10–334 OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY CODE.

(B) THE FUNDS PROVIDED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE SUPPLEMENTAL
TO, AND MAY NOT SUPPLANT, FUNDS OTHERWISE AVAILABLE FOR REENTRY
EMPLOYMENT INCENTIVES IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of June 30, 2028,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1