START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 162 
(Senator Lam, et al.) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Aviation Commission - Duties, Composition, and Member Orientation 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Aviation Commission (MAC), in carrying out its duties, to 
consider information and advice from additional stakeholders and consider the aviation, 
economic, business, environmental, health, and community-related impacts or any other 
impacts MAC finds relevant to its decisions and the decisions of the Maryland Aviation 
Administration (MAA). The bill also (1) increases the number of voting members on MAC 
from 9 to 13 and modifies the appointment criteria, as specified; (2) requires 
commissioners to receive an orientation session relating to MAC’s duties, as specified; 
(3) expands MAC’s annual report to include additional information; and (4) subjects MAC 
to enhanced Open Meetings Act requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund expenditures may increase minimally for MAC 
to meet the enhanced Open Meetings Act requirements. Otherwise, MAC can handle the 
bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments can cooperate with MAC as necessary and appropriate 
using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The list of stakeholders MAC must consider information and advice from 
in carrying out its duties is expanded to include airport employees or their representatives, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 162/ Page 2 
local government, citizens from communities near airports, and other Maryland 
communities that have, or are predicted to have, potentially adverse health or community 
impacts from airport infrastructure and economic growth decisions. 
 
Of the 12 commissioners appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, 2 must be recommended by the Anne Arundel County Senate delegation and 2 must 
be recommended by the Howard County Senate delegation. In appointing members, the 
Governor must consider the experience of an appointee in the aviation and airport 
industries such that some commission members have directly relevant experience. 
 
The annual report submitted by MAC to the General Assembly must include a summary 
of commission feedback related to health or community impact and how the commission 
addressed such feedback. 
 
MAC is included in the list of public bodies that must follow enhanced Open Meetings Act 
requirements under § 3-307 of the General Provisions Article, as discussed below under 
Current Law. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Aviation Administration and Maryland Aviation Commission 
 
MAA, as a unit of the Maryland Department of Transportation, has responsibility for 
fostering, developing, and regulating aviation activity throughout the State. MAA is 
responsible for operating, maintaining, and developing State-owned airports, including 
BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport. MAA is governed by its executive director and MAC. 
 
MAC is comprised of eight individuals appointed by the Governor with the advice and 
consent of the Senate. The Secretary of Transportation serves as the commission’s 
chairman. The chairman must appoint the Executive Director of MAA based on the advice 
of the commission, subject to the approval of the Governor. In appointing members to 
MAC, the Governor must consider the geographic and ethnic representation of the State 
such that all segments of the population of the State to the extent possible are represented 
on MAC. The commission is responsible for: 
 
 
establishing policies directed toward MAA’s ability to improve and promote the 
role of BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport as an airport of service to the 
Washington-Baltimore metropolitan area; 
 
approving regulations for the operation of State-owned airports, as specified; 
 
directing MAA in developing and implementing airport management policy for all 
State-owned airports; 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 162/ Page 3 
 
approving major capital projects, as specified; and 
 
excising the powers granted to it, as specified. 
 
In carrying out its duties, MAC must consider information and advice from the air carrier 
industry, airport concessionaire industry, airline support services industry, and citizen 
advisory groups. 
 
MAC must submit an annual report to the General Assembly by January 15 of each year 
on its activities during the previous year. The report must include (1) a review of the 
financial and operational results for all State-owned airports during the previous year and 
any recommendations for future changes in legislation, capital funding, or operational 
flexibility; (2) subject to review by the Department of Budget and Management, an 
estimate of necessary commission expenditures, as specified; and (3) certain actions taken 
by the commission relating to managerial staffing and salaries. 
 
Open Meetings Act, Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A “public 
body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by the 
Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum of 
understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of education 
and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; a rule, 
resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others. 
 
Agendas:  Generally, a public body must make an agenda available to the public prior to 
meeting in an open session. The agenda must include known items of business or topics to 
be discussed at the meeting and indicate whether the public body expects to close any 
portion of the meeting in accordance with State law. The public body is not required to 
include in the agenda any information regarding the subject matter of a closed portion of 
the meeting. If a public body is unable to comply with specified deadlines for the release 
of a meeting agenda because the meeting is scheduled in response to an emergency, a 
natural disaster, or any other unanticipated situation, the public body must make available, 
on request, an agenda of the meeting within a reasonable time after the meeting occurs. 
 
Minutes:  As soon as practicable after an open session, a public body must prepare minutes 
of the meeting. The minutes must reflect each item that the public body considered, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 162/ Page 4 
action it took on each item, and each vote that was recorded. If a public body meets in 
closed session, the minutes for a public body’s next open session must include a summary 
that includes specified information about the proceedings of the closed meeting. A public 
body need not prepare written minutes of an open session if (1) live and archived video or 
audio streaming of the open session is available or (2) if the public body votes on legislation 
and the individual votes taken by each participating member of the public body are 
promptly posted on the Internet. 
 
In general, with limited exceptions, minutes of a public body must be available for public 
inspection during normal business hours. A public body must retain a copy of the minutes 
of each session and any specified recording for at least five years and, to the extent 
practicable, post them online. 
 
Enhanced Open Meetings Act Requirements 
 
Certain public bodies are subject to additional Open Meetings Act requirements under 
§ 3-307 of the General Provisions Article. A public body subject to those provisions must 
make publicly available on its website (1) each open meeting agenda, along with other 
specified information, at least 48 hours in advance of each meeting or, for specified 
unanticipated situations, as far in advance as practicable; (2) meeting minutes from the 
portions of a meeting that were held in open session, not more than two business days after 
the minutes are approved; and (3) live video streaming of each portion of a meeting that is 
held in open session. To the extent practicable, each open meeting agenda must indicate 
(1) whether the public body intends to adjourn the open session to a closed session and 
(2) if applicable, the expected time at which the public body intends to adjourn the open 
session to a closed session. Generally, each open meeting must also include consideration 
of the meeting minutes from the most recent meeting. 
 
Further, the public body must approve minutes in a timely manner and maintain on its 
website (1) meeting minutes (from the portions of a meeting held in open session) for a 
minimum of five years after the date of the meeting and (2) a complete and unedited 
archived video recording of each open meeting for which live video streaming was made 
available for a minimum of one year after the date of the meeting. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 204 (Delegate Hill, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 162/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Association 
of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Federal Aviation Administration; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5