START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 143 
(Senator Feldman) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Electricity - Net Energy Metering and Virtual Net Energy Metering - Accrual of 
Net Excess Generation (Net Metering Flexibility Act) 
 
 
This bill authorizes an eligible customer-generator under the State’s net metering law to 
accrue net excess generation for an indefinite period, instead of only for a 12-month period, 
subject to specified requirements. An electric company must pay the customer-generator 
for any indefinitely accrued net excess generation within 15 days of the close of a 
customer’s account; the Public Service Commission (PSC) must establish a method for 
determining the value of such generation. The authorization does not apply to a 
customer-generator served by a municipal electric utility or an electric cooperative. 
Subscribers under the Community Solar Energy Generating System Pilot Program are 
likewise authorized to accrue virtual net excess generation in the same manner as described 
above, and the credit limitation of 200% of baseline energy usage is removed. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.        
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 143/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:      
 
Payment for Excess Generation 
 
Generally, an eligible customer-generator may accrue net excess generation for a period 
(1) of up to one year and (2) that ends with the billing cycle that is complete immediately 
prior to the end of April of each year. The electric company must carry forward net excess 
generation until (1) the eligible customer-generator’s consumption of electricity from the 
grid eliminates the net excess generation or (2) the accrual period expires.  
 
Generally, the dollar value of net excess generation is equal to the generation or commodity 
portion of the rate that the eligible customer-generator would have been charged for the 
electricity multiplied by the number of kilowatt-hours of net excess generation. At the end 
of the accrual period ending in April each year, the electric company must pay to each 
eligible customer-generator the dollar value for any accrued net excess generation 
remaining. An electric company must also pay the dollar value for any accrued net excess 
generation within 15 days of customer account closure.  
 
Certain customer-generators in an electric cooperative service territory may elect to be paid 
for net excess generation on a monthly basis.   
 
Net Metering – Generally  
 
Net energy metering is the measurement of the difference between the electricity that is 
supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by an eligible 
customer-generator and fed back to the electric company over the eligible 
customer-generator’s billing period. PSC must require electric utilities to develop and 
make net metering tariffs available to eligible customer-generators. Generally, the 
generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may be up to 
two megawatts. Eligible energy sources are solar, wind, biomass, micro combined heat and 
power, fuel cell, and certain types of hydroelectric. There is a statewide net-metered 
capacity limit of 3,000 megawatts.    
 
Community Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
Chapters 346 and 347 of 2015 required PSC to establish a three-year Community Solar 
Energy Generating System Pilot Program, subject to specified conditions. Chapters 461 
and 462 of 2019 extended the pilot program through December 31, 2024. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 143/ Page 3 
A community solar energy generating system, as defined in statute, is a system that, in 
addition to other requirements:    
 
 
has a generating capacity that does not exceed five megawatts as measured by the 
alternating current rating of the system’s inverter; 
 
has at least two subscribers, but no limit to the maximum number of subscribers; 
and 
 
credits its generated electricity, or the value of its generated electricity, to the bills 
of the subscribers to that system through virtual net energy metering. 
 
Subscribers must be in the same electric service territory as the system. Investor-owned 
electric companies must participate in the program; large electric cooperatives and 
municipal utilities may choose to participate. PSC regulations increase authorized capacity 
additions each year. 
 
A subscriber may not receive credit for virtual net excess generation that exceeds 200% of 
the subscriber’s baseline annual usage.   
 
Small Business Effect:  For the 12-month period ending April 30, 2022, commercial 
net-metered customers were paid $3.0 million for excess generation. Some of these 
commercial customers are likely small businesses and have the option under the bill to 
carry forward excess generation indefinitely and apply it against future energy usage. This 
option may be meaningful for such small businesses – particularly in an environment of 
rising energy costs. The effect on rates more broadly from such a change is likely minimal.  
      
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 68 (Delegate Korman) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 143/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 10, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4