START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

Chapter 531

(Senate Bill 114)

AN ACT concerning

Property Tax – ~~Constant~~ ~~Yield~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Rate~~ Real Property Tax Assessment and Tax
Rate Increases – Notice Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring certain notices relating to increases in property assessments;
altering certain notice requirements relating to the intention of a county or
municipal corporation to set a certain real property tax rate that exceeds the
constant yield tax rate and requiring instead certain notice when a county or
municipal corporation intends to increase its real property tax rate; and generally
relating to ~~the~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~county~~ ~~and~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~
~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rates~~ real property assessment and tax rate increases.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 1–402(1)(i), 2–205, and 6–308
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

1–402.

Property owners in this State have the following rights:

(1) (i) the right to an assessment notice upon reassessment, as provided
in § 8–401 of this article, that clearly explains:

1. the property owner’s right to appeal an assessment;

2. that the determination of value is based upon information
contained in the valuation records of the Department; [and]

3. the property owner’s right of access to the valuation records
of the Department; and

4. THAT IF AN ASSESSMENT HAS INCREASED, THE TOTAL
AMOUNT OF PROPERTY TAX OWED BY THE PROPERTY OWNER MAY ALSO INCREASE
EVEN IF THE PROPERTY TAX RATE HAS NOT INCREASED; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 531 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2–205.

(a) In this section, “taxing authority” means:

(1) the county council or board of county commissioners of a county;

(2) the City Council of Baltimore City; and

(3) the governing body of a municipal corporation.

(b) (1) On or before February 14 of each year, the Department shall send each
taxing authority:

(i) an estimate of the total assessment of all real property in the
county or municipal corporation for the next taxable year; and

(ii) an estimate of the total assessment:

1. of all new construction and improvements in the county or
municipal corporation not assessed since the last date of finality; and

2. of all real property in the county or municipal corporation
that may be deleted from the assessment records.

(2) The Department shall notify each taxing authority of any change in the
estimated assessment of all real property in the county or the municipal corporation that
results from actions of a property tax assessment appeal board or the Maryland Tax Court.

(c) (1) The Department shall notify each taxing authority of the constant yield
tax rate that will provide the same property tax revenue that is provided by the real
property tax rate that is in effect for the current taxable year.

(2) In calculating a constant yield tax rate for a taxable year, the
Department shall use an estimate of the total assessment of all real property for the next
taxable year exclusive of real property that appears for the 1st time on the assessment
records.

(3) (i) The Department may amend a constant yield tax rate only as
provided in this paragraph.

(ii) On or before April 15 each year, the Department may amend a
constant yield tax rate when a county or municipal corporation alters the homestead tax
credit percentage under § 9–105 of this article.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(iii) On or before May 15 each year, the Department may amend a
constant yield tax rate:

1. when directed to make a change by an enactment of the
General Assembly;

2. to correct an error in the calculation of the constant yield
tax rate; or

3. to reflect a significant loss of taxable base, as determined
by the Director.

[(d) The Director shall exempt a municipal corporation from the constant yield tax
rate provisions of § 6–308 of this article if a difference of less than $25,000 exists between:

(1) the property tax revenue that is provided by applying the municipal
corporation real property tax rate for the preceding taxable year to the estimated
assessment of all real property in the municipal corporation; and

(2) the property tax revenue that is provided by applying the constant yield
tax rate for the next taxable year to the estimated assessment of all real property in the
municipal corporation.

(e) (1) The Director shall report to the Attorney General any taxing authority
that appears to have violated the requirements of § 6–308 of this article.

(2) The Attorney General shall investigate the report forwarded by the
Director. If the Attorney General finds that a taxing authority violated the requirements of
§ 6–308 of this article, the Attorney General shall institute appropriate legal action to effect
compliance with the requirements of § 6–308 of this article.

(3) If a court finds that a taxing authority violated § 6–308 of this article,
the real property tax rate of that taxing authority shall be the constant yield tax rate.

(f) A taxing authority that does not exceed the constant yield tax rate shall notify
the Department within the time set by the Director.]

6–308.

(a) In this section, “taxing authority” means:

(1) the county council or board of county commissioners;

(2) the City Council of Baltimore City; and

(3) the governing body of a municipal corporation.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 531 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) Unless the requirements of this section are met, a taxing authority may
not set a county or municipal corporation real property tax rate that exceeds the ~~constant~~
~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~year~~ ~~excluding~~ ~~revenue~~ ~~from~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~appearing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
1st time on the assessment roll CURRENT TAXABLE YEAR’S REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE.

(2) A taxing authority does not meet the requirements of this section until
it provides to the Department:

~~(i)~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~15~~ ~~days~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~advertisement~~ ~~required~~
~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~a~~ ~~copy~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~entire~~ ~~newspaper~~ ~~page~~ ~~that~~ ~~carried~~ ~~the~~ ~~meeting~~ ~~notice~~ ~~required~~
~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~section;~~ ~~or~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~the~~ ~~evidence~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~requires~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~mailing~~
EVIDENCE of the notices described in subsection (c) of this section.

(c) If a taxing authority intends to set a INCREASE THE county or municipal
corporation real property tax rate ~~that~~ ~~exceeds~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate,~~ it shall advertise
to the public by:

(1) placing ~~an~~ ~~advertisement~~ ~~that~~ ~~satisfies~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~and~~ ~~meets~~ ~~the~~
requirements of this section A PUBLIC NOTICE in a newspaper of general circulation in the
jurisdiction of the taxing authority; or AND

(2) ~~mailing~~ ~~a~~ ~~notice~~ ~~that~~ ~~meets~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~to~~ ~~each~~
~~property~~ ~~taxpayer~~ ~~who~~ ~~resides~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~jurisdiction~~

(I) PUBLISHING A COPY OF THE NOTICE ON THE WEBSITE OF
THE TAXING AUTHORITY; OR

(II) IF THE TAXING AUTHORITY DOES NOT HAVE A WEBSITE,
POSTING A COPY OF THE NOTICE IN A PLACE THAT IS EASILY ACCESSIBLE TO THE
PUBLIC.

(d) ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~advertisement~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~1/4~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~page~~ ~~in~~ ~~size~~ ~~for~~ ~~counties~~ ~~and~~
~~1/8~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~page~~ ~~in~~ ~~size~~ ~~for~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporations.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~type~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~used~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~advertisement~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~18~~ ~~point~~ ~~for~~ ~~counties;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~12~~ ~~point~~ ~~for~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporations.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~The~~ ~~advertisement~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~be~~ ~~placed~~ ~~with~~ ~~legal~~ ~~notices~~ ~~or~~ ~~classified~~
~~advertisements.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

~~(4)~~ ~~The~~ ~~headline~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~advertisement~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~in~~ ~~bold~~ ~~print,~~ ~~with~~ ~~all~~
~~letters~~ ~~capitalized.~~

~~(5)~~ ~~The~~ ~~text~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~advertisement,~~ ~~other~~ ~~than~~ ~~the~~ ~~headline,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~in~~ ~~upper~~
~~and~~ ~~lower~~ ~~case~~ ~~letters.~~

(e) (1) [The] IF THE TAXING AUTHORITY INTENDS TO SET A REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATE THAT EXCEEDS THE CURRENT TAXABLE YEAR’S REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATE, THE notice or advertisement shall be in the following form:

“........ (NAME OF JURISDICTION) NOTICE OF A PROPOSED REAL PROPERTY TAX
RATE INCREASE

~~The......~~ ~~(name~~ ~~of~~ ~~taxing~~ ~~authority)~~ ~~of......~~ ~~(name~~ ~~of~~ ~~jurisdiction)~~ ~~proposes~~ ~~to~~ ~~increase~~
~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~taxes.~~

~~1.~~ ~~For~~ ~~the~~ ~~tax~~ ~~year~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~July~~ ~~1,......,~~ ~~the~~ ~~estimated~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~assessable~~
~~base~~ ~~will~~ ~~increase~~ ~~by.....%,~~ ~~from~~ ~~$......~~ ~~to~~ ~~$........~~

~~2.~~ ~~If......~~ ~~(name~~ ~~of~~ ~~jurisdiction)~~ ~~maintains~~ ~~the~~ ~~current~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~of~~ ~~$......~~ ~~per~~ ~~$100~~ ~~of~~
~~assessment,~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~revenues~~ ~~will~~ ~~increase~~ ~~by......%~~ ~~resulting~~ ~~in~~ ~~$......~~ ~~of~~ ~~new~~ ~~real~~
~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~revenues.~~

~~3.~~ ~~In~~ ~~order~~ ~~to~~ ~~fully~~ ~~offset~~ ~~the~~ ~~effect~~ ~~of~~ ~~increasing~~ ~~assessments,~~ ~~the~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~
~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~should~~ ~~be~~ ~~reduced~~ ~~to~~ ~~$......,~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate.~~

~~4.~~ ~~The......~~ ~~(county,~~ ~~city,~~ ~~town,~~ ~~etc.)~~ ~~is~~ ~~considering~~ ~~not~~ ~~reducing~~ ~~its~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~
~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~enough~~ ~~to~~ ~~fully~~ ~~offset~~ ~~increasing~~ ~~assessments.~~ ~~The......~~ ~~(county,~~ ~~city,~~ ~~town,~~ ~~etc.)~~
~~proposes~~ ~~to~~ ~~adopt~~ ~~a~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~of~~ ~~$......~~ ~~per~~ ~~$100~~ ~~of~~ ~~assessment.~~ ~~This~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~
~~is......%~~ ~~higher~~ ~~than~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~and~~ ~~will~~ ~~generate~~ ~~$......~~ ~~in~~ ~~additional~~
~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~revenues.~~

FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR BEGINNING JULY 1,......, THE ...... (NAME OF TAXING
AUTHORITY) OF ...... (NAME OF JURISDICTION) PROPOSES TO INCREASE REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATES FROM $...... PER $100 OF ASSESSMENT TO $...... PER $100 OF
ASSESSMENT.

A public hearing on the proposed real property tax rate increase will be held at......
(time) on...... (date) at...... (location). The hearing is open to the public, and public testimony
is encouraged. Persons with questions regarding this hearing may call...... (phone number)
for further information.”.

(2) IF THE TAXING AUTHORITY INTENDS TO MAINTAIN THE CURRENT
REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE, THE NOTICE OR ADVERTISEMENT SHALL BE IN THE
FOLLOWING FORM:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 531 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~“........~~ ~~(NAME~~ ~~OF~~ ~~JURISDICTION)~~ ~~NOTICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PROPOSED~~ ~~REAL~~
~~PROPERTY~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~RATE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~EXCEEDS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSTANT~~ ~~YIELD~~ ~~TAX~~
~~RATE~~

THE...... (NAME OF TAXING AUTHORITY) OF...... (NAME OF JURISDICTION)
~~PROPOSES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~SET~~ ~~A~~ ~~REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~RATE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~MAINTAINS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CURRENT~~ ~~TAX~~
RATE BUT EXCEEDS THE CONSTANT YIELD TAX RATE.

1. FOR THE TAX YEAR BEGINNING JULY 1,......, THE ESTIMATED REAL
PROPERTY ASSESSABLE BASE WILL INCREASE BY.....%, FROM $...... TO $........

2. IN ORDER TO FULLY OFFSET THE EFFECT OF INCREASING
ASSESSMENTS, THE REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE SHOULD BE REDUCED TO $......, THE
CONSTANT YIELD TAX RATE.

3. THE...... (COUNTY, CITY, TOWN, ETC.) IS CONSIDERING NOT REDUCING
~~ITS~~ ~~REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~RATE~~ ~~ENOUGH~~ ~~TO~~ ~~FULLY~~ ~~OFFSET~~ ~~INCREASING~~
ASSESSMENTS. THE...... (COUNTY, CITY, TOWN, ETC.) PROPOSES TO ADOPT A REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATE THAT MAINTAINS THE CURRENT TAX RATE OF $...... PER $100
OF ASSESSMENT. THIS TAX RATE IS......% HIGHER THAN THE CONSTANT YIELD TAX
RATE AND WILL GENERATE $...... IN ADDITIONAL PROPERTY TAX REVENUES.

A PUBLIC HEARING ON THE PROPOSAL TO MAINTAIN THE CURRENT REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATE WILL BE HELD AT...... (TIME) ON...... (DATE) AT...... (LOCATION).
THE HEARING IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC, AND PUBLIC TESTIMONY IS ENCOURAGED.
PERSONS WITH QUESTIONS REGARDING THIS HEARING MAY CALL...... (PHONE
NUMBER) FOR FURTHER INFORMATION.”.

(f) (E) (1) The meeting on the proposed county or municipal corporation real
property tax rate [increase] shall be held:

(i) on or after the 7th day and on or before the 21st day after the
notice is published as required by subsection (c) of this section; and

(ii) on or before June 17th before the date required by law for
imposition of the real property tax.

(2) The meeting may coincide with the meeting on the proposed budget of
the taxing authority.

(3) In computing periods of time under this subsection all calendar days
shall be counted including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(g) (F) After the meeting, the taxing authority may adopt by law [an increase
in the] A county or municipal corporation real property tax rate that exceeds the constant
~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate:~~

(1) on the day of the meeting; or

(2) on a later day, if the day, time, and location to consider the [increase]
TAX RATE are announced at that meeting.

~~(h)~~ ~~The~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~do~~ ~~not~~ ~~apply~~ ~~if~~ ~~a~~ ~~taxing~~ ~~authority:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~increases~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~or~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~
~~above~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~solely~~ ~~because~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~reduction~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~taxing~~ ~~authority’s~~
~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~assessable~~ ~~base~~ ~~due~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~final~~ ~~determination~~ ~~of~~ ~~assessment~~ ~~appeals;~~ ~~or~~

~~(2)~~ ~~sets~~ ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~or~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~that~~ ~~does~~
~~not~~ ~~exceed~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate.~~

~~(i)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Annually,~~ ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~shall~~ ~~include~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~face~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~bill:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~
~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~year;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount,~~ ~~if~~ ~~any,~~ ~~by~~ ~~which~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~
~~exceeds~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~a~~ ~~designation~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~property~~ ~~is~~ ~~either~~ ~~the~~ ~~owner’s~~ ~~“principal~~
~~residence”~~ ~~or~~ ~~“not~~ ~~a~~ ~~principal~~ ~~residence”.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~A~~ ~~county~~ ~~shall~~ ~~also~~ ~~mail~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~bill~~ ~~the~~ ~~information~~
~~described~~ ~~below~~ ~~in~~ ~~substantially~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~form:~~

~~“Constant~~ ~~Yield~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Rate~~

~~1.~~ ~~In~~ ~~the~~ ~~last~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~year~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~(or~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City)~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~
~~was.....,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~certified~~ ~~assessment~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~net~~ ~~assessable~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~was~~ ~~$......~~ ~~The~~
~~assessment~~ ~~multiplied~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~rate~~ ~~produced~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~revenues~~ ~~of~~ ~~$.......~~

~~2.~~ ~~For~~ ~~this~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~year~~ ~~the~~ ~~certified~~ ~~assessment~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~net~~ ~~assessable~~ ~~real~~
~~property~~ ~~is~~ ~~$......~~ ~~To~~ ~~produce~~ ~~the~~ ~~same~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~revenues~~ ~~as~~ ~~last~~ ~~year~~ ~~the~~ ~~real~~
~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~would~~ ~~be......~~ ~~This~~ ~~rate~~ ~~is~~ ~~called~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate.~~

~~3.~~ ~~For~~ ~~this~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~year~~ ~~the~~ ~~actual~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~is.....,~~ ~~which~~ ~~is~~ ~~(the~~ ~~same~~
~~as)~~ ~~(different~~ ~~from)~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate.~~ ~~(If~~ ~~different,~~ ~~the~~ ~~rate~~ ~~is.....~~ ~~(more)~~ ~~(less)~~ ~~than~~
~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate~~ ~~and~~ ~~will~~ ~~produce~~ ~~in~~ ~~real~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~revenues~~ ~~$.....~~ ~~(more)~~ ~~(less)~~
~~than~~ ~~would~~ ~~be~~ ~~produced~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ ~~tax~~ ~~rate).”.~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 531 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) (1) ANNUALLY, A COUNTY SHALL INCLUDE ON THE FACE OF A REAL
PROPERTY TAX BILL:

(I) THE COUNTY REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE FOR THE CURRENT
TAXABLE YEAR AND THE COUNTY REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE FOR THE IMMEDIATELY
PRECEDING TAXABLE YEAR; AND

(II) THE AMOUNT, IF ANY, BY WHICH THE COUNTY REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATE FOR THE CURRENT TAXABLE YEAR EXCEEDS THE COUNTY REAL
PROPERTY TAX RATE FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TAXABLE YEAR.

(2) IF THE TOTAL REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE FOR THE CURRENT
TAXABLE YEAR, INCLUDING THE STATE AND COUNTY RATES AND ANY MUNICIPAL OR
SPECIAL RATES, DOES NOT EXCEED THE TOTAL REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE FOR THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TAXABLE YEAR, THE COUNTY SHALL INCLUDE WITH THE
REAL PROPERTY TAX BILL A NOTICE THAT ANY INCREASE IN THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF
PROPERTY TAX OWED, EXCLUSIVE OF ANY FEES INCLUDED ON THE PROPERTY TAX
BILL, IN THE CURRENT TAXABLE YEAR COMPARED TO THE PREVIOUS TAXABLE YEAR
IS DUE TO AN INCREASE IN THE TAXABLE ASSESSED VALUE OF THE PROPERTY.

(j) (G) (H) A taxing authority that in good faith has made all reasonable efforts to
comply with the requirements OF SUBSECTIONS (B) THROUGH (F) of subsections (b)
~~through~~ ~~(g)~~ of this section and provides satisfactory evidence to the Department that any
lack of compliance with the requirements was for reasons beyond the taxing authority’s
control:

(1) is deemed to have complied with the requirements; and

(2) may set a real property tax rate that exceeds the ~~constant~~ ~~yield~~ tax rate
FOR THE CURRENT TAXABLE YEAR.

(H) (I) (1) THE DIRECTOR SHALL REPORT TO THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL ANY TAXING AUTHORITY THAT APPEARS TO HAVE VIOLATED THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

(2) (I) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL INVESTIGATE THE
REPORT FORWARDED BY THE DIRECTOR.

(II) IF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL FINDS THAT A TAXING
AUTHORITY VIOLATED THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION, THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL SHALL INSTITUTE APPROPRIATE LEGAL ACTION TO EFFECT COMPLIANCE
WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(3) IF A COURT FINDS THAT A TAXING AUTHORITY VIOLATED THIS
SECTION, THE REAL PROPERTY TAX RATE OF THAT TAXING AUTHORITY SHALL BE
THE SAME AS THE TAX RATE FOR THE CURRENT TAXABLE YEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9