START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 127 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 127 
(Senator Ellis) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center - Student FAFSA Data - Reporting 
Requirement 
 
 
This bill alters a reporting requirement to require the Maryland Longitudinal Data 
System (MLDS) Center to report specified student Free Application for Federal Student 
Aid (FAFSA) data to specified committees of the General Assembly by December 15 each 
year beginning in 2023 and ending in 2028. The MLDS Center must disaggregate the 
information by county and other student subgroups. The Maryland Higher Education 
Commission (MHEC) must provide the MLDS Center with access to student FAFSA data 
as specified. The requirements related to a local board of education reporting FAFSA data 
are repealed. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Altering the method of reporting data on FAFSA completion data is not 
anticipated to have a material impact on State finances, as explained below. Revenues are 
not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures may decrease minimally due to the 
elimination of the FAFSA reporting requirements. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The FAFSA is the official application for financial assistance for 
postsecondary education from the federal government. States, individual colleges and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 127/ Page 2 
universities, and private scholarship programs use this information as well. Financial aid 
includes grants, educational loans, and work-study programs. 
 
Chapter 577 of 2021 requires each local board of education to encourage and assist as many 
high school seniors as possible in completing and submitting a FAFSA, or a Maryland 
State Financial Aid Application if ineligible to complete a FAFSA, by the deadline for 
eligibility for State financial aid set by MHEC. To achieve that objective, each local board 
of education must develop an outreach plan with specific elements and submit a copy to 
specific entities by October 1 each year beginning in 2022. 
 
Chapter 577 also requires additional reporting. By July 1 each year, beginning in 2023 and 
ending in 2028, each local board must submit a report to MLDS with the following 
information, disaggregated by high school:   
 
 
the number of students who completed and submitted the FAFSA in the 
immediately preceding school year; 
 
the number of students who did not complete and submit the FAFSA in the 
immediately preceding school year; and 
 
the number of students who completed the FAFSA by the deadline for eligibility for 
State financial aid. 
 
By October 1 each year, beginning in 2023 and ending in 2028, MLDS must report on the 
data submitted by the local boards, disaggregated by high school. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The method of reporting FAFSA completion data to produce 
reports under Chapter 577 does not align with the operation of the MLDS Center. 
Generally, MLDS Center data comes directly from another State agency. The bill aligns 
the reporting of FAFSA data to produce reports with the operation of the MLDS Center by 
requiring MHEC to provide the MLDS Center access to already available data rather than 
requiring local boards of education to collect and submit additional data. 
 
The MLDS Center can produce the required report using existing resources. The 
MLDS Center advises that, under the bill, it can incorporate FAFSA completion data 
into MLDS and match those data against student data already submitted to the center by 
the Maryland State Department of Education. MHEC advises it can provide the data access 
required using existing resources as it routinely imports Maryland resident Institutional 
Student Information Records into its student financial aid system. In addition, the 
MLDS Center advises that the reporting method established under the bill allows for more 
in-depth analysis of FAFSA completion data than can be completed under current law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 127/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3