START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 145 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 145 
(Senators West and M. Washington) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board of Social Work Examiners - Conditional Licenses to Practice Social 
Work 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Board of Social Work Examiners to issue a conditional license 
to practice bachelor social work or master social work to an applicant who, except for 
passing the required examination, has met the appropriate education and experience 
requirements for licensure. The board must submit a specified report on conditional 
licenses beginning December 31, 2024, and annually thereafter. Unless the board agrees to 
accept the surrender of a license, the holder of a conditional license may not surrender the 
license or allow the license to lapse while the licensee is under investigation or while 
charges are pending against them. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
 
State Effect:  Board special fund revenues and expenditures may increase by an 
indeterminate amount as early as FY 2024 should the board issue conditional licenses, as 
discussed below. The board can submit the required report using existing budgeted 
resources. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $75,000 in 
general funds for board operations, contingent on enactment of either this bill or 
House Bill 103 of 2023 and Senate Bill 871 of 2023. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 145/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board may issue a conditional license if an administrative delay or an 
unforeseen circumstance, act, or occurrence prevents a required examination from being 
available to an applicant for at least 15 business days. A conditional license is valid until 
180 days after the examination becomes readily available to the applicant. A conditional 
license authorizes the holder to practice bachelor or master social work in the State only 
under the supervision of a board-approved supervisor. 
 
By December 31, 2024, and annually thereafter, the board must report to the Senate 
Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee the 
following information for the immediately preceding 12-month period:  (1) whether the 
examination was unavailable at any time during the reporting period; and (2) if the 
examination was unavailable, the number of:   
 
 
applicants who were eligible for a conditional license due to the unavailability of 
the examination; 
 
applicants who applied to take the examination; 
 
applicants that were delayed in processing; and 
 
conditional licenses issued under the bill.  
 
Current Law:  In general, to obtain a license from the State Board of Social Work 
Examiners, an applicant must (1) submit a written application on a board-prescribed form; 
(2) be at least 18 years old; (3) be of good moral character; (4) successfully pass required 
examinations pertinent to the license sought; (5) pay any applicable fees; (6) complete a 
criminal history records check; and (7) if required, complete a mental or physical 
examination by a board-appointed health care practitioner. 
 
A licensed bachelor social worker (LBSW) must have a baccalaureate degree in social 
work from an accredited social work program. A licensed master social worker (LMSW) 
must have a master’s degree in social work from an accredited social work program. 
Generally, an LBSW or an LMSW must practice social work under the supervision of 
another social worker, unless given approval to engage in independent practice. The board 
charges a $100 application fee and an initial $75 license fee for an LBSW or LMSW. 
 
The board uses a national examination administered by the Association of Social Work 
Boards (ASWB). After the board approves a license application, the applicant must register 
with ASWB and pay the examination fee. The applicant can then schedule to take the 
examination at any Pearson VUE test center. The ASWB national examination is available 
any time that scheduling permits at a Pearson VUE test center.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 145/ Page 3 
The board may fine, reprimand, place on probation, suspend, or revoke a license for a 
number of reasons. Additionally, unless the board agrees to accept the surrender of a 
license, a licensed social worker may not surrender the license or allow the license to lapse 
while the licensee is under investigation or while charges are pending against the social 
worker. The board may set conditions on its agreement with the social worker to accept 
surrender of the license while the social worker is under investigation or while charges 
pending against them. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The board advises that additional staff is needed to review and 
approve requests for conditional licenses, process conditional license applications, track 
conditional license holders’ access to the examination, notify conditional licensees when 
their license is expiring, and convert conditional licensees to permanent licenses once an 
individual passes the examination. The board advises that, between 2019 and 2022, an 
average of 875 individuals applied for an LMSW annually and 29 individuals applied for 
an LBSW annually. Should the board issue conditional licenses, it would likely charge 
one application fee (for both a conditional and permanent license) and a conditional license 
fee of $75. 
 
Under the bill, eligibility for a conditional LBSW or LMSW is triggered by an 
administrative delay or unforeseen circumstance, act, or occurrence that prevents a required 
examination from being available to an applicant for at least 15 business days. Thus, the 
number of applicants who will qualify for a conditional LBSW or LMSW (and the resulting 
need for additional staff) is unknown. To the extent the criteria for a conditional license is 
met, and the board elects to issue conditional licenses, board special fund revenues and 
expenditures increase beginning as early as fiscal 2024. The exact amount cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time.  
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $75,000 in general 
funds for board operations, contingent on the enactment of either this bill or House Bill 103 
and Senate Bill 871. The Department of Legislative Services assumes that at least $39,107 
of the $75,000 are spent on contractual personnel to staff the workgroup established by 
Chapter 228 of 2023 (Senate Bill 871). An additional $35,893 in general funds is available 
in fiscal 2024 only for further board costs associated with the workgroup, accelerated 
notification of applicants regarding whether their application is complete as required by 
Chapter 228, and costs associated with implementing the conditional and temporary 
licensure program required by this bill. Any unspent funds revert to the general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 173 of 2022 and SB 167 of 2021. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 145/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  HB 103 (Delegate Bagnall, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
Enrolled - April 13, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 13, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 8, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4