START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 114 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 114 
(Senator Hayes) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Property Tax - Real Property Tax Assessment and Tax Rate Increases - Notice 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill repeals public notice requirements when a taxing authority sets a real property tax 
rate that exceeds the constant yield rate. Instead, a taxing authority is required to provide 
public notice of increases in the real property tax rate. A taxing authority that intends to 
increase its real property tax rate must (1) place a public notice in a newspaper of general 
circulation in the taxing authority’s jurisdiction and (2) publish a copy of the notice on the 
taxing authority’s website; or, if the taxing authority does not have a website, post a copy 
of the notice in a place that is easily accessible to the public. A property taxpayer must be 
notified of increases in the real property tax rate on their property tax bill. Information 
about the effect of rising assessments on the amount of taxes owed must be included with 
assessment notices and property tax bills. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential decrease in local expenditures for public notifications of property 
tax rate increases. County expenditures may increase in FY 2023 to include specified 
property tax information on annual property tax bills. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The “constant yield” is a concept that, as property values fluctuate, the tax 
rate would be adjusted so that the revenue derived from the property tax stays at a constant 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 114/ Page 2 
level from year to year, thus assuring a local government a constant yield from its tax 
source. The constant yield tax rate is the rate that, when applied to the current assessable 
base, yields the same property tax revenue as in the prior year. Generally, when there is 
growth in the real property assessable base, the constant yield tax rate is lower than the 
existing tax rate. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) notifies all 
counties and municipalities by February 14 of their constant yield tax rates for the 
upcoming fiscal year. 
 
Baltimore City and county governments must set or alter the homestead property tax credit 
percentage in a taxable year by March 15 and then notify SDAT of any changes. 
Municipalities must do the same by March 25. The department is authorized to recalculate 
the constant yield tax rate by April 15 if a county or municipality changes the homestead 
tax credit percentage. In addition, assessment notices must include a statement that the 
taxable assessment may change if a county or municipality changes the homestead tax 
credit percentage and that the final taxable assessment will be stated on the next property 
tax bill. 
 
Under the constant yield tax rate law, taxing authorities are required to (1) provide 
information to the public about the constant yield tax rate and the assessable base and 
(2) hold public hearings regarding proposals to enact a tax rate that is higher than the 
constant yield rate. A municipality is exempt from the requirements of the constant yield 
tax rate law if the difference in revenue generated by the current year’s tax rate and the 
constant yield tax rate is less than $25,000. If a municipality is exempt from the constant 
yield tax rate law, it is not required to advertise or hold public hearings on the proposed tax 
rate increase. The municipality may set any tax rate within the limits of its municipal 
charter. The department is required to report to the Attorney General any taxing authority 
that appears to have violated the requirements of this law. Violating jurisdictions must 
reduce their property tax rates to the constant yield level and must refund all excessive 
taxes that have been collected. 
 
Information on constant yield property tax rates for county governments can be found in 
the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the most recent report is available on 
the Department of Legislative Services website. In fiscal 2023, 19 counties and 
Baltimore City set a property tax rate that exceeded the constant yield rate. In 17 of these 
jurisdictions, the property tax rate did not change from the prior fiscal year. In the other 
jurisdictions, one county (Cecil) set the property tax rate at the constant yield rate and 
three counties (Harford, Queen Anne’s, and Washington) set a property tax rate below the 
constant yield rate.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  For fiscal 2023, five counties – Cecil, Harford, Queen Anne’s, 
Washington, and Wicomico – decreased real property tax rates, while Montgomery and 
Talbot counties increased their rates. Under the bill, only the two counties that increased 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 114/ Page 3 
their real property tax rate would be required to notify the public of their intention to 
increase the real property tax rate, compared to 19 counties and Baltimore City that would 
have been required to notify the public under the constant yield requirements. As a result, 
local expenditures for public notices are expected to decrease. 
 
County government expenditures may increase in fiscal 2023 in order to include specified 
property tax rate information on annual property tax bills.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore and Frederick counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Association of Counties; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3