START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 104 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 104 
(Senator Augustine, et al.) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Labor and Employment - Apprenticeship 2030 Commission and Representation 
on the Apprenticeship and Training Council 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission, staffed by the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) with the assistance of staff from State agencies 
represented on the commission. The purpose of the commission is to examine and make 
recommendations to reduce skill shortages in high-demand occupations and provide 
affordable training for career pathways for young people by (1) expanding registered 
apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; (2) growing the number of 
registered apprenticeships to at least 60,000 in 2030; and (3) reaching the Blueprint for 
Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates completing the high school level 
of a registered apprenticeship. The commission terminates December 31, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $36,900 in FY 2024 for the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MDL) to assist the commission. DLS can likely staff the commission 
with existing resources. However, general fund expenditures may increase further to the 
extent that DLS must hire a consultant with relevant expertise. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
36,900 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($36,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 104/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By December 1, 2023, the commission must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill establishes 
legislative intent that in the event of a conflict between a decision or policy of the 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission and the Career and Technical Education (CTE) 
Committee related to youth apprenticeships, the CTE Committee’s decision or policy 
controls. 
 
Additionally, the bill specifically requires that the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training 
Council (MATC) and consultants to the council include representation of individuals who 
are Asian, Black, and Latino. 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of apprenticeship programs in Maryland, including the 
role of MATC, please see the Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
MATC consists of 12 members, all of whom are appointed by the Governor with the advice 
of the Secretary of Labor and the advice and consent of the Senate of Maryland. 
Four members must be representatives of employee organizations, one must be an 
employee, five must be representatives of employers, and two must be appointed from the 
general public. 
 
The membership of MATC (and any nonvoting consultants to MATC) must, to the extent 
practicable, reflect the geographic, racial, ethnic, cultural, and gender diversity of the State 
and must include representation by individuals with disabilities. Of MATC’s current 
12 members, 4 are people of color (3 are Black and 1 is Latino) and 3 are women. 
 
Career and Technical Education Committee 
 
Chapter 36 of 2021 (Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation) created the 
CTE Committee as a unit within the Governor’s Workforce Development Board. The 
purpose of the committee is to build an integrated, globally competitive framework for 
providing CTE to Maryland students in public schools, postsecondary institutions, and the 
workforce. 
 
The 
CTE 
Committee 
must 
establish 
for 
each 
school 
year 
between 
the 
2023-2024 school year and the 2030-2031 school year, statewide goals so that by the 
2030-2031 school year, 45% of high students prior to graduation have completed the high 
school level of a registered apprenticeship or an industry-recognized occupational 
credential. To the extent practicable, the CTE Committee must ensure the largest number 
of students achieve this goal by completing a high school level of a registered 
apprenticeship program approved by the Division of Workforce Development and Adult 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 104/ Page 3 
Learning (DWDAL) within MDL. Annually, by December 1 of each year, the committee 
must report to the Governor, the General Assembly, and the Accountability and 
Implementation Board on the progress, by high school, toward attaining the goals 
established by the committee. 
 
State Expenditures:  To the extent staff from other State agencies assist DLS in 
completing the charge of the commission, DLS can likely staff the Apprenticeship 2030 
Commission with existing resources. However, if the research demands of the commission 
are significant or other agencies are not able to provide sufficient support, DLS may require 
additional general fund expenditures to retain consultant services to complete the work of 
the commission. 
 
As MDL administers the State’s Apprenticeship and Training Program, it has determined 
that additional support for two regular, part-time employees is needed to provide sufficient 
support to meet the December 31, 2023 deadline for the final report. However, DLS advises 
that the added responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent and, thus, may 
be performed by contractual employees. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one half 
time contractual assistant to support the commission beginning July 1, 2023, through 
December 31, 2023, which is shortly after the commission’s report is due and the 
termination date of the commission. Other State agencies represented on the commission 
can assist with existing resources. Thus, general fund expenditures for MDL increase by 
$36,900 in fiscal 2024, for a half-time contractual policy analyst. This estimate includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, and operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$30,021 
Operating Expenses 
     6,879 
Total FY 2024 Expenditures 
$36,900 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.  
 
To the extent that MDL cannot hire new contractual staff in time to adequately support the 
commission’s work, it may instead designate current DWDAL staff for that purpose. 
However, since DWDAL staff are almost entirely federally funded, general funds are 
needed to cover the cost of their time dedicated to the commission. It is anticipated that 
costs associated with using existing staff are similar to those associated with hiring 
contractual staff.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 104/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the past three years. 
See SB 926 of 2022; SB 131 of 2021; and HB 726 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Legislative Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 104/ Page 5 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers and may be 
administered solely by the employer or jointly by management and labor groups. An 
apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job training under the direction of a 
skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in a specific occupation. 
Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the program sponsor. Many 
industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train employees in the knowledge 
necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the number of apprenticeships 
available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the industry and the capacity and 
willingness of employers to supervise them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations. Apprenticeships last from one to six years, although most are three to 
four years, and involve a minimum of 144 hours of classroom instruction per year and at 
least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job training. A national apprenticeship and training 
program was established in federal law in 1937 with the passage of the National 
Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The purpose of the Act was to promote 
national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with 26 other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has chosen to operate 
its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of Workforce 
Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department of Labor is 
responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. More specifically, 
DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as changes to current programs 
and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. The approval process 
involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program in a proposed 
industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current staffing level of 
the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate supervision can be 
provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations of the entity. The 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory role for legislation 
and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 
As of December 2021, there were 11,404 apprentices registered, and there were 
3,833 participating employers. During calendar 2021, the State added 23 new 
apprenticeship programs. 
 

END OF PAGE 5