START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 317

Chapter 317

(Senate Bill 145)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Social Work Examiners – ~~Temporary~~ ~~License~~ Conditional ~~and~~
~~Temporary~~ Licenses to Practice Social Work

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ authorizing the State Board of Social Work Examiners, under
certain circumstances, to issue a ~~temporary~~ conditional license to practice social
work; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Social~~ ~~Work~~ ~~Examiners~~ ~~to~~ ~~issue~~ ~~a~~ ~~temporary~~
~~license~~ ~~to~~ ~~practice~~ ~~social~~ ~~work~~ ~~to~~ ~~certain~~ ~~applicants~~ ~~who~~ ~~meet~~ ~~certain~~ ~~requirements;~~
and generally relating to ~~a~~ ~~temporary~~ ~~license~~ conditional ~~and~~ ~~temporary~~ licenses to
practice social work.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–101(c–1) and 19–309.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–101(e) and 19–310(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Occupations~~
~~Section~~ ~~19–101(u)~~ ~~and~~ ~~19–101(c–1)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(u),~~ ~~19–309.1,~~ ~~and~~ ~~19–309.2~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

19–101.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 317 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(C–1) “CONDITIONAL LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE ISSUED BY THE BOARD
UNDER, AND AS LIMITED BY, § 19–309.1 OF THIS TITLE TO PRACTICE:

(1) BACHELOR SOCIAL WORK; OR

(2) MASTER SOCIAL WORK.

(e) “License” means, unless the context requires otherwise[, one]:

(1) ONE of four categories of licenses issued by the Board authorizing an
individual to practice:

[(1)] (I) Bachelor social work;

[(2)] (II) Master social work;

[(3)] (III) Certified social work; or

[(4)] (IV) Certified social work–clinical; OR OR

(2) A TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL LICENSE ISSUED BY THE BOARD; OR

(3) A TEMPORARY LICENSE ISSUED BY THE BOARD.

(U) “TEMPORARY LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE ISSUED BY THE BOARD
UNDER, AND AS LIMITED BY, § 19–309.1 § 19–309.2 OF THIS TITLE TO PRACTICE:

(1) BACHELOR SOCIAL WORK; OR

(2) MASTER SOCIAL WORK.

19–309.1.

(A) IF AN ADMINISTRATIVE DELAY FOR ANY REASON OR AN UNFORESEEN
CIRCUMSTANCE, ACT, OR OCCURRENCE PREVENTS AN EXAMINATION REQUIRED
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE FROM BEING AVAILABLE TO AN APPLICANT FOR A PERIOD OF
AT LEAST 7 15 BUSINESS DAYS, THE BOARD SHALL MAY ISSUE A TEMPORARY
CONDITIONAL LICENSE TO AN APPLICANT WHO, EXCEPT FOR PASSING THE
EXAMINATION, HAS MET THE APPROPRIATE EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER § 19–302 OF THIS
SUBTITLE TO PRACTICE:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 317

(1) BACHELOR SOCIAL WORK; OR

(2) MASTER SOCIAL WORK.

(B) A TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION
AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO PRACTICE SOCIAL WORK IN THE STATE ONLY UNDER
THE SUPERVISION OF A BOARD–APPROVED SUPERVISOR WHILE THE TEMPORARY
CONDITIONAL LICENSE IS EFFECTIVE.

(C) A TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL LICENSE IS VALID UNTIL 180 DAYS AFTER
THE EXAMINATION BECOMES READILY AVAILABLE TO THE APPLICANT.

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
BOARD SHALL REPORT TO THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE
HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION FOR
THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12–MONTH PERIOD:

(1) WHETHER THE EXAMINATION WAS UNAVAILABLE AT ANY TIME
DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD; AND

(2) IF THE EXAMINATION WAS UNAVAILABLE:

(I) THE NUMBER OF APPLICANTS WHO WERE ELIGIBLE FOR A
CONDITIONAL LICENSE DUE TO THE UNAVAILABILITY OF THE EXAMINATION;

(II) THE NUMBER OF APPLICANTS WHO APPLIED TO TAKE THE
EXAMINATION;

(III) THE NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS THAT WERE DELAYED IN
PROCESSING; AND

(IV) THE NUMBER OF CONDITIONAL LICENSES ISSUED UNDER
THIS SECTION.

~~19–309.2.~~

(A) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE A TEMPORARY LICENSE TO AN APPLICANT WHO,
~~EXCEPT~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PASSING~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EXAMINATION~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~
SUBTITLE, HAS MET THE APPROPRIATE EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER § 19–302 OF THIS
SUBTITLE TO PRACTICE:

(1) BACHELOR SOCIAL WORK; OR
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 317 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) MASTER SOCIAL WORK.

(B) A TEMPORARY LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION AUTHORIZES THE
HOLDER TO PRACTICE SOCIAL WORK IN THE STATE ONLY WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE
SPECIFIC CATEGORY OF LICENSE ISSUED BY THE BOARD WHILE THE TEMPORARY
LICENSE IS EFFECTIVE.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
TEMPORARY LICENSE IS VALID UNTIL THE EARLIER OF:

(I) NOTIFICATION OF PERMANENT LICENSURE; OR

(II) 2 YEARS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE TEMPORARY
LICENSE WAS ISSUED.

(2) THE BOARD MAY RENEW A TEMPORARY LICENSE FOR AN
ADDITIONAL TERM ONLY:

(I) ON THE GOVERNOR’S DECLARATION OF A STATE OF
EMERGENCY BY EXECUTIVE ORDER OR PROCLAMATION;

(II) FOR A SERVICE MEMBER OR MILITARY SPOUSE UNDER §
1–703 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

(III) FOR GOOD CAUSE ON THE WRITTEN RECOMMENDATION OF
ONE LICENSED SOCIAL WORKER AND ONE BOARD–APPROVED SUPERVISOR OF THE
TEMPORARY LICENSE HOLDER.

19–310.

(a) Unless the Board agrees to accept the surrender of a license, a licensed social
worker OR THE HOLDER OF A CONDITIONAL OR TEMPORARY LICENSE may not
surrender the license nor may the license lapse by operation of law while the licensee is
under investigation or while charges are pending against the social worker.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2023~~ ~~is~~ ~~an~~ ~~emergency~~ ~~measure,~~ ~~is~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~immediate~~ ~~preservation~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~public~~ ~~health~~ ~~or~~ ~~safety,~~ ~~has~~ ~~been~~ ~~passed~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~yea~~ ~~and~~ ~~nay~~ ~~vote~~ ~~supported~~ ~~by~~ ~~three–fifths~~
~~of~~ ~~all~~ ~~the~~ ~~members~~ ~~elected~~ ~~to~~ ~~each~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~two~~ ~~Houses~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~and~~ ~~shall~~
~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~date~~ ~~it~~ ~~is~~ ~~enacted.~~ ~~It~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~through~~ ~~July~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025,~~ ~~and,~~
~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~July~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025,~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~
~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~ ~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect~~ shall take effect October 1,
2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 317

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5