START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 167 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 167 
(Senator Elfreth, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland State Arts Council - Funding 
 
 
This bill clarifies the general fund mandate calculation for the Maryland State Arts Council 
(MSAC) beginning in fiscal 2025. Specifically, beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor 
must include in the annual budget bill a general fund appropriation for MSAC in an amount 
no less than the result of the following calculation:  (1) any funds distributed to MSAC in 
accordance with § 2-202 of the Tax General Article, increased by the general fund growth 
adjustment; plus (2) the amount of the general fund appropriation for MSAC for the 
immediately preceding fiscal year increased by the general fund growth adjustment; minus 
(3) the amount of funds distributed to MSAC in the immediately preceding fiscal year in 
accordance with § 2-202 of the Tax General Article. The “general fund growth adjustment” 
is defined as the percentage by which the projected total general fund revenues for the 
upcoming fiscal year exceed the revised estimate of total general fund revenues for the 
current fiscal year, as further specified. An obsolete uncodified provision is also removed. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) would have 
otherwise continued with its current interpretation of the MSAC funding mandate, the bill 
has no effect on State expenditures. Revenues are not affected. This bill clarifies an 
existing mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 167/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MSAC is a 17-member State agency established in 1967. The council’s 
mission is to encourage and invest in the advancement of the arts for the people of the 
State, which the council accomplishes largely through grants to arts organizations and local 
arts agencies. The council also makes grants to enhance the availability of artists in public 
schools, further the creative work of individual artists, and support the preservation of folk 
and traditional arts. 
 
Generally, MSAC is funded through a mandated general fund appropriation and a 
$1.0 million transfer from certain admissions and amusement (A&A) tax revenues each 
year. General funds allocated to MSAC are required to grow each year by the expected 
percentage growth in general fund revenues. These provisions have been modified and 
clarified several times and have been interpreted by DBM in a way that reduced annual 
general fund appropriations beginning in fiscal 2022. See below for additional details. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General funds allocated to MSAC are required to grow each year by 
the expected percentage of growth in general fund revenues. MSAC also receives 
$1.0 million annually from A&A tax revenues on electronic bingo and electronic tip jars. 
The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2017 required that funds from 
the A&A tax revenues be included in the calculation to determine the mandated general 
fund appropriation for MSAC, although at the time the revenue transfer was set to terminate 
after fiscal 2021. Chapter 14 of 2021 extended the transfer indefinitely but did not indicate 
how to treat the transfer for purposes of future MSAC general fund appropriations. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2022, DBM changed its method for calculating the general fund 
mandate for MSAC based on a change in interpretation of the language in the BRFA of 
2017 on how to include the A&A tax revenues in the calculation compared to prior years. 
Both methods use the A&A tax revenues as part of the base when calculating the growth, 
but the new (current) method then removes the $1.0 million in A&A tax revenues after that 
growth calculation. This has the effect of reducing the following year’s general fund base 
by $1.0 million. The difference grows each year due to the cumulative effect of the lower 
base on subsequent calculations. 
 
The bill clarifies the existing mandate provisions to explicitly align with DBM’s current 
interpretation. Assuming DBM would have otherwise continued with its current 
interpretation, there is no effect on general fund expenditures.  
 
Additional Comments:  The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report requested information on the 
funding mandate altered by the bill. See the Department of Commerce’s response for 
further discussion and legislative history.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 167/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3