START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 154 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 154 
(Senators Beidle and Augustine) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Public Health - Mental Health Advance Directives - Awareness and Statewide 
Database 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to develop and implement a 
public awareness campaign to encourage the use of mental health advance directives in the 
State. The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) and the Maryland Health Care 
Commission (MHCC) must jointly study how first responders and behavioral health crisis 
providers can access the advance directives database (as developed by MHCC in 
accordance with statute) when responding to a behavioral health crisis and report to 
specified committees of the General Assembly by December 1, 2023. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $140,700 in FY 2024 for 
MDH to hire staff and procure specified materials; future years reflect annualization and 
the elimination of one-time costs. BHA and MHCC can complete the required study and 
report with existing budgeted resources. Any operational impact on the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) can be absorbed within existing 
budgeted resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
140,700 
87,400 
91,300 
95,400 
100,400 
Net Effect 
($140,700) 
($87,400) 
($91,300) 
($95,400) 
($100,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Any change in operational activities for local government agencies, 
including local correctional facilities and local health departments, does not materially 
affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 154/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Public Awareness Campaign 
 
The public awareness campaign must include initiatives to encourage and support outreach 
efforts by specified persons and agencies to inform present or future recipients of mental 
health services and members of their families, health care providers, and other behavioral 
health care partners about mental health advance directives.   
 
Current Law: 
 
Advance Directives 
 
In general, an advance directive allows an adult who has decision making capacity to deal 
with future health care issues through written instructions, a written appointment of an 
agent, or an oral statement to a physician or nurse practitioner. The advance directive 
outlines the individual’s instructions regarding the provision of health care or withholding 
or withdrawing health care. The individual may name an agent to make health care 
decisions under circumstances stated in the directive, and the authority of surrogate 
decision makers is specified based on their relationships with the individual. The directive 
becomes effective when two physicians have certified in writing that the patient is 
incapable of making an informed decision. 
 
In general, a written or electronic advance directive must be dated, signed by or at the 
express direction of the individual making the advance directive, and subscribed by 
two witnesses.  
 
MHCC recognizes electronic advance directive services to be authorized for connection to 
the State-designated health information exchange (HIE) subject to security provisions. An 
individual may register an advance directive with such a service recognized by MHCC. 
Currently, ADVault, Inc. (or MyDirectives.com) is the only web-based repository 
recognized by MHCC. 
 
Under § 19-145.1 of the Health-General Article, MHCC must coordinate the accessibility 
of electronic advance care planning documents (including advance directives and medical 
orders for life-sustaining treatment forms). Among other things, MHCC must collaborate 
with the State-designated HIE to develop an electronic platform through which individuals 
can upload, save, and update advance care planning documents, and health care providers 
can access electronic advance care planning documents, as appropriate.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 154/ Page 3 
Maryland Behavioral Health Crisis Response System 
 
Behavioral Health Crisis Response Services must (1) operate a statewide network utilizing 
existing resources and coordinating interjurisdictional services to develop efficient and 
effective crisis response systems to serve all individuals in the State, 24 hours a day and 
7 days a week; (2) provide skilled clinical intervention to help prevent suicides, homicides, 
unnecessary hospitalizations, and arrests or detention, and to reduce dangerous or 
threatening situations involving individuals in need of behavioral health services; and 
(3) respond quickly and effectively to community crisis situations. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
General fund expenditures increase by at least $140,682 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for 
a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one administrative program 
manager to develop, manage, coordinate, and monitor the required public awareness 
campaign. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating 
expenses, and approximately $67,000 in one-time costs to procure materials for 
implementation of the awareness campaign.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$66,273 
Awareness Campaign Materials 
67,000 
Operating Expenses 
7,409 
Public Awareness Campaign FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$140,682 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating and the termination of one-time costs.  
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
DPSCS advises that the bill has a potential operational impact depending on how a mental 
health advance directive affects the provision of mental health services in the correctional 
setting, including the transfer of an inmate to a preferred medical or mental health facility, 
the provision of preferred or authorized medications, and the consultation of an appointed 
agent to act on an inmate’s behalf. However, DPSCS advises that any change in operations 
can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  A mental health advance directive is a legal written document 
that outlines an individual’s treatment preferences (including where to receive care and 
what treatments they are willing to undergo) in the event that a mental health crisis occurs, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 154/ Page 4 
and the individual is unable to make treatment decisions. An individual may also identify 
an agent or representative who is trusted and legally empowered to make health care 
decisions on his or her behalf. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 994 and HB 1467 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Maryland Independent College and 
University Association; Morgan State University; Department of Information Technology; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4