START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 156 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 156 
(Prince George's County Senators) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Prince George's County - Prince George's County Reentry Employment 
Incentive Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include an appropriation of $500,000 in the annual 
budget bill for the Prince George’s County Reentry Employment Incentive Program. The 
mandated appropriation applies in fiscal 2025 through 2028. The annual appropriation 
must be used to supplement, but not supplant money appropriated to the county program. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023 and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in FY 2025 through 
FY 2028. State revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation 
beginning in FY 2025.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues and expenditures increase by $500,000 in 
FY 2025 through FY 2028. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potentially meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 156/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 10-334 of the Prince George’s County Code establishes the criteria 
for the County Re-entry Employment Incentive Program. The following outlines several 
key components of the program. 
 
A “qualifying employee” is a county resident who has been confined for 6 months or more 
for criminal conviction during the five years prior to becoming employed in a qualified 
position and been released within 36 months prior to becoming employed in a qualified 
position; was a county resident prior to their most recent incarceration; is eligible for 
employment with a qualifying employer; and has been a county resident continuously since 
being released from the most recent period of confinement. 
 
A “qualifying employer” is a commercial or nonprofit business that conducts business 
within the county and complies with federal, State, and local requirements; employs a 
qualifying employee in a qualifying position; and has signed and is in compliance with the 
Re-entry Employment Reimbursement Program Agreement, as specified. 
 
A “qualifying position” is an employment position located within the county for which the 
employer is required to pay the Maryland Unemployment Insurance Tax. A qualifying 
employee in a qualifying position works at least 21 hours per week; is paid at least $15 per 
hour; and is hired by a qualifying employer after the employer signs a Re-entry 
Employment Reimbursement Program Agreement, as specified. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 annually 
in fiscal 2025 through 2028 due to the mandated appropriation to the 
Prince George’s County Reentry Employment Incentive Program. Prince George’s County 
government will receive the mandated appropriation from the State; however, the funds 
must be distributed to the county’s Reentry Employment Incentive Program. The program 
is currently administered by Employ Prince George’s, which currently receives a 
$300,000 grant from the county government. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 464 (Delegate J. Lewis, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 156/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3