START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 494

Chapter 494

(Senate Bill 273)

AN ACT concerning

National Capital Strategic Economic Development Fund – Annual
Appropriation and Authorized Uses

FOR the purpose of altering the amount of a certain appropriation the Governor is required
to make for the National Capital Strategic Economic Development Fund; repealing
a provision requiring 100% of the National Capital Strategic Economic Development
Fund to be used for community enhancement projects in sustainable communities
located, at least in part, within the boundary created by Interstate 495 in the State
and the District of Columbia beginning in a certain fiscal year; and generally relating
to the National Capital Strategic Economic Development Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 6–710(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section ~~6–710(k)~~ 6–710(j) and (k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

6–710.

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the National Capital Strategic Economic
Development Fund.

(j) (1) For fiscal year 2021 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor shall
include in the annual operating budget an appropriation for the Fund in the amount of
$200,000.

(2) For fiscal [year] YEARS 2021 [and each fiscal year thereafter]
THROUGH 2024, the Governor shall include in the annual operating or capital budget an
appropriation for the Fund in the amount of $7,000,000.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 494 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL OPERATING OR CAPITAL BUDGET
AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE FUND IN THE AMOUNT OF $12,000,000.

(k) [(1) In fiscal years 2022 and 2023, 100% of the Fund shall be used] THE
FUND MAY BE USED ONLY for community enhancement projects in sustainable
communities located:

[(i)] (1) in Prince George’s County, at least in part, within the
boundary created by Interstate 495 in the State and the District of Columbia; or

[(ii)] (2) in Montgomery County, within an enterprise zone or the
boundary created by:

[1.] (I) Prince George’s County;

[2.] (II) Maryland Route 200;

[3.] (III) Interstate 270;

[4.] (IV) Interstate 495 to the Maryland state line; and

[5.] (V) the District of Columbia.

[(2) In fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, 100% of the Fund
shall be used for community enhancement projects in sustainable communities located, at
least in part, within the boundary created by Interstate 495 in the State and the District of
Columbia.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2