START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 632

Chapter 632

(Senate Bill 290)

AN ACT concerning

Office of the Attorney General – Independent Investigations Division
– Authority to Prosecute

FOR the purpose of expanding the investigative jurisdiction of the Independent
Investigations Division of the Office of the Attorney General; repealing a
requirement that the Division submit a certain report to a certain State’s Attorney
at a certain time; requiring the Division to annually submit a certain report on its
activities to the Governor and General Assembly; authorizing the Attorney General
to prosecute certain criminal matters under certain circumstances; and generally
relating to the Independent Investigations Division.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–527
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 6–601
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 6–602 and 6–603
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 6–604
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

3–527.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 632 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Law enforcement agency” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of this
title.

(3) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of this title.

(b) A law enforcement agency shall notify the Independent Investigations
Division within the Office of the Attorney General of any police–involved incident that
results in the death of [a civilian] AN INDIVIDUAL or injuries that are likely to result in
the death of [a civilian] AN INDIVIDUAL as soon as the law enforcement agency becomes
aware of the incident.

(c) (1) A law enforcement agency shall cooperate with and may not impede the
Independent Investigations Division in connection with [the] AN investigation [of a
police–involved death of a civilian] CONDUCTED UNDER § 6–602 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(2) On request of the Attorney General or the Attorney General’s designee,
a local law enforcement agency shall provide any requested evidence to the Independent
Investigations Division.

(d) (1) The Attorney General or the Attorney General’s designee may seek
temporary or permanent injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in order to
facilitate an investigation or to prevent intereference with an investigation.

(2) In a request for injunctive relief brought under this subsection, the
Attorney General or the Attorney General’s designee is not required to:

(i) post bond;

(ii) allege or prove that an adequate remedy at law does not exist; or

(iii) allege or prove that substantial or irreparable damage would
result from any conduct alleged.

Article – State Government

6–601.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Division” means the Independent Investigations Division in the Office of the
Attorney General.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 632

(c) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the Public Safety Article.

6–602.

(a) There is an Independent Investigations Division within the Office of the
Attorney General.

(b) (1) The Division is the primary investigative unit for police–involved
incidents that result in the death of [civilians] INDIVIDUALS or injuries likely to result in
death.

(2) The Office of the Attorney General shall determine whether an incident
is police–involved and whether an injury is likely to result in death.

(c) (1) The Division[:

(1)] shall investigate all police–involved incidents that result in the
death of [a civilian] AN INDIVIDUAL or injuries that are likely to result in the death of [a
civilian; and

(2) may investigate any other crimes related to police misconduct
that are discovered during an investigation under item (1) of this subsection] AN
INDIVIDUAL.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
STATE’S ATTORNEY MAY REFER FOR INVESTIGATION BY THE DIVISION A
POLICE–INVOLVED INCIDENT RESULTING IN SERIOUS BODILY INJURY TO AN
INDIVIDUAL THAT IS NOT OTHERWISE WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE DIVISION
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) THE DIVISION MAY, IN ITS DISCRETION, DECLINE TO
INVESTIGATE AN INCIDENT REFERRED BY A STATE’S ATTORNEY UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(3) THE DIVISION MAY INVESTIGATE ANY OTHER CRIME RELATED TO
POLICE MISCONDUCT THAT IS DISCOVERED DURING AN INVESTIGATION UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OR (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(d) In conducting an investigation under subsection (c) of this section, the Division
may act with the full powers, rights, privileges, and duties of a State’s Attorney, including
the use of a grand jury in any county.

(e) [(1) Within 15 days after completing an investigation required under
subsection (c) of this section, the Division shall transmit a report containing detailed

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 632 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

investigative findings to the State’s Attorney of the county that has jurisdiction to prosecute
the matter.

(2) Except as otherwise provided by law, the report under this subsection
shall remain confidential through adjudication of any associated criminal case at the trial
court level.

(f)] To investigate [and assist with the investigation of] UNDER THIS SECTION
alleged criminal offenses committed by police officers, the Division may:

(1) detail one or more police officers employed by the Department of State
Police; and

(2) employ other civilian personnel as needed.

(F) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31 EACH YEAR, THE DIVISION SHALL SUBMIT
A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE
DIVISION IN THE PRIOR CALENDAR YEAR, INCLUDING:

(1) THE NUMBER OF INVESTIGATIONS THAT WERE CONDUCTED BY
THE DIVISION; AND

(2) THE NUMBER OF PROSECUTIONS THAT WERE INITIATED AS A
RESULT OF AN INVESTIGATION BY OR A REFERRAL TO THE DIVISION.

[(g)] (F) (1) The Governor annually shall include funding in the State budget
sufficient to provide for the full and proper operation of the Division.

(2) Funds provided in accordance with this subsection shall supplement
and may not supplant any other funding provided to the Division.

6–603.

(a) (1) For the limited purpose of furthering an ongoing criminal investigation
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, the Attorney General or a Deputy Attorney General or an
assistant Attorney General designated in writing by the Attorney General may issue in any
court in the State a subpoena to a person to produce telephone, business, government, or
corporate records or documents.

(2) A subpoena issued under this subsection may be served in the same
manner as a subpoena issued by a circuit court.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 632

(b) (1) A person may have an attorney present during any contact made under
subsection (a) of this section with the Attorney General or [an agent of the Attorney
General] THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DESIGNEE.

(2) The Attorney General OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DESIGNEE
shall advise a person of the right to counsel when the subpoena is served.

(c) (1) (i) If a person fails to obey a lawfully served subpoena under
subsection (a) of this section, the Attorney General OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
DESIGNEE may report the failure to obey the subpoena to the circuit court with jurisdiction
over the matter.

(ii) The Attorney General OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
DESIGNEE shall provide a copy of the subpoena and proof of service to the circuit court.

(2) After conducting a hearing at which the person that allegedly failed to
comply with a subpoena issued under subsection (a) of this section has had an opportunity
to be heard and be represented by counsel, the court may grant appropriate relief.

(d) This section does not allow the contravention, denial, or abrogation of a
privilege or right recognized by law.

6–604.

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, IF
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL DETERMINES THAT AN INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED
UNDER § 6–602 OF THIS SUBTITLE PROVIDES SUFFICIENT GROUNDS FOR THE
PROSECUTION OF A CRIMINAL OFFENSE DISCOVERED IN THE COURSE OF THE
INVESTIGATION, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL HAVE EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY TO
PROSECUTE THE OFFENSE.

(2) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, IN THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
DISCRETION, MAY PROSECUTE A POLICE–INVOLVED INCIDENT NOT OTHERWISE
WITHIN THE INVESTIGATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE DIVISION UNDER § 6–602(C) OF
THIS SUBTITLE IF THE INCIDENT IS REFERRED BY A STATE’S ATTORNEY TO THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR PROSECUTION.

(B) A STATE’S ATTORNEY MAY PROSECUTE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE
DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION ONLY IF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL REQUESTS THAT THE STATE’S ATTORNEY PROSECUTE THE OFFENSE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the provisions of this Act shall
apply to any police–involved incident that results in the death of an individual or injury to
an individual that occurs on or after the effective date of this Act.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 632 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6