START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 273 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 273 
(Senator Zucker, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Fund - Annual Appropriation 
and Authorized Uses 
 
   
This bill increases, from $7.0 million to $12.0 million, the mandated annual appropriation 
the Governor must include in the annual operating or capital budget beginning in 
fiscal 2025 for the National Capital Strategic Economic Development Fund. It also makes 
permanent the requirement that the National Capital Strategic Economic Development 
Fund must be used only for community enhancement projects in sustainable communities 
located in specified areas of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. The bill repeals 
the requirement that, starting in fiscal 2024 and annually thereafter, 100% of the fund be 
used for community enhancement projects in sustainable communities located, at least in 
part, within the boundary created by Interstate 495 in the State and the District of Columbia. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. Pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general fund and/or general 
obligation (GO) bond expenditures increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in FY 2025 
due to the increased mandated appropriation. Special fund revenues and expenditures from 
the fund increase commensurately. This bill increases an existing mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
Bond/PAYGO 
Exp. 
$0 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($5,000,000) 
($5,000,000) 
($5,000,000) 
($5,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 273/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent local governments 
apply for and receive additional financial assistance as a result of the bill. However, some 
municipalities in Montgomery and Prince George’s counties may benefit from the changes 
while others may be disadvantaged. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program 
 
Chapter 732 of 2019 established the National Capital Strategic Economic Development 
Program. The program provides financial assistance to specified government agencies, 
entities controlled by housing authorities, and community development organizations in 
the “national capital region” for community enhancement projects. The “national capital 
region” is defined as the areas of the State located within a sustainable community in 
Montgomery or Prince George’s counties. The Governor is required to include annual 
appropriations of $200,000 in the operating budget to administer the program and 
$7.0 million in either the operating or capital budget to be distributed under the program.  
 
In fiscal 2022 and 2023, 100% of program funding must be used for community 
enhancement projects in sustainable communities in specified areas of Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties. In Prince George’s County, the projects must be located, at least 
in part, within the boundary created by Interstate 495 in the State and the District of 
Columbia. In Montgomery County, eligible projects must be within an enterprise zone or 
the boundary created by (1) Prince George’s County; (2) Maryland Route 200; 
(3) Interstate 270; (4) Interstate 495 to the Maryland State line; and (5) the District of 
Columbia.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2024, 100% of program funding must be used for community 
enhancement projects in sustainable communities located, at least in part, within the 
boundary created by Interstate 495 in the State and the District of Columbia.  
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas  
 
A sustainable community is defined as a part of a priority funding area that (1) is designated 
by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the Secretary of Housing and 
Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base Realignment and Closure 
Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a transit-oriented development.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 273/ Page 3 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for fiscal 2024 through 
2028 includes $7.0 million in PAYGO general funds for the program in fiscal 2025 and  
$7.0 million annually in GO bonds for the program from fiscal 2026 through 2028.  
 
The bill mandates that funding for the program be included in either the operating budget 
or the capital budget, but the General Assembly cannot mandate appropriations in the 
capital budget. If the mandated appropriation for the program (as increased by the bill) is 
met by including funds in the operating budget, PAYGO general funds must be used. 
However, the Governor can satisfy the mandated appropriation by including GO bond 
funding in the capital budget on a discretionary basis. Because the CIP for fiscal 2024 
through 2028 assumes that the existing mandate is met with PAYGO general funds in 
fiscal 2025 and GO bonds beginning in fiscal 2026, it is reasonable to assume that the 
increased mandated appropriation may be met by including funding in either the operating 
or the capital budget. Therefore, PAYGO general fund and/or GO bond expenditures 
increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to meet the bill’s increased 
funding mandate. To the extent that GO bonds are used, fewer funds are available for other 
capital programs.  
 
Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly each 
year. To the extent any additional loans are made under the program due to the additional 
funding mandated by the bill, special fund revenues increase further from loan repayments. 
The Department of Housing and Community Development advises it can continue to 
administer the program with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that local governments receive additional financial 
assistance as a result of the bill, local revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly 
beginning in fiscal 2025. However, some municipalities in Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties may benefit from the changes while others may be 
disadvantaged. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 273/ Page 4 
Although not a direct effect, local tax revenues in affected areas may increase from 
additional economic development initiatives funded by the increased mandated 
appropriation for the program. However, the exact magnitude of such an effect cannot be 
reliably estimated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business involved in development activities in 
jurisdictions eligible for funding may receive additional business due to the increased 
mandated appropriation established under the bill. However, because the existing program 
restricts funding to projects in specified areas located in Montgomery and Prince George’s 
counties, small businesses operating in those areas are more likely to benefit under the bill 
than entities in other areas of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1228 (Delegate Queen, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4