START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 209 
(Senator West, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Task Force to Study Crime Classification 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force to Study Crime Classification. The task force must 
(1) study and make recommendations regarding a method for classifying crimes and civil 
offenses under State law and (2) identify and logically categorize all crimes and civil 
offenses that exist under State law. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) must 
provide staff for the task force. Members of the task force may not receive compensation 
but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses, as provided in the State budget. The task 
force must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by December 31, 2023. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023, and 
terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $177,400 in FY 2024 only 
for OAG to staff the task force, as discussed below. Any expense reimbursements for 
members of the task force are assumed to be minimal and absorbable with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
177,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($177,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 209/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 372 and 578 of 2019 established the Task Force to Study Crime 
Classification and Penalties. That task force was required to:   
 
 
review the penalties for all criminal and civil violations throughout the 
Maryland Code; 
 
study the history and legislative intent of the classification of criminal and civil 
violations throughout the Maryland Code, including the constitutional implications 
and collateral consequences that arise as a result of classification; 
 
study criminal classifications and penalty schemes in other states and how those 
classifications and schemes compare to those in the State; and 
 
make recommendations regarding the current statutory scheme for criminal and 
civil violations throughout the Maryland Code, including recommendations on 
several specified topics. 
 
In its December 2020 report, the task force made the following recommendations:   
 
 
due to the scope of the task force’s responsibilities and delays caused by 
COVID-19 pandemic, the General Assembly should extend the task force for 
one year and authorize the task force to obtain technical and research assistance; 
 
the General Assembly should adopt a standard crime classification system and 
consider a default mens rea for appropriate criminal offenses in the State; and 
 
the General Assembly should define and distinguish misdemeanor and felony 
offenses. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $177,399 in fiscal 2024 
only for contractual personnel to assist OAG with staffing the task force from July 1, 2023, 
until June 30, 2024. This estimate assumes that despite the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective 
date, contractual personnel will not begin employment until July 1, 2023. To the extent 
OAG requires additional personnel to perform its staffing responsibilities, expenditures 
increase. 
 
OAG advises that its current staff cannot accommodate the bill’s requirements, and given 
its current workloads, the scope of the task force’s responsibilities, the research required, 
and the reporting deadline, two regular full-time attorneys, one part-time attorney, and one 
part-time paralegal are needed to implement the bill, at a cost of approximately $385,600 in 
fiscal 2024. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the task force’s 
responsibilities under the bill may not require that magnitude of personnel, and the added 
responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent and may be performed by 
contractual employees. Thus, this estimate reflects the cost of hiring the following 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 209/ Page 3 
minimum personnel needed for OAG to staff the task force:  one contractual full-time 
attorney and one contractual part-time paralegal. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$162,581 
Operating Expenses 
  $14,818 
Minimum FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$177,399 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1281 (Delegate Cardin) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - February 13, 2023 
Third Reader - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3