START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 277 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 277 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Real Property - Sheriff's Sales - Procedures and Subordinate Interests 
 
  
This bill establishes that a sheriff’s sale of real property extinguishes any subordinate lien 
or interest on the land being sold. The bill also specifies that existing provisions related to 
exemptions do not impair a lien on land affected by a judgment in favor of a local 
government for real property maintenance violations or nuisance condition violations that 
is indexed and recorded in accordance with the Maryland Rules. Additionally, the bill 
authorizes the Judiciary to transfer up to $12.0 million of its fiscal 2023 general fund 
appropriation to the Circuit Court Real Property Records Improvement Fund on or before 
June 30, 2023. Any amount transferred under the bill may not revert to the general fund. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by up to $12.0 million in FY 2023; general 
fund revenues decrease by the same amount, as discussed below. Expenditures are not 
affected.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
GF Revenue 
($12.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$12.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 277/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current law:  
 
Money Judgments – Generally  
 
A “money judgment” is a judgment that a specified amount of money is immediately 
payable to the judgment creditor. A money judgment constitutes a lien on the debtor’s 
interest in real or personal property located where the judgment was rendered and may be 
executed by a writ.  
 
In general, statute specifically exempts specified items from execution on a money 
judgment, including up to $6,000 of cash or property of any kind, if the debtor elects to 
exempt such cash or property within 30 days from the date of attachment or the levy by the 
sheriff. In order to determine whether such property is subject to execution, the sheriff must 
appraise the property at the time of levy.  
 
The bill specifies that a lien on land affected by a judgment in favor of a local government 
for real property maintenance violations or nuisance condition violations that is indexed 
and recorded in accordance with the Maryland Rules is not impaired by the statutory 
exemptions. 
 
A writ of execution is a court-issued document that allows a creditor to use the judgment 
debtor’s property to satisfy the money judgment. A writ of execution on a money judgment 
does not become a lien on the personal property of the debtor until an actual levy is made. 
The lien then extends only to the property included in the levy. Upon the issuance of a writ 
of execution, a sheriff or constable may seize (levy) the debtor’s property and sell the 
debtor’s legal or equitable interest in the real or personal property.  
 
Sheriff’s Sale 
 
Generally, a sheriff or constable to whom any writ of execution is directed may seize and 
sell the legal or equitable interest of the defendant named in the writ in real or personal 
property. Current law also requires a sheriff or constable to execute the writ, conduct the 
sale, and distribute the proceeds pursuant to the Maryland rules.  
 
Under current law, prior to any sale, a sheriff or constable must give notice of the time, 
place, and terms of the sale of any property under execution before the property can be 
sold. If there is to be a sale of an interest in property, the notice must be posted on the 
courthouse door or on a bulletin board in the immediate vicinity of the door of the 
courthouse and printed in a newspaper, published in the county where the property is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 277/ Page 3 
located at least 10 days before the sale of personal property or 20 days before the sale of 
real property.  
 
The bill establishes that a sheriff’s sale of real property extinguishes any subordinate lien 
or interest on the land subject to the sale. 
 
Circuit Court Real Property Records Improvement Fund  
 
The Circuit Court Real Property Records Improvement Fund supports the operating and 
equipment expenses of the land records offices of the clerks of the circuit courts as well as 
the Judiciary’s major information technology development projects. The fund is managed 
and supervised by the State Court Administrator with advice from a five-member oversight 
committee. Revenues for the fund are generated through a recordation surcharge on all real 
estate transactions and other specified court surcharges. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill authorizes the transfer of up to $12.0 million from the Judiciary’s 
fiscal 2023 general fund appropriation to the Circuit Court Real Property Records 
Improvement Fund on or before June 30, 2023. Assuming the Judiciary exercises its 
authority to transfer funds, special fund revenues for the Judiciary increase by up to 
$12.0 million in fiscal 2023; under the assumption that, absent the bill, those funds would 
have reverted to the general fund, general fund revenues decrease by the same amount. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Altering procedures and requirements relating to real property 
sold under the conditions of the bill may impact small business judgment creditors, as well 
as small businesses holding subordinate interests in the subject properties.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 729 (Delegate Grossman, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington and Worcester counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 277/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 31, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2023 
Enrolled - May 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4