START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 721

Chapter 721

(Senate Bill 293)

AN ACT concerning

Corrections – Incarcerated Individuals

FOR the purpose of altering the term “inmate” to be “incarcerated individual”; requiring
the publishers of the Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject
to the approval of the Department of Legislative Services, to correct any
cross–references or terminology rendered incorrect by this Act and to describe any
corrections made in an editor’s note following the section affected; and generally
relating to incarcerated individuals.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Correctional Services
Section 1–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Correctional Services
Section 1–101(k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

1–101.

(a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

(k) [“Inmate”] “INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL” means an individual who is
actually or constructively detained or confined in a correctional facility.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That in every law, executive order,
rule, regulation, policy, or document created by any official, employee, or unit of this State,
inmates are renamed incarcerated individuals, as provided in this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 721 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

References to “inmate” throughout the Code shall be replaced with references to
“incarcerated individual”. The publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is
made in an editor’s note following the section affected.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2