START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 222 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 222 
(Senator Augustine, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
 
Environment - Statewide Recycling Needs Assessment and Producer 
Responsibility for Packaging Materials 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of Recycling in the Maryland Department of the Environment 
(MDE) to hire an independent consultant to conduct a statewide recycling needs 
assessment. The Office of Recycling must report the results of the assessment to the 
Governor and the General Assembly by July 30, 2024. By October 1, 2023, MDE must 
approve a single producer responsibility organization to represent the interests of producers 
under the bill. The bill also establishes the Producer Responsibility Advisory Council to 
provide advice and make recommendations regarding establishing and implementing a 
producer responsibility program in the State for packaging materials. The advisory council 
must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and specified committees 
of the General Assembly by December 1, 2024. The bill also establishes related definitions 
and alters the definition of “organics recycling” as that term relates to the Office of 
Recycling and related statutory provisions. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $532,100 in FY 2024 and by 
$12,100 in FY 2025. State revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
532,100 
12,100 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($532,100) 
($12,100) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  It is assumed that any affected local governments can consult with the 
independent consultant with existing resources. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 222/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Office of Recycling Statewide Recycling Needs Assessment 
 
MDE’s Office of Recycling must hire an independent consultant to conduct a statewide 
recycling needs assessment. In conducting the assessment, the independent consultant must 
consult with the advisory council, appropriate local government entities, and regional solid 
waste organizations and producers in the State. 
 
The assessment must include (1) an analysis of the State’s current solid waste and recycling 
streams, as specified; (2) an evaluation of the current infrastructure and capacity related to, 
need for, and associated costs of specified items and related processes; (3) an evaluation of 
comingled recycling processing facility worker conditions, wages, and benefits; (4) an 
evaluation of opportunities in the recycling system for women and minority individuals; 
(5) an evaluation of local government requirements related to multifamily and commercial 
recycling services and their implementation; (6) the sufficiency of recycling education 
programs relative to desired equity outcomes; (7) an evaluation of the economic 
opportunities in the State’s recycling system, as specified; (8) recommendations for 
improving equity and equitable outcomes for underserved populations in the State’s 
recycling system; (9) an analysis of the costs and benefits of implementing an extended 
responsibility program, as specified; (10) an analysis of the potential environmental impact 
of an extended producer responsibility program, as specified; and (11) recommendations 
on the best practices to follow from successful extended producer responsibility programs 
in other states and countries. 
 
Producer Responsibility Advisory Council 
 
MDE must provide staff for the advisory council. The Secretary of the Environment must 
appoint advisory council members; in doing so, the Secretary must, to the extent 
practicable, ensure that the membership of the advisory council represents all geographic 
regions of the State, large and small counties and municipalities, and the variability in how 
waste and recyclable and compostable materials are collected and processed in the State. 
Advisory council members may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses. 
 
The advisory council, which meets at the request of the Secretary, must evaluate and make 
recommendations, including legislative recommendations, on how to effectively establish 
and implement a producer responsibility program in the State for packaging materials. In 
making recommendations, the advisory council must include recommendations regarding 
the responsibilities of producers under a producer responsibility program. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 222/ Page 3 
Related Definitions 
 
The bill alters the definition of “organics recycling” under Subtitle 17 of Title 9 of the 
Environment Article, which establishes the Office of Recycling and related statutory 
provisions governing recyclable materials, recycling facilities, and composting. The 
definition is expanded to mean any process in which organic materials or compostable 
packaging materials are collected, separated, or processed and returned to the marketplace 
in the form of raw materials or products. The bill also establishes definitions for “packaging 
materials,” “producer,” and “producer responsibility organization.”  
 
Current Law:  The solid waste infrastructure in Maryland consists of both permitted and 
nonpermitted facilities, and solid waste is managed through a combination of recycling, 
composting, landfilling, energy recovery, and exporting for disposal or recycling. There 
are several examples of regional waste management partnerships in the State. 
 
Maryland’s recycling policy is guided by the Maryland Recycling Act, which sets 
mandatory recycling rates for State government and local jurisdictions, as well as a 
voluntary statewide waste diversion goal of 60% and a voluntary statewide recycling goal 
of 55% by 2020. Each county (including Baltimore City), must recycle at least 20% or 
35% of the county’s solid waste stream, depending on the county’s population. Each 
county (including Baltimore City) must also prepare a recycling plan that addresses how 
the jurisdiction will achieve its mandatory recycling rate. The plan must be submitted to 
MDE’s Office of Recycling for approval when the jurisdiction submits its water and 
sewerage plan at least every 10 years. At least every 2 years, each county must also submit 
a progress report to MDE, which must include any revision of or amendment to the 
county plan that has been adopted. 
 
MDE’s Office of Recycling submits annual reports, in coordination with the 
Maryland Environmental Service, to the Governor and the General Assembly on specified 
information related to recycling in Maryland. Beginning in 2009, MDE has combined the 
Maryland Waste Diversion Activities Report and the Solid Waste Managed in Maryland 
Report into one report, the Maryland Solid Waste Management and Diversion Report. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for MDE increase by $532,064 in 
fiscal 2024, which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date, and by $12,078 in 
fiscal 2025. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time contractual natural 
resources planner to (1) approve a single producer responsibility organization to represent 
the interests of producers; (2) staff the advisory council and conduct related duties; and  
(3) identify an independent consultant to conduct the statewide recycling needs assessment 
and write the required report. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, and ongoing operating 
expenses. In fiscal 2024 only, the estimate also includes one-time start-up costs and 
one-time costs to hire the independent consultant. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 222/ Page 4 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
Contractual Position (New) 
0.5 
- 
Salary and Fringe Benefits  
$24,920 
$11,810 
Consultant Costs 
500,000 
0 
Operating Expenses 
    7,144 
268 
Total State Expenditures 
$532,064 
$12,078 
 
The fiscal 2025 estimate reflects termination of the contractual employee on  
December 31, 2024, (after the advisory council’s report is due). Although the advisory 
council does not terminate, it is assumed that after the required report has been completed, 
any ongoing work of the advisory council can be handled with existing resources.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 307 and SB 292 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 284 (Delegate Love, et al.) - Environment and Transportation 
and Economic Matters. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Maryland 
Environmental 
Service; 
Frederick 
and 
Somerset counties; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; cities of Frederick and 
Havre de Grace; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4