START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 240 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 240 
(Senator Guzzone)(By Request - Office of the 
Comptroller) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Income Tax – Out–of–State Taxes Paid by Pass–Through Entities – Addition 
Modification 
 
 
This departmental bill requires a resident member of a pass-through entity (PTE), when 
calculating Maryland adjusted gross income, to add back the amount of specified credit 
claimed against Maryland income tax for tax paid by the PTE to another state. Specifically, 
a resident must add back to income the amount of State income tax credit claimed based 
on a tax imposed on any PTE by another state that is deductible in determining the PTE’s 
income under the Internal Revenue Code. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies 
to tax year 2023 and beyond.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase beginning in FY 2024, as discussed 
below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues may increase beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. 
Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 240/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  In response to a provision of the federal Tax Cuts and Jobs 
Act of 2017 (TCJA) that limited the allowable state and local tax deduction 
(SALT deduction) for individuals to $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately) in 
tax years 2018 through 2025, Maryland, like a number of other states, enacted legislation 
authorizing PTEs to elect to be taxed at the entity level for State income tax purposes. In 
Notice 2020-75, the Internal Revenue Service clarified that specified income tax payments 
made by a partnership or S corporation would not be taken into account in the application 
of the SALT deduction limitation for its individual members. 
 
Thus, pursuant to Chapter 641 of 2020, a member of a PTE that makes an election to be 
taxed at the entity level (electing PTE) may claim a credit against Maryland income tax for 
the amount of Maryland income tax paid by the PTE that is attributable to the member’s 
share of the PTE’s taxable income. For PTEs, taxable income is defined as the portion of 
the PTE’s income under the federal Internal Revenue Code, calculated without regard to 
any deduction for taxes based on net income that are imposed by any state or political 
subdivision of a state, that is derived from or reasonably attributable to the trade or business 
of the PTE in Maryland. Chapter 39 of 2021 required a member of an electing PTE to add 
back to income the amount of credit claimed for the member’s share of State income tax 
paid by the PTE. 
 
A resident member of an electing PTE may also claim a credit in the amount of the 
member’s pro rata share of income tax that the PTE pays to another state. However, State 
law does not require a corresponding addition modification. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  As discussed above, the bill builds upon State legislation enacted 
during the 2020 and 2021 sessions authorizing the entity-level taxation of PTEs in response 
to the federal SALT deduction limits imposed under the TCJA. Under current federal law, 
the SALT deduction limits expire after tax year 2025. 
 
While a resident member of an electing PTE may claim a credit against Maryland income 
tax for the amount of out-of-state income tax paid by the PTE that is attributable to the 
member, the amount of such out-of-state tax payments do not flow through to the member’s 
Maryland income tax return as income. By requiring the member to add the amount of the 
State credit back to income on the member’s Maryland income tax return, the bill seeks to 
more accurately account for the income of electing PTE members and, thus, equalize the 
State tax treatment of income taxes paid to other states on PTE income with the State tax 
treatment of income taxes paid to Maryland on PTE income. 
 
Therefore, State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues increase beginning 
in fiscal 2024 to the extent that the bill results in additional Maryland income tax liability 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 240/ Page 3 
for affected taxpayers. However, the effect cannot be reliably predicted, as it depends on, 
among other things, the tax elections of out-of-state and multi-state PTEs and the tax 
treatment of affected PTEs in other states. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Internal Revenue Service; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - April 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 8, 2023 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 240/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax – Out–of–State Taxes Paid by Pass–Through Entities – 
Addition Modification 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB240 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs, COM 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
  
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
While some taxpayers may be members of electing Pass-Through Entity (PTEs) which are small 
businesses that will be affected, the bill is anticipated to have a minimal overall effect on small 
businesses in the State. The bill will more accurately account for the revenue from members of a 
PTE who file a Maryland tax return for a credit paid to another state/jurisdiction when the PTE 
elected to pay tax at the entity level. 
 

END OF PAGE 4