START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 242 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 242 
(Senator Guzzone)(By Request - Office of the 
Comptroller) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Income Tax - Work Opportunity Tax Credit - Technical Correction 
 
 
This departmental bill corrects an incorrect cross-reference to the federal Internal Revenue 
Code relating to the federal Work Opportunity Tax Credit. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.      
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Maryland Work Opportunity Credit  
 
Chapters 5 and 6 of 2022 authorized a nonrefundable State income tax credit for up to 50% 
of the value of the federal Work Opportunity Tax Credit claimed by an employer with 
respect to a qualified individual who is employed in the State. The credit is available 
beginning in tax year 2022. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 242/ Page 2 
Federal Work Opportunity Credit  
 
The federal Work Opportunity Tax Credit provides a federal income tax credit to 
employers for qualified first-year wages paid to employees who (1) are members of 
specified targeted groups that face significant barriers to employment and (2) begin work 
before January 1, 2026. In general, the value of the credit is 40% of the first $6,000 of 
wages paid to a qualifying employee during the employee’s first year of employment. An 
employer must obtain certification from a designated state workforce agency that an 
employee for which the credit is claimed is a member of a targeted group.  
 
Targeted groups under the Work Opportunity Tax Credit include recipients of Temporary 
Assistance to Needy Families or Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits; 
veterans; ex-felons; residents of empowerment zones, enterprise zones, enterprise 
communities, renewal communities, and rural renewal counties; vocational rehabilitation 
referrals; recipients of supplemental Social Security income; and specified long-term 
unemployment recipients. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - February 21, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 242/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax - Work Opportunity Tax Credit - Technical Correction 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB242 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs, COM 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill allows not-for-profit entities to be eligible for a credit, as was originally envisioned by 
the legislation that created the Work Opportunity Tax Credit. As such, there is no small business 
impact whatsoever. 
 

END OF PAGE 3