START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 290 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 290 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Office of the Attorney General - Independent Investigations Division - Authority 
to Prosecute 
 
 
This bill expands the investigative jurisdiction of the Independent Investigations Division 
(IID) of the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and makes corresponding changes. The 
bill also expands the prosecutorial authority of the Attorney General with respect to 
criminal offenses discovered during IID investigations and police-involved incidents 
referred to the Attorney General by State’s Attorneys. The bill’s provisions apply to any 
police-involved incident that results in the death of an individual or injury to an individual 
that occurs on or after October 1, 2023. By January 31 each year, IID must submit a report 
to the Governor and the General Assembly on IID’s activities during the prior calendar 
year, including the number of investigations IID conducted and the number of prosecutions 
that were initiated as a result of an investigation by or a referral to IID. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for OAG increase by $548,900 in FY 2024. 
Future years reflect annualization, inflation, and elimination of one-time costs. Revenues 
are not affected. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$548,900 contingent on the passage of the bill. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
548,900 
641,800 
668,400 
695,700 
729,700 
Net Effect 
($548,900) 
($641,800) 
($668,400) 
($695,700) 
($729,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 290/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Investigative Jurisdiction of IID:  Under current law, IID is the primary investigative unit 
for police-involved incidents that result in the death of civilians or injuries likely to result 
in death. OAG must determine whether an incident is police-involved and whether an 
injury is likely to result in death. IID must investigate all police-involved incidents that 
result in the death of a civilian or injuries that are likely to result in the death of a civilian. 
IID may investigate any other crimes related to police misconduct that are discovered 
during an investigation of these incidents.  
 
The bill expands IID’s investigative jurisdiction. The bill specifies that IID is the primary 
investigative unit for police-involved incidents that result in the death of individuals or 
injuries likely to result in death. OAG is still required to determine whether an incident is 
police-involved and whether an injury is likely to result in death. However, under the bill, 
IID must investigate all police-involved incidents that result in the death of an individual 
or injuries that are likely to result in the death of an individual. A State’s Attorney may 
refer for investigation by IID a police-involved incident resulting in serious bodily injury 
to an individual that is not otherwise within IID’s jurisdiction; however, IID may decline 
to investigate the referred incident. The bill also authorizes IID to investigate any other 
crime related to police misconduct that is discovered during these investigations (i.e., 
investigations under IID’s main jurisdiction and investigations of police-involved incidents 
referred to IID by a State’ Attorney). As under current law, when investigating the matters 
described above, IID may act with the full powers, rights, privileges, and duties of a State’s 
Attorney, including use of a grand jury in any county. The bill makes corresponding 
changes to IID’s authority to use officers from the Department of State Police and civilian 
personnel to reflect the expansion of its investigative jurisdiction described above.  
 
Required Reports:  Under current law, within 15 days after completing an investigation, 
IID must transmit containing detailed investigative findings to the State’s Attorney of the 
county that has jurisdiction to prosecute the matter. The bill repeals this requirement. 
 
Prosecutorial Authority of the Attorney General:  Under the bill, if the Attorney General 
determines that an investigation described above provides sufficient grounds for the 
prosecution of a criminal offense discovered in the course of the investigation, the 
Attorney General must have exclusive authority to prosecute the offense. However, a 
State’s Attorney may prosecute a criminal offense under this exclusive prosecutorial 
authority of the Attorney General only at the request of the Attorney General. 
 
The bill further establishes that the Attorney General, in the Attorney General’s discretion, 
may prosecute a police-involved incident not otherwise within IID’s investigative 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 290/ Page 3 
jurisdiction if the incident is referred by a State’s Attorney to the Attorney General for 
prosecution. 
 
Corresponding and Clarifying Changes:  Under current law, a law enforcement agency 
must notify IID of any police-involved incident that results in the death of a civilian or 
injuries that are likely to result in the death of a civilian as soon as the law enforcement 
agency becomes aware of the incident. A law enforcement agency must cooperate with and 
may not impede IID in connection with the investigation of a police-involved death of a 
civilian. As a reflection of IID’s expanded investigative jurisdiction, the bill changes 
references to “a civilian” to “an individual” and alters the reference to a “police-involved 
death of a civilian” to an investigation conducted within IID’s jurisdiction. 
 
The bill also clarifies that existing provisions addressing the Attorney General’s subpoena 
authority only apply to criminal investigations under IID’s investigative jurisdiction. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $548,900 in fiscal 2024, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring two attorneys, one investigator, and one paralegal to assist IID/OAG in 
performing its expanded responsibilities under the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
a vehicle, contractual services for use of force experts, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. The fiscal 2024 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, includes 
$548,900 contingent on passage of the bill. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$450,538 
Vehicle 
30,000 
Contractual Services – Use of Force Experts 
30,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    38,362 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$548,900 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
IID is currently staffed with six attorneys, eight investigators, and one paralegal. IID shares 
a Public Information Act officer and a victim-witness coordinator with another office. 
OAG advises, and the Department of Legislative Services concurs, that the staffing and 
resources described above are needed for the division to fulfill its responsibilities under the 
bill based on (1) existing IID workloads; (2) projected IID caseloads under the bill; (3) the 
nature of cases IID may prosecute under the bill; and (4) IID’s statewide operations and 
responsibilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 290/ Page 4 
Local Expenditures:  While the bill may reduce local prosecutorial caseloads, this 
estimate assumes that State’s Attorney’s offices will retain and redirect any resources 
currently devoted to local cases that are diverted to IID/OAG under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 857 (Delegate Clippinger, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Somerset County; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2023 
Third Reader - March 31, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 4, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4