START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 243 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 243 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) (By Request - Office of the 
Comptroller) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Income Tax - Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill limits eligibility for the State child and dependent care tax credit to 
resident taxpayers. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and 
beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase by an estimated $332,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$332,000 
$332,000 
$332,000 
$332,000 
$332,000 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$332,000 
$332,000 
$332,000 
$332,000 
$332,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 243/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
State Child and Dependent Care Credit 
 
A taxpayer who claims the federal child and dependent care credit may claim the State 
child and dependent care credit if the taxpayer’s federal adjusted gross income (FAGI) 
does not exceed a specified maximum income threshold. Unlike the State’s earned income 
credit, eligibility for the child and dependent care credit is not limited to resident taxpayers. 
 
The maximum value of the State credit is 32% of the federal credit and begins to phase out 
for taxpayers with FAGI over $30,000 ($50,000 if married filing jointly). For individual 
filers, the credit rate decreases by one percentage point for each $2,000 (or fraction thereof) 
of FAGI over $30,000; for joint filers, the credit rate decreases by one percentage point for 
each $3,000 (or fraction thereof) of FAGI over $50,000. 
 
The credit is refundable for taxpayers whose FAGI does not exceed a specified maximum 
income threshold; for all other taxpayers, the value of the credit is capped at the taxpayer’s 
State income tax liability. For tax year 2022, the refundable credit is available to taxpayers 
with FAGI of up to $55,750 ($83,650 if married filing jointly). 
 
Federal Child and Dependent Care Credit 
 
A taxpayer may be eligible to claim the federal child and dependent care credit if the 
taxpayer paid expenses for the care of one or more qualifying individuals during the 
taxable year and the expenses were incurred to enable the taxpayer to work or look for 
employment. A qualifying individual is (1) a dependent child younger than age 13 or (2) a 
spouse, dependent, or other specified individual who is physically or mentally incapable of 
self-care and lived with the taxpayer for more than half of the year. 
 
Tax Years Other Than Tax Year 2021:  For tax years other than tax year 2021, the credit 
may be applied to eligible expenses of up to $3,000 for one qualifying individual or 
$6,000 for two or more qualifying individuals, minus the amount of any 
employer-provided dependent care benefits excluded from gross income. Further, the 
amount of expenses used to calculate the credit may not exceed the taxpayer’s earned 
income. The maximum value of the credit is 35% of eligible expenses, subject to a 
maximum dollar value of $1,050 for one qualifying individual and $2,100 for two or more 
qualifying individuals. The credit rate decreases by one percentage point for each 
$2,000 (or fraction thereof) of FAGI over $15,000 until the credit rate is reduced to a 
minimum of 20% for taxpayers with FAGI over $43,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 243/ Page 3 
Temporary Enhancements for Tax Year 2021:  The American Rescue Plan Act of 
2021 (ARPA) substantially enhanced the federal child and dependent care credit for 
tax year 2021 only. Specifically, the Act:   
 
 
increased the maximum amount creditable to $8,000 for one qualifying individual 
and $16,000 for two or more qualifying individuals; 
 
increased the maximum credit rate to 50% for taxpayers with FAGI of up to 
$125,000. The credit rate begins to phase out for taxpayers with FAGI over 
$125,000 and completely phases out for taxpayers with FAGI over $438,000; and 
 
made the credit refundable for taxpayers who meet certain residency requirements. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill disallows the State child and dependent care credit for 
nonresident taxpayers beginning in tax year 2023. Thus, general fund revenues may 
increase by an estimated $332,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2024 due to an anticipated 
decrease in credits claimed against the State income tax. This estimate is based on the 
average amount of child and dependent care credits claimed on nonresident income tax 
returns in tax years 2019 and 2020. 
 
The Comptroller reports that approximately $1.5 million in child and dependent care 
credits were claimed on nonresident income tax returns in tax year 2021. However, 
tax year 2021 claims for the tax credit are not reflective of a typical year due to the 
significant enhancements to the federal child and dependent care credit for tax year 2021 as 
enacted under ARPA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Internal Revenue Service; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 243/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax - Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit - Alterations 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 243 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs, COM 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Because this bill – and the underlying credit – applies to individuals only, there is no small 
business impact whatsoever. 

END OF PAGE 4