START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 239 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 239 
(Senator Feldman) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program – Domestic 
Partnerships 
 
   
This bill requires that the terms “spouse,” “family,” “immediate family,” or “dependent” 
(or any other terms that denote the spousal relationship) in Title 2, Subtitle 5 of the State 
Personnel and Pensions Article (which governs the Health and Welfare Benefits Program) 
be construed to include a party to a domestic partnership. The provisions of the State 
Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program that apply to spouses must 
also apply to parties who have entered into a domestic partnership. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent that State employees and retirees elect to enroll their domestic 
partners and/or the dependents of their domestic partners in the State Employee and Retire 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program under the bill, Department of Budget and 
Management (DBM) expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
FY 2024, as discussed below. Revenues are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 6-101 of the Health-General Article defines “domestic partnership” 
as a relationship between two individuals who (1) are at least 18 years old; (2) are not 
related to each other by blood or marriage within four degrees of consanguinity under civil 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 239/ Page 2 
law rule; (3) are not married or in a civil union or domestic partnership with another 
individual; and (4) agree to be in a relationship of mutual interdependence in which each 
individual contributes to the maintenance and support of the other individual and the 
relationship, even if both individuals are not required to contribute equally to the 
relationship.  
 
An individual who asserts a domestic partnership may be required to provide (1) an 
affidavit signed under penalty of perjury by two individuals stating that they have 
established a domestic partnership and (2) proof of any two of a specified list of documents, 
including joint liability for a mortgage, lease, or loan; the designation of one of the 
individuals as the primary beneficiary of the other individual’s life insurance policy, 
retirement plan, or will; or coverage on a health insurance policy. 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program offers medical, 
prescription, and dental plans to active employees and State retirees, as well as flexible 
spending accounts, term life insurance, and accidental death and dismemberment plans.  
 
Under the Code of Maryland Regulations 17.04.13.01, with respect to State employee and 
retiree health benefits, “spouse” means an individual who is lawfully joined in marriage to 
an employee or retired employee. The spouse of an employee or retired employee and the 
dependent child or another dependent child relative of an employee or retired employee are 
also eligible for benefits.  
 
DBM promulgated regulations (effective July 1, 2009) that extended health insurance; life 
insurance; and personal, accidental death and dismemberment insurance benefits to State 
employees, retirees, and their dependents in same-sex domestic partnerships. With the 
passage of Chapter 2 of 2012 (the Civil Marriage Protection Act), same-sex marriage 
became legal in Maryland effective January 1, 2013. DBM subsequently determined that 
the need to offer domestic partner benefits had been alleviated. Thus, new enrollments of 
same-sex domestic partners and their dependents ended June 30, 2013, and domestic 
partner coverage terminated on January 1, 2015.  
 
Other Domestic Partnership Provisions in Maryland Law 
 
Individual and group health insurance policies and contracts that allow family coverage 
must provide, at the request of an insured or group policy holder, the same benefits and 
eligibility guidelines that apply to other covered dependents for a domestic partner or a 
child dependent of the domestic partner of the insured.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 239/ Page 3 
Insurance under a policy of group life insurance may be extended to cover a domestic 
partner of an insured employee or member who elects to obtain that coverage. Such 
coverage is treated in the same manner as that for a spouse or dependent child. 
 
Hospitals, nursing homes, and residential treatment centers must allow visitation by a 
patient’s or resident’s domestic partner and members of the domestic partner’s family. A 
domestic partner can make decisions about health care for a person who has been certified 
to be incapable of making an informed decision and who has not appointed a health care 
agent or whose health care agent or appointed guardian is unavailable. If a domestic partner 
has a health care agent, that health care agent retains the authority to make any decisions 
for a domestic partner until the health care agency is revoked. A domestic partner may 
petition the circuit court to enjoin the provision or withholding of medical treatment to the 
patient upon a finding by a preponderance of the evidence that the action is not lawfully 
authorized by State or federal law. A domestic partner may have priority to consent to the 
donation of the decedent’s organs or tissues. A domestic partner may provide consent for 
a postmortem examination of the decedent; have priority in arranging for the final 
disposition of a body; and request reasonable access to a burial site for restoring, 
maintaining, or viewing.  
 
Persons in domestic partnerships or former domestic partnerships, as specified, may qualify 
for an exemption from recordation and State and county transfer taxes for residential 
property used as a common residence. The receipt by a decedent’s domestic partner of an 
interest in a joint primary residence that at the time of the death was held in joint tenancy 
by the decedent and the domestic partner is exempt from the State inheritance tax. 
 
State Expenditures:  Due to Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and other federal tax rules 
and regulations, employers that offer health insurance benefits to domestic partners and/or 
their dependents must follow certain rules and regulations regarding pre-tax and post-tax 
payroll deductions, including the calculation of imputed income. Thus, to implement 
coverage of domestic partners and their dependents, DBM must rewrite the contribution 
tables and eligibility rules in both the Employee Benefits Division system of record and 
legacy system; reestablish post-tax payroll deductions and corresponding imputed income 
calculations for IRS Form W-2; and review all documents to determine eligibility, 
including notification and follow-up on incorrect or incomplete documentation.  
 
To the extent State employees and retirees elect to enroll their domestic partners and/or the 
dependents of their domestic partners in the State Employee and Retire Health and Welfare 
Benefits Program, DBM expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
fiscal 2024 (for coverage for the 2024 plan year, beginning January 1, 2024) to provide 
benefits for additional enrollees. As the number of domestic partners and dependents who 
may enroll is unknown, actual expenditures cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 239/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4