START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 226 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 226 
(Senator Salling) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Criminal Law - Child Pornography - Accessing and Intentionally Viewing 
 
 
This bill expands § 11-208 of the Criminal Law Article (possession of child pornography) 
to prohibit a person from knowingly or intentionally accessing and intentionally viewing a 
film, videotape, photograph, or other visual representation showing an actual child or a 
computer-generated image that is indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child 
younger than age 16 (1) engaged as a subject of sadomasochistic abuse; (2) engaged in 
sexual conduct; or (3) in a state of sexual excitement. The remaining provisions of 
§ 11-208, including the affirmative defense and penalties, apply to a person charged with 
violating this prohibition. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
expanded application of existing penalty provisions. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s expanded 
application of existing penalty provisions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 11-208 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not knowingly 
possess and intentionally retain a film, videotape, photograph, or other visual 
representation showing an actual child or a computer-generated image that is 
indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child younger than age 16 (1) engaged as 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 226/ Page 2 
a subject of sadomasochistic abuse; (2) engaged in sexual conduct; or (3) in a state of sexual 
excitement. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or 
a $2,500 maximum fine for a first offense. A person who has previously been convicted 
under § 11-208 is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or 
a $10,000 maximum fine. 
 
Section 11-208 does not prohibit a parent from possessing visual representations of the 
parent’s own child in the nude unless the visual representations show the child engaged as 
a subject of sadomasochistic abuse or in sexual conduct and in a state of sexual excitement. 
 
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this prohibition that the person promptly 
and in good faith (1) took reasonable steps to destroy each visual representation or 
(2) reported the matter to a law enforcement agency. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
expanded application of an existing penalty provision from cases heard in the 
District Court. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
expanded application of existing incarceration penalties due to more people being 
committed to State correctional facilities and increased payments to counties for 
reimbursement of inmate costs. The number of people convicted as a result of this 
expanded application is expected to be minimal. 
 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy reports that for 
fiscal 2022, there were 99 individuals sentenced to 215 total counts of possessing child 
pornography under § 11-208 of the Criminal Law Article in the circuit courts. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$4,970 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For persons sentenced to a term 
of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the discretion to order that the 
sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional facility. The State provides 
assistance to the counties for locally sentenced inmates and for (1) inmates who are 
sentenced to and awaiting transfer to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced inmates 
confined in a local detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) inmates who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 226/ Page 3 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
Local Revenue:  Revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded application 
of existing monetary penalty provisions from cases heard in circuit courts. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded 
application of existing incarceration penalties. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration 
for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs 
of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately $90 to $300 per inmate in 
recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 233 (Delegate Grammer, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2023 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3