START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 445

Chapter 445

(Senate Bill 240)

AN ACT concerning

Income Tax – Out–of–State Taxes Paid by Pass–Through Entities – Addition
Modification

FOR the purpose of providing an addition modification under the Maryland income tax for
the amount of a certain tax credit claimed for certain taxes paid to another state by
~~a~~ ~~member~~ ~~of~~ a pass–through entity under certain circumstances; and generally
relating to Maryland income tax and pass–through entities.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 10–102.1(a)(1), (4), and (7) and (b), 10–205(a), and 10–703
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~ adding to
Article – Tax – General
Section ~~10–205(m)~~ 10–205(d–1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

10–102.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(4) “Member” means:

(i) a shareholder of an S corporation;

(ii) a general or limited partner of a partnership, limited
partnership, or limited liability partnership;

(iii) a member of a limited liability company; or

(iv) a beneficiary of a business trust or statutory trust.

(7) “Pass–through entity” means:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 445 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) an S corporation;

(ii) a partnership;

(iii) a limited liability company that is not taxed as a corporation
under this title; or

(iv) a business trust or statutory trust that is not taxed as a
corporation under this title.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, in addition to any other tax
imposed under this title, a tax is imposed on each pass–through entity.

(2) Each pass–through entity:

(i) shall pay the tax imposed under paragraph (1) of this subsection
with respect to the distributive shares or pro rata shares of the nonresident and
nonresident entity members of the pass–through entity; or

(ii) may elect to pay the tax imposed under paragraph (1) of this
subsection with respect to the distributive shares or pro rata shares of all members of the
pass–through entity.

10–205.

(a) In addition to the modification under § 10–204 of this subtitle, the amounts
under this section are added to the federal adjusted gross income of a resident to determine
Maryland adjusted gross income.

(D–1) THE ADDITION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION INCLUDES THE
AMOUNT OF A CREDIT THAT IS CLAIMED UNDER § 10–703 OF THIS TITLE AND IS
BASED ON A TAX IMPOSED ON ANY PASS–THROUGH ENTITY BY ANOTHER STATE THAT
IS DEDUCTIBLE IN DETERMINING THE PASS–THROUGH ENTITY’S INCOME UNDER
THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

~~(m)~~ ~~The~~ ~~addition~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(a)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~includes~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~credit~~
that is claimed under:

(1) § 10–701.1 of this title for the amount of tax paid by a pass–through
~~entity~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~10–102.1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~and~~ ~~is~~ ~~attributable~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~member’s~~ ~~share~~ ~~of~~ ~~tax~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~
~~member’s~~ ~~share~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~pass–through~~ ~~entity’s~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~income,~~ ~~as~~ ~~defined~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~ ~~10–102.1(a)(8)~~
of this title; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 445

(2) TO THE EXTENT NOT INCLUDED IN THE ADDITION UNDER
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, § 10–703 OF THIS TITLE FOR THE AMOUNT OF
TAX PAID BY A PASS–THROUGH ENTITY TO A STATE OTHER THAN THIS STATE THAT
~~IS:~~

(I) BASED ON THE PASS–THROUGH ENTITY’S NET INCOME;

(II) ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE MEMBER’S SHARE OF THE TAX; AND

(III) DEDUCTED FROM THE PASS–THROUGH ENTITY’S INCOME
UNDER THE FEDERAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

10–703.

(a) In this section, “member” and “pass–through entity” have the meanings stated
in § 10–102.1 of this title.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a resident may claim a
credit against the income tax for a taxable year in the amount determined under subsection
(d) of this section for State tax on income paid to another state for the year.

(c) A credit under subsection (b) of this section is not allowed to:

(1) a resident other than a fiduciary, if the laws of the other state allow the
resident a credit for State income tax paid to this State;

(2) a resident fiduciary, if the fiduciary claims, and the other state allows,
a credit for State income tax paid to this State;

(3) a resident for less than the full taxable year for tax on income that is
paid to another state during residency in that state; or

(4) a nonresident.

(d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection and subject to
subsection (e) of this section, the credit allowed a resident under subsection (b) of this
section is the lesser of:

(i) the amount of allowable tax on income that the resident paid to
another state; or

(ii) an amount that does not reduce the income tax to an amount less
than would be payable if the income subjected to tax in the other state were disregarded.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 445 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) If the credit allowed a resident under subsection (b) of this section is
based on tax that a pass–through entity pays to another state, the credit allowable to a
member of the pass–through entity:

(i) may not exceed that member’s pro rata share of the tax; and

(ii) will be allowed for another state’s income taxes or taxes based on
income.

(e) (1) The amount of the credit allowed under subsection (b) of this section to
be applied against the State income tax is equal to the amount that would be calculated
under subsection (d) of this section using the State income tax rate as the only applicable
rate.

(2) The amount of the credit allowed under subsection (b) of this section to
be applied against the county income tax is equal to the amount calculated under subsection
(d) of this section less the amount calculated under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2022.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4