START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 241 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 241 
(Senator Guzzone)(By Request - Office of the 
Comptroller) 
Budget and Taxation 
Economic Matters 
 
Commercial Law – Abandoned Property – Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill specifies that, within one year after delivery of abandoned property 
(other than money), the Comptroller must determine whether the property has commercial 
value and, if applicable, the commercial value of the property. The bill also establishes that 
the Comptroller need not offer abandoned property for sale if the property has no 
commercial value. If property is not required to be offered for sale, the Comptroller may 
(1) return the property to the holder; (2) destroy the property; or (3) otherwise dispose of 
the property. Finally, the bill repeals a provision requiring notice to be provided in a 
newspaper of general circulation and instead requires the Comptroller to give “reasonable 
notice” to the public of any sale. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the Comptroller may realize cost efficiencies (primarily due to an 
expected reduction in storage costs), the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State 
finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 241/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Title 17 of the Commercial Law Article generally governs abandoned 
property in the State. 
 
Sale of Abandoned Property Delivered to the Comptroller 
 
Within one year of taking custody of abandoned personal property, the Comptroller must 
sell the property at auction. The sale must be to the highest bidder at public sale in whatever 
place in the State affords the most favorable market for the property involved. The 
Comptroller may decline the highest bid and reoffer the property for sale if the price bid is 
insufficient. The Comptroller need not offer any property for sale if the probable cost of 
sale exceeds the estimated value of the property. 
 
Any sale held pursuant to these requirements must be preceded by a single publication of 
notice (at least three weeks in advance of the sale) in a newspaper of general circulation in 
the county where the property is to be sold. 
 
The purchaser at any sale must receive title to the property purchased, free from every 
claim of the owner (or prior holder of it) and of every person who claims through or under 
them. The Comptroller must execute all documents necessary to complete the transfer of 
title. No action by any person may be brought or maintained against the State or any officer 
of the State for (or on account of) any transaction entered into pursuant to (and in 
accordance with) these requirements. 
 
Background:  The Comptroller advises that, under current law, the only permissible 
method of disposing of abandoned property is via sale, even if the property has no 
commercial value. This requirement has resulted in the need to store, maintain, and 
catalogue property without monetary value that could not be sold at auction. Under the bill, 
the Comptroller is authorized to dispose of such property, which may lead to a reduction 
in the amount of property that is held in storage. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Comptroller has an electronic abandoned property database 
on the agency’s website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 241/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2023 
Third Reader - February 21, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 241/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Commercial Law – Abandoned Property – Alterations  
BILL NUMBER: 
SB241 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs, COM 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
  
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill allows the Comptroller’s Office to dispose of non-valuable items of abandoned property 
already in its control. There is no discernible impact to small business. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4