START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 19

Chapter 19

(Senate Bill 241)

AN ACT concerning

Commercial Law – Abandoned Property – Alterations

FOR the purpose of requiring the Comptroller, as Administrator of abandoned property in
the State, to determine the value of certain nonmonetary abandoned property;
authorizing the Administrator to dispose of the property in certain manners; and
generally relating to abandoned property in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 17–316
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

17–316.

(a) WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER DELIVERY UNDER THIS TITLE OF ABANDONED
PROPERTY OTHER THAN MONEY, THE ADMINISTRATOR SHALL DETERMINE:

(1) WHETHER THE PROPERTY HAS COMMERCIAL VALUE; AND

(2) IF THE PROPERTY HAS COMMERCIAL VALUE, THE PROPERTY’S
COMMERCIAL VALUE.

(B) (1) Except as provided in [this] subsection (C) OF THIS SECTION, [all]
WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER DELIVERY UNDER THIS TITLE OF ABANDONED PROPERTY
OTHER THAN MONEY, THE ADMINISTRATOR SHALL OFFER THE abandoned property
[under this title, other than money delivered to the Administrator under this title, shall be
offered] for sale [by the Administrator within 1 year of delivery].

(2) The sale shall be to the highest bidder at public sale in whatever place
in the State affords the most favorable market for the property involved.

(3) The Administrator may decline the highest bid and reoffer the property
for sale if the price bid is insufficient.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 19 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (1) The Administrator need not offer [any] ABANDONED property for sale
if[, the]:

(I) THE probable cost of sale exceeds the Administrator’s estimation
of the value of the property; OR

(II) THE ADMINISTRATOR DETERMINES THAT THE PROPERTY
HAS NO COMMERCIAL VALUE.

(2) IF UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ABANDONED
PROPERTY NEED NOT BE OFFERED FOR SALE, THE ADMINISTRATOR MAY:

(I) RETURN THE PROPERTY TO THE HOLDER;

(II) DESTROY THE PROPERTY; OR

(III) OTHERWISE DISPOSE OF THE PROPERTY.

[(b) Any sale held under this section shall be preceded by a single publication of
notice at least three weeks in advance of the sale in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county where the property is to be sold.]

(D) THE ADMINISTRATOR SHALL GIVE REASONABLE NOTICE TO THE
PUBLIC OF ANY SALE HELD UNDER THIS SECTION.

[(c)] (E) (1) The purchaser at any sale conducted by the Administrator under
this section shall receive title to the property purchased, free from every claim of the owner
or prior holder of it and of every person who claims through or under them.

(2) The Administrator shall execute all documents necessary to complete
the transfer of title.

[(d)] (F) No action by any person may be brought or maintained against the
State or any officer of the State for or on account of any transaction entered into pursuant
to and in accordance with the provisions of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2