START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  SB 325 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 325 
(Washington County Senators) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Washington County - Sheriff's Salary - Alteration 
 
 
This bill establishes that the salary of the Washington County Sheriff is equal to 90% of 
the salary of the State’s Attorney of Washington County. The bill also repeals the 
requirement for the Washington County Salary Study Commission to study and issue a 
report that contains recommendations relating to the salary of the county sheriff. Pursuant 
to constitutional requirements, the salary increase takes effect at the beginning of the next 
term of office. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County expenditures increase by a minimum of $21,100 in 
FY 2027 and $36,200 annually thereafter. Local revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to statute, the Sheriff of Washington County receives an annual 
salary that is equal to the greater of (1) $100,000 or (2) the salary set by the county 
commissioners under Title 28, Subtitle 2 of the Local Government Article (provisions 
relating to the Washington County Salary Study Commission). The Washington County 
Salary Study Commission is charged with studying the salaries of specified public officials 
in the county (including the sheriff) and making recommendations to the county 
commissioners for review and consideration. Within 60 days after receiving the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 325/ Page 2 
recommendations of the commission, the county commissioners may accept, reduce, or 
reject the salary recommendations but may not increase them. 
 
The salary of the Washington County State’s Attorney is set by statute as equal to 90% of 
the salary of a judge of the District Court. Pursuant to Joint Resolutions 2 and 3 of the 
2022 session, which implemented the recommendations of the Judicial Compensation 
Commission and set judicial salaries for fiscal 2023 through 2026, a District Court judge’s 
salary will increase to $201,333 by fiscal 2026. Salary increases in future years are 
dependent on the recommendations submitted by the Judicial Compensation Commission 
when it next meets in 2025 (and subsequent action by the General Assembly pertaining to 
the recommendations). 
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public official from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Washington County expenditures increase by a minimum of 
$21,100 in fiscal 2027 and by a minimum of $36,200 annually thereafter. This estimate 
(1) is based on the fiscal 2026 salary of a District Court judge ($201,333); (2) is based on 
the current salary of the Sheriff ($126,900), as reported by Washington County; 
(3) accounts for the next term of office beginning December 2026; and (4) does not include 
fringe benefits. Expenditures increase beyond the estimate shown to the extent that judicial 
salaries further increase, thereby correspondingly increasing the salary of the State’s 
Attorney and the Sheriff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 873 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 197 (Chair, Washington County Delegation) - Environment 
and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 325/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 2, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3