START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 362 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 362 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics - Planning Grant Funds and 
Demonstration Application 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to apply to the Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) at the Center for Mental 
Health Services for (1) federal planning, development, and implementation grant funds 
related to certified community behavioral health clinics (CCBHCs) for fiscal 2025 and 
(2) inclusion in the state CCBHC demonstration program for fiscal 2026. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can apply for federal grant funds and inclusion in the demonstration 
program using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The federal CCBHC model is designed to ensure access to coordinated 
comprehensive behavioral health care. CCBHCs are required to serve anyone who requests 
care for mental health or substance use, regardless of their ability to pay, place of residence, 
or age. CCBHCs must meet standards for the range of services they provide and are 
required to get people into care quickly. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 362/ Page 2 
CCBHCs must provide nine core services either directly or through designated 
collaborating organizations:  (1) crisis services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; (2) treatment 
planning; (3) screening, assessment, diagnosis, and risk assessment; (4) outpatient mental 
health and substance use services; (5) targeted case management; (6) outpatient primary 
care screening and monitoring; (7) community-based mental health care for veterans; 
(8) peer, family support, and counselor services; and (9) psychiatric rehabilitation services. 
CCBHCs also provide care coordination to help people navigate behavioral health care, 
physical health care, social services, and other systems. 
 
More than 450 CCBHCs operate nationally either through the federal CCBHC Medicaid 
Demonstration, through federal CCBHC Expansion (CCBHC-E) Grants, or through 
independent state programs. Six states operate under a Medicaid SPA or § 1115 waiver. 
Maryland currently has five CCBHCs funded by federal CCBHC-E grants that serve 
residents of Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that it plans to apply for a SAMHSA planning grant 
for the implementation of CCBHCs in fiscal 2025. Thus, MDH can apply for federal grant 
funds related to CCBHCs using existing budgeted resources. SAMHSA planning grants 
are funded at a 65% federal matching rate. To the extent grant funds are received, MDH 
federal fund revenues increase in fiscal 2025 (but any such revenues were anticipated 
absent the bill). MDH also advises that it can apply for inclusion in SAMHSA’s state 
CCBHC demonstration program for fiscal 2026 using existing budgeted resources. This 
analysis does not reflect any cost associated with participation in the demonstration 
program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 637 and HB 935 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1249 (Delegates Hornberger and D. Jones) - Rules and 
Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 
Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 362/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3