START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 322 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 322 
(Senator Beidle, et al.) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - Class 4 Limited Winery License - Food Service 
 
 
This bill authorizes a holder of a Class 4 limited winery license to prepare, sell, or serve 
specified foods including sandwiches and other light fare. The bill specifies that a Class 4 
limited winery license holder may sell wine and pomace brandy produced by the license 
holder for on-premises and off-premises consumption, as specified. The bill repeals 
existing requirements for off-premises and on-premises consumption at a limited winery 
and extends the general hours of sale for on-premises consumption at a limited winery from 
10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. each day to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. each day regardless of whether 
a planned promotional event takes place on the licensed premises. Furthermore, the bill 
repeals a notice requirement for specified planned promotional events and makes 
conforming changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 322/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a Class 4 license holder must (1) own or have under contract at 
least 20 acres of grapes or other fruit in cultivation in the State for use in the production of 
wine or (2) if less than 20 acres are owned or under contract, ensure that at least 51% of 
the ingredients used in the annual production of wine are grapes or other fruit grown in the 
State. A license holder may (1) sell or serve specified types of food; (2) distill and bottle 
up to 1,900 gallons of pomace brandy made from available Maryland agricultural products; 
(3) purchase bulk wine and pomace brandy in a specified manner; (4) import, export, and 
transport its product; (5) store the product of other Class 4 limited wineries in a specified 
manner; and (6) produce wine and pomace brandy at a warehouse for which the license 
holder has been issued an individual storage permit if specified conditions are met. A 
Class 4 limited winery may only be located at the place stated on the license. Throughout 
the winemaking process, the licensee must maintain ownership of the wine or pomace 
brandy and ensure it returns to the location of the limited winery. The annual license fee is 
determined by the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission and may not exceed $200. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Revenues for small business Class 4 limited winery license 
holders may increase as a result of additional allowances authorized under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 246 (Delegate Harrison, et al.) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Talbot counties; Alcohol and 
Tobacco Commission; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2