START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 565

Chapter 565

(Senate Bill 310)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Black Bear ~~Conflict~~ ~~Reduction~~ ~~and~~ Damage ~~Mitigation~~
Prevention and Reimbursement Fund – Uses

FOR the purpose of altering the Black Bear Damage Reimbursement Fund to authorize
grants from the Fund to be made for projects that ~~mitigate~~ prevent damages caused
by black bears and reduce conflicts between black bears and humans; renaming the
Black Bear Damage Reimbursement Fund to be the Black Bear ~~Conflict~~ ~~Reduction~~
~~and~~ Damage ~~Mitigation~~ Prevention and Reimbursement Fund; requiring a certain
amount of the Fund to be reserved for black bear damage reimbursement; repealing
a certain apportionment formula applicable to black bear damage reimbursement
under certain circumstances; increasing the ~~minimum~~ ~~and~~ maximum ~~amounts~~
amount of reimbursement from the Fund per person annually authorized for damage
caused by black bears; and generally relating to the Black Bear ~~Conflict~~ ~~Reduction~~
~~and~~ Damage ~~Mitigation~~ Prevention and Reimbursement Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–423.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–423.1.

(a) The General Assembly finds that it is in the public interest to provide funding
to PREVENT CONFLICTS WITH BLACK BEARS BEFORE THEY OCCUR AND TO reimburse
a person who has sustained damage to agricultural products or pets as a result of black
bear.

(b) (1) There is a Black Bear CONFLICT REDUCTION AND Damage
MITIGATION PREVENTION AND Reimbursement Fund in the Department.

(2) The Fund consists of:

(i) Proceeds from the sale of a conservation bear stamp or decal
which may be purchased at a cost of $5 for each stamp or decal; [and]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 565 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Gifts, grants, and contributions to the State that are designated
for inclusion in the Fund; AND

(III) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND.

(3) The Fund is a continuing, nonlapsing special fund, and is not subject to
§ 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(4) The State Treasurer shall hold and the State Comptroller shall account
for the Fund.

(c) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ACCEPT REQUESTS FOR GRANTS FROM
THE FUND FOR PROJECTS THAT MITIGATE SEEK TO PREVENT DAMAGES CAUSED BY
BLACK BEARS AND REDUCE CONFLICTS BETWEEN HUMANS AND BLACK BEARS
THROUGH NONLETHAL METHODS.

(2) IN DETERMINING PROJECTS THAT ARE ELIGIBLE FOR GRANTS,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER PROJECTS THAT:

(I) REDUCE THE AVAILABILITY OF ATTRACTANTS TO BLACK
BEARS IN COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING AGRICULTURAL COMMUNITIES;

(II) DISCOURAGE BLACK BEARS FROM ENTERING AREAS THAT
HAVE A HIGH NUMBER OF CONFLICTS BETWEEN HUMANS AND BLACK BEARS;

(III) HAVE LOCAL COMMUNITY SUPPORT OR A DETAILED PLAN
TO BUILD LOCAL COMMUNITY SUPPORT;

(IV) USE PROVEN NONLETHAL TECHNIQUES FOR REDUCING
CONFLICTS BETWEEN HUMANS AND BLACK BEARS OR INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS THAT
HAVE THE POTENTIAL TO PREVENT CONFLICTS BETWEEN HUMANS AND BLACK
BEARS;

(V) ARE COST–EFFECTIVE INVESTMENTS THAT HAVE THE
POTENTIAL TO CONTINUE TO BE EFFECTIVE BEYOND THE TIME FRAME FOR THE
GRANT FUNDING; OR

(VI) INCLUDE MATCHING FUNDS OR AN IN–KIND MATCH.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT AWARD A GRANT FOR:

(I) THE LETHAL REMOVAL OF BLACK BEARS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 565

(II) STAND–ALONE RESEARCH, DATA COLLECTION, AND
ANALYSIS; OR

(III) THE DIRECT GENERATION OF REVENUE OR PROFIT.

(4) ENTITIES ELIGIBLE FOR A GRANT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
INCLUDE:

(I) LOCAL GOVERNMENTS;

(II) PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENTS;

(III) LANDOWNERS;

(IV) FARMERS;

(V) BUSINESSES;

(VI) TRIBES;

(VII) INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION; AND

(VIII) NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.

(5) GRANT FUNDING UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CAPPED AT
AN AMOUNT THAT LEAVES $50,000 AT LEAST 10% OF THE TOTAL ANNUAL
APPROPRIATION UNDER SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION AVAILABLE ANNUALLY
FOR BLACK BEAR DAMAGE REIMBURSEMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS
SECTION.

(D) (1) The Department may reimburse a person from the [Black Bear Damage
Reimbursement] Fund FOR DAMAGE CAUSED BY BLACK BEARS in accordance with
[subsections (d) and (e) of this section] THIS SUBSECTION for any damage to the person’s:

[(1)] (I) Beehives, fruit, or other crops;

[(2)] (II) Livestock and poultry as defined in § 1–101 of the Agriculture
Article; or

[(3)] (III) Pets as defined in § 4–501 of the Family Law Article.

[(d) (1)] (2) A person is eligible to be reimbursed from the Fund FOR
DAMAGE CAUSED BY BLACK BEARS if:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 565 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) The person has followed all black bear damage preventive
measures recommended by the Department;

(ii) The damage amount is determined by an extension agent of the
University of Maryland Cooperative Extension Service; and

(iii) The Department has verified that the damage was caused by
black bear.

[(2)] (3) Subject to available funding, a person may be reimbursed from
the Fund FOR DAMAGE CAUSED BY BLACK BEARS in an amount not less than [$200]
$500 or more than [$3,000] $5,000 per year.

(e) [If the money in the Fund is not sufficient to satisfy all the claims in
accordance with the conditions described in subsection (d) of this section, an equal percent
of each claim shall be paid.

(f)] The Department shall adopt regulations to carry out [the provisions of] this
section.

(F) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF AT LEAST $1,000,000 $50,000 TO THE
FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4