START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 743

Chapter 743

(Senate Bill 330)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Law Enforcement – Body–Worn Cameras
(Body–Worn Camera Appropriation and Financing Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of General Services, in coordination with the
Department of Information Technology, to negotiate certain contracts ~~to~~ ~~acquire~~ ~~and~~
~~maintain~~ ~~body–worn~~ ~~cameras,~~ ~~equipment,~~ ~~and~~ ~~technology~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~request~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~law~~
~~enforcement~~ ~~agency~~ with third parties for the acquisition or maintenance of
body–worn cameras, equipment, or technology for certain law enforcement agencies;
requiring the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Police~~ ~~Training~~ ~~and~~ ~~Standards~~ ~~Commission~~ Department of
Information Technology, in coordination with the Department of General Services
~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Information~~ ~~Technology,~~ to study the cost and feasibility of
implementing a statewide uniform storage and access system for the body–worn
camera data of all law enforcement agencies; and generally relating to law
enforcement agencies and body–worn cameras.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–101(a) and (e) and 3–201(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–511.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

3–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Law enforcement agency” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of this title.

3–201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 743 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) (1) “Law enforcement agency” means a governmental police force, sheriff’s
office, or security force or law enforcement organization of the State, a county, or a
municipal corporation that by statute, ordinance, or common law is authorized to enforce
the general criminal laws of the State.

(2) “Law enforcement agency” does not include members of the Maryland
National Guard who:

(i) are under the control and jurisdiction of the Military
Department;

(ii) are assigned to the military property designated as the Martin
State Airport; and

(iii) are charged with exercising police powers in and for the Martin
State Airport.

3–511.1.

(A) (1) AT THE REQUEST OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, THE THE
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES, IN COORDINATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT
OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, SHALL NEGOTIATE CONTRACTS TO ACQUIRE AND
MAINTAIN BODY–WORN CAMERAS, EQUIPMENT, AND TECHNOLOGY FOR THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, AT THE REQUEST OF ONE OR MORE LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES, WITH THIRD PARTIES FOR THE ACQUISITION OR MAINTENANCE OF
BODY–WORN CAMERAS, EQUIPMENT, OR TECHNOLOGY FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES.

(2) THE CONTRACTS NEGOTIATED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY INCLUDE CONTRACTS FOR ANY RELATED EQUIPMENT OR
TECHNOLOGY DETERMINED TO BE NECESSARY FOR THE EFFECTIVE USE OF
BODY–WORN CAMERAS.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SHALL NOTIFY ALL
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES OF THE CONTRACTS THAT ARE BEING NEGOTIATED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BY POSTING THE CONTRACTS ON
EMARYLAND MARKETPLACE ADVANTAGE.

(B) THE CONTRACTS NEGOTIATED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL PRIORITIZE:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 743

(1) EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGY THAT COMPLIES WITH THE
POLICIES DEVELOPED BY THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS
COMMISSION UNDER § 3–511 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGY THAT CONFORM TO INDUSTRY
STANDARDS AND BEST PRACTICES;

(3) CYBERSECURITY AND DATA PRIVACY;

(4) COMPATIBILITY WITH DIFFERENT EQUIPMENT AND
TECHNOLOGY;

(5) CAPABILITIES TO EFFECTIVELY VIEW, EDIT, REDACT, AND
TRANSFER DATA FROM BODY–WORN CAMERAS; AND

(6) COST EFFECTIVENESS.

(C) FOR ANY CONTRACT NEGOTIATED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE RIGHT OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY TO RECEIVE SERVICES
FROM AN ENTITY RELATED TO VIEWING, EDITING, REDACTING, OR TRANSFERRING
DATA FROM BODY–WORN CAMERAS MAY NOT BE RESTRICTED IN ANY MANNER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The ~~Maryland~~ ~~Police~~ ~~Training~~ ~~and~~ ~~Standards~~ ~~Commission~~ Department of
Information Technology, in coordination with the Department of General Services ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Information~~ ~~Technology,~~ shall study the cost and feasibility of implementing
a statewide uniform storage and access system for the body–worn camera data of all law
enforcement agencies, as defined in § 3–201 of the Public Safety Article.

(b) The study shall include an analysis of:

(1) the best practices for the storage of body–worn camera data; and

(2) alternatives to a statewide uniform storage and access system for
body–worn camera data.

(c) On or before December 1, 2023, the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Police~~ ~~Training~~ ~~and~~ ~~Standards~~
~~Commission~~ Department of Information Technology shall report the findings of the study
to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Appropriations Committee,
in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 743 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

application to any contract related to body–worn cameras negotiated before the effective
date of this Act.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4