START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 601

Chapter 601

(Senate Bill 396)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Upper Shore Regional Council – Membership

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of certain voting and nonvoting members of
the Upper Shore Regional Council; and generally relating to the Upper Shore
Regional Council.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 13–1003(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

13–1003.

(a) (1) The Council consists of the members described in this subsection.

(2) The voting members of the Council are:

(i) from Cecil County[, three commissioners, appointed by the Board
of County Commissioners]:

1. THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE; AND

2. TWO MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL,
APPOINTED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL;

(ii) from Kent County, the three commissioners;

(iii) from Queen Anne’s County, three commissioners, appointed by
the Board of County Commissioners;

(iv) three municipal elected officials, one from each county, appointed
by:

1. their respective municipal corporations; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 601 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. the Eastern Shore Municipal Association if the municipal
corporations are unable to appoint a member within a reasonable time; and

(v) if the majority of the member’s legislative district is in the region,
each member of the General Assembly representing the region.

(3) The nonvoting members of the Council are:

(i) each commissioner in the region who is not appointed under
paragraph (2) of this subsection;

(II) EACH COUNTY COUNCIL MEMBER OF THE REGION WHO IS
NOT APPOINTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

(ii) (III) each other member of the General Assembly representing
the region if the majority of the member’s legislative district is not in the region; and

(iii) (IV) three county administrators, one from each county.

(4) The bylaws of the Council may provide for additional members who are
private individuals.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2