START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 351 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 351 
(Senator M. Washington) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Maryland Legal Services Corporation - Affordable Life, Wills, and Estate 
Planning for Seniors Grant Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Affordable Life, Wills, and Estate Planning for Seniors Grant 
Program within the Maryland Legal Services Corporation (MLSC) to provide eligible 
seniors access to affordable civil law‐related services. Beginning December 1, 2023, and 
annually thereafter, MLSC must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
implementation and utilization of the program. The Governor must include a $225,000 
appropriation for the program in the annual budget. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $225,000 annually for the program. 
Funding in FY 2024 is discretionary; future years reflect the mandated appropriation. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning 
FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
225,000 
225,000 
225,000 
225,000 
225,000 
Net Effect 
($225,000) 
($225,000) 
($225,000) 
($225,000) 
($225,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 351/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The provision of services under the program must be in accordance with 
the Maryland Legal Services Corporation Title of the Human Services Article. The 
program must provide (1) an intake method, which may include a referral hotline, to screen 
clients by eligibility and by legal need; (2) an outreach method for matching eligible clients 
to a grantee, as specified; and (3) a grant program to fund grantees representing eligible 
clients, particularly in rural communities, when no other attorneys are readily available. 
MLSC must publicize the program, including in rural communities. 
 
The program must provide eligible clients with legal services concerning primarily wills, 
powers of attorney, special needs trusts, advance health care directives, and life estate 
deeds. MLSC may contract with a grantee to provide all or part of the services under the 
program. MLSC may seek funds from any other source to aid in the administration of the 
program. 
 
Current Law:  MLSC was established by the General Assembly in 1982 to raise funds 
and make grants to nonprofit organizations for the provision of civil legal assistance to 
low-income persons in Maryland. MLSC is governed by a nine-person board of directors 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Maryland Legal 
Services Corporation Board appoints the executive director, who serves ex officio on the 
board and manages the organization. 
 
As specified in Title 11 of the Human Services Article, MLSC has the purpose of receiving 
and distributing funds to “grantees” that provide legal assistance to eligible clients in civil 
proceedings or matters. A grantee means a nonprofit organization that is (1) qualified under 
§ 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; (2) provides legal assistance to eligible clients; 
and (3) receives financial assistance, as specified, from MLSC. 
 
One of MLSC’s principal funding sources is the Interest on Lawyer Trust Account 
program, also established by State legislation in 1982. Other major funding is from 
specified surcharges on court filing fees and an annual distribution from the Abandoned 
Property Fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 760 (Delegate Embry) - Judiciary. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 351/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3