START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 377 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 377 
(Senator Kramer) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Workers' Compensation - Benefits - Offset and Study 
 
 
This bill limits the application of existing provisions that do not require the payment of 
workers’ compensation benefits to specified public-sector employees when the employee 
is receiving other similar public benefits; that provision only applies when the other public 
benefits being paid are based in whole or in part on the same body part. The bill also 
requires the Maryland Association of Counties and the Professional Fire Fighters of 
Maryland (PFFOM) to jointly research and submit a report on the bill’s changes. By 
December 1, 2024, the report on findings must be submitted to interested parties and 
specified committees of the General Assembly.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  According to the Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company 
(Chesapeake), the Maryland Supreme Court decision being abrogated by the bill does not 
affect any benefit offset used by State government. Therefore, the bill is not anticipated to 
directly affect State operations or finances. 
 
Chesapeake Effect:  Chesapeake expenditures increase to the extent that additional 
benefits are paid to affected employees on behalf of affected local governments. 
Chesapeake revenues increase correspondingly as Chesapeake increases its premiums to 
account for the additional liability. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures likely increase, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 377/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required report must include data and analysis of the effects of the 
bill on the offset of benefits following the implementation of the bill compared to a 
comparable period of time before the Supreme Court of Maryland Decision in Spevak v. 
Montgomery County, 480 Md. 562 (2022). 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that the bill abrogate the holding by the 
Supreme Court of Maryland in Spevak v. Montgomery County. The bill must be applied in 
a manner consistent with the Supreme Court of Maryland decision in Reger v. 
Washington County Board of Education, 455 Md. 68 (2017). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Workers’ Compensation – Generally 
 
If an employee covered under workers’ compensation insurance has suffered an accidental 
personal injury, compensable hernia, or occupational disease, the employee is entitled to 
compensation benefits paid by the employer, its insurer, the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF), 
or the Uninsured Employers’ Fund, as appropriate. Workers’ compensation benefits 
include wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational rehabilitation expenses. 
Wage replacement benefits are calculated based on the covered employee’s average weekly 
wage; medical benefits are generally fully or partially covered, depending on how the 
treatment is related to the personal injury, hernia, or occupational disease. 
 
If a covered accident or occupational disease results in the death of the covered employee, 
then the employee’s dependents are entitled to workers’ compensation death and funeral 
benefits. Similar to wage replacement benefits, death benefits are calculated using the 
covered employee’s average weekly wage. The duration of benefits and total benefits 
allowed depend on if the dependents were partially or wholly dependent on the covered 
employee, among other factors. 
 
Offset Against Other Benefits 
 
If a covered employee of a governmental unit or a quasi-public corporation receives 
another benefit granted by a statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, regulation, or policy 
(regardless of whether it is part of the pension system), then payment of that benefit 
satisfies any liability of the employer and SIF for the payment of similar 
workers’ compensation benefits the employee may be owed. If payment of that benefit, 
however, is less than the workers’ compensation benefits the claimant would receive, then 
the employer, SIF, or both must provide an additional benefit that equals the difference. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 377/ Page 3 
If federal law provides benefits for an individual who is a covered employee of the Military 
Department of the State that are equal to or less than any workers’ compensation benefits 
an individual may be receiving, then the individual is not entitled to the 
workers’ compensation benefits. However, if the benefits provided are less than the 
workers’ compensation benefits an individual may be receiving, then the State must 
provide an additional benefit that equals the difference. 
 
Recent Case Law Affecting the Offset of Benefits 
 
Prior to the 2022 decision in Spevak v. Montgomery County, the application of the benefit 
offset described above was governed by the Maryland Supreme Court decision in Reger v. 
Washington County Board of Education. The offset primarily occurs for a type of disability 
retirement benefit offered by local governments, and both decisions affect local 
governments with that specific type of disability retirement benefit. In the Reger case, the 
court held that:   
 
In summary, the legislative intent behind the overall offset provision now 
contained in Labor and Employment § 9-610 is to prevent employees of a 
Maryland governmental unit or quasi-public corporation who are covered by 
both a pension plan and workers’ compensation from receiving a double 
recovery for the same injury. Similarly, we conclude that the legislative 
intent behind the specific language in the statute that “payment of the benefit 
by the employer satisfies, to the extent of the payment, the liability of the 
employer ... for payment of similar benefits under this title,” Labor and 
Employment § 9-610 (emphasis added), was that the offset apply only to 
“comparable” benefits, which are “benefits accruing by reason of the same 
injury.” 
 
The court’s decision in the Spevak case, however, overturned the decision in the Reger case 
by applying a broader interpretation of “similar” benefits. The court interpreted “similar” 
to apply to all service-related injuries, regardless of whether the benefits were awarded for 
the same or different injuries. Specifically, the court held that:   
 
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that Mr. Spevak’s service-connected total 
disability retirement benefits arising from his back injury are similar to the 
permanent partial disability retirement benefits arising from his occupational 
hearing loss. In enacting the offset provision contained in Labor and 
Employment § 9-610, the General Assembly sought to preclude employees 
from receiving duplicative recovery at the taxpayers’ and State’s expense. 
Service-connected total disability retirement benefits compensate the 
recipient for all injuries related to the recipient’s service. Therefore, as a 
matter of law, Mr. Spevak’s service-connected total disability retirement 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 377/ Page 4 
benefits are similar to his permanent partial disability benefits, and the 
benefits related to his occupational hearing loss are offset under Labor and 
Employment § 9-610. 
 
Local Expenditures:  In essence, the Maryland Supreme Court decision in Spevak v. 
Montgomery County ensures that affected local governments can claim the benefit offset 
in most cases where an employee is receiving both workers’ compensation and disability 
retirement benefits, which allows local governments to limit their costs. By abrogating the 
Spevak decision and requiring the courts to interpret the offset provision as it was in 
Reger v. Washington County Board of Education, the bill limits the application of the 
offset, thereby likely increasing workers’ compensation costs for affected local 
governments. 
 
A precise estimate of the impact depends on numerous unknown factors and cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. Indeed, the purpose of the report required of  
MACO and PFFOM is to determine exactly how the bill affects workers’ compensation 
costs for local governments. MACO advises that the report can be completed without 
experiencing any additional costs.  
 
Chesapeake Fiscal Effect:  As the workers’ compensation insurer for many local 
governments, Chesapeake expenditures increase to the extent that additional benefits are 
paid. Chesapeake revenues increase correspondingly as Chesapeake increases its premiums 
to account for the additional liability. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 590 (Delegate Pruski) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; Subsequent Injury Fund; 
Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Maryland Association 
of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 377/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5