START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 524

Chapter 524

(Senate Bill 371)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Commercial Use – Definition

FOR the purpose of defining “commercial use” in Baltimore City to include certain
multifamily residential development; and generally relating to the definition of
“commercial use” in Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 10–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, The Chesapeake Bay is intrinsic to life in Maryland, as it is a part of
the State’s identity and local culture and is a vibrant part of Maryland’s history and State
pride both environmentally and economically; and

WHEREAS, The health of Baltimore’s waterfront, from the Inner Harbor to the Port
of Baltimore, is critical to the State as a major driver of Central Maryland’s economy, but
also as an important environmental feeder to the sustainability of the Chesapeake Bay;
and

WHEREAS, The redevelopment of Baltimore’s waterfront will ensure increased
tourism spending, new jobs, and more equitable access to the water for the Central
Maryland region; and

WHEREAS, The State has a financial interest in the success of Baltimore City’s
economy, both for State revenues and for local quality of life, and the reinvestment and
redevelopment in Baltimore’s waterfront as a destination location advances that interest;
now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Land Use

10–101.

(A) In this title[,] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS INDICATED.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 524 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) “Board” means the Board of Municipal and Zoning Appeals.

(C) “COMMERCIAL USE” INCLUDES MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT IF THE DEVELOPMENT IS LOCATED WITHIN:

(1) A WATERFRONT COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT; AND

(2) A 0.50–MILE RADIUS OF A COMMUTER RAIL STATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2