START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 343 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 343 
(Senator Zucker, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program - Account 
Establishment - Procedures 
 
 
This bill generally conforms statute to Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations 
governing Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) programs by specifying conditions 
under which Maryland ABLE Program accounts may be opened by and distributions made 
to individuals other than an eligible individual. The Maryland 529 Board may adopt 
regulations to carry out the bill. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. State general fund revenues decrease, potentially 
significantly, beginning as early as FY 2024 to the extent the bill results in additional 
subtraction modifications claimed against the personal income tax for contributions to and 
distributions from new ABLE accounts. Maryland 529 nonbudgeted revenues increase, 
potentially significantly, from fees associated with new accounts, while nonbudgeted 
expenditures likewise increase for distributions. To the extent additional fee revenue from 
accounts obviates the need for State funding of the Maryland ABLE Program, currently 
$300,000 annually, State general fund expenditures for the program may decrease. 
Maryland 529 can implement changes to ABLE eligibility using existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant decrease in revenue to the extent more individuals 
claiming subtraction modifications for contributions to ABLE accounts decrease taxable 
income. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 343/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, an ABLE account may be established only for an eligible 
individual by the eligible individual or a person selected by the eligible individual. If the 
eligible individual is unable to establish an ABLE account, the eligible individual’s agent 
under power of attorney may establish an account. If the eligible individual does not have 
a power of attorney, in priority order, an ABLE account may be opened for the eligible 
individual by the individual’s (1) conservator or legal guardian; (2) spouse; (3) parent; 
(4) sibling; (5) grandparent; or (6) representative payee appointed by the Social Security 
Administration (SSA). 
 
The Maryland 529 Board may accept a certification, made under the penalties of perjury, 
from the person seeking to establish an ABLE account that indicates the basis of the 
person’s authority to establish an ABLE account and that there is no other person with a 
higher priority to establish the ABLE account. 
 
Minors, individuals against whom the eligible individual has obtained a peace or protective 
order, an individual held civilly or criminally liable for financial exploitation, or an 
individual who is the subject of a civil or criminal order prohibiting contact with the eligible 
individual may not establish an ABLE account on behalf of an eligible individual. 
 
Current Law:  The Stephen Beck, Jr., Achieving a Better Life Experience Act of 
2014 established a new § 529A of the Internal Revenue Code that permits a state (or a state 
agency or instrumentality) to establish and maintain another type of tax-advantaged savings 
program, a qualified ABLE program, under which contributions may be made to an account 
that is established for the purpose of meeting the qualified disability expenses of the 
designated beneficiary of the account. Chapter 39 of 2016 required the 
Maryland 529 Board, in consultation with the Maryland Department of Disabilities, to 
establish, administer, manage, and promote the Maryland ABLE Program. State programs 
must adhere to minimum federal guidelines to be considered qualified ABLE programs 
under federal law. Individuals with disabilities for whom the onset of the disability 
occurred prior to age 26 are considered “eligible individuals” under IRS regulations. 
Eligible individuals who establish an ABLE account and are the owner of such account are 
“designated beneficiaries” under IRS regulations. 
 
The assets and income of ABLE accounts are exempt from State and local taxation. Money 
and assets in the accounts established under the Maryland ABLE Program or an 
ABLE program in any other state may not be considered for the purpose of determining 
eligibility to receive, or the amount of, any assistance or benefits from local or State 
means-tested programs. The money and assets in each ABLE account must be less than 
federal limits. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 343/ Page 3 
Each contributor to an ABLE account may subtract up to $2,500 per year, per designated 
beneficiary, from Maryland taxable income for contributions to an ABLE account. Each 
spouse on a joint tax return is treated separately for this limited purpose. Contributions 
exceeding $2,500 may be carried over for 10 successive tax years. 
 
Federal law limits total contributions to a single ABLE account in a year to the amount 
allowed for tax-free gifts. The board must refund to an ABLE account contributor any 
amount contributed to an ABLE account over this limit. There is also an addition 
modification for expenses that do not meet program requirements and ABLE account 
refunds. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Income Tax Subtraction Modifications 
 
Maryland 529 advises there are 5,204 ABLE accounts in the State with a combined 
$59.2 million in assets. The number of new accounts that may be opened due to the bill is 
difficult to quantify, particularly given the program’s requirement that disability onset 
before age 26. According to SSA, as of December 2021, there were 102,088 individuals in 
Maryland receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) with blindness or a disability. 
Although SSA does not disaggregate by age of disability onset, given the number of 
individuals receiving SSI, the pool of eligible individuals for an ABLE account is likely 
significantly larger than the current 5,204 open accounts. Therefore, to the extent the bill 
facilitates new accounts and contributors to those accounts claim income tax subtraction 
modifications, general fund revenues decrease. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office advises that, for tax year 2021, 1,231 tax filers claimed about 
$4.0 million in income subtraction modifications for contributions to ABLE accounts, 
which resulted in a decrease of $167,034 in State tax revenue. Assuming State tax revenues 
continue to decrease by about 4.2% of the total amount of subtraction modifications 
claimed and each tax filer continues to subtract an average of $3,257 in contributions, for 
every 1,000 additional filers claiming the subtraction modification, State revenues decrease 
by approximately $135,700. Given the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date, new accounts can 
be opened in 2023 and subtraction modifications claimed when 2023 taxes are filed in 
2024; therefore, any revenue impacts of the bill could begin as early as fiscal 2024. 
 
Distributions from ABLE accounts are likewise tax-advantaged. An eligible individual 
receiving a distribution from a Maryland ABLE account may also claim a subtraction 
modification when used for eligible disability-related expenses. The exact effect of the bill 
on the number of distributions being made is similarly difficult to quantify, but to the extent 
more eligible individuals receive distributions from the savings and earnings in an 
ABLE account, State revenues further decrease by a potentially significant amount. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 343/ Page 4 
Other Effects of New Accounts 
 
Maryland 529 is a nonbudgeted State agency and operates using fee revenue from the 
savings plans it offers. Accordingly, nonbudgeted revenues increase with additional 
ABLE accounts. Likewise, additional ABLE accounts result in an increase in nonbudgeted 
expenditures for more distributions. 
 
Means-tested Programs:  New ABLE accounts created as a result of the bill would have 
their assets excluded from means testing for State programs such as Medicaid and, 
therefore, could increase the number of eligible individuals in those programs. However, 
given the size of the Medicaid budget, the impact is not likely to significantly affect the 
program. Any such impact has not been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
State Grants to the Maryland ABLE Program:  Even though Maryland 529 is nonbudgeted, 
a portion of the Maryland ABLE Program’s expenses come from a $300,000 annual State 
grant. To the extent additional ABLE accounts are opened beginning in fiscal 2024, new 
fee revenues may allow the program to become more or fully self-sufficient and, therefore, 
general fund expenditures for the program to decrease.  
 
Local Revenues:  Although an exact estimate of the total impact of new ABLE subtraction 
modifications on local governments is not feasible, local revenues decrease beginning as 
early as fiscal 2024 to the extent additional individuals claim an income subtraction 
modification as a result of the bill. The Comptroller’s Office advises that, for tax year 2021,  
1,231 tax filers claimed about $4.0 million in income subtraction modifications for 
contributions to ABLE accounts, which resulted in a decrease of $167,034 in State tax 
revenue. Therefore, assuming local tax revenues continue to decrease by about 2.7% of the 
total amount of subtraction modifications claimed and each tax filer continues to subtract 
an average of $3,257 in contributions, for every 1,000 additional filers claiming the 
subtraction modification, local revenues decrease by approximately $88,400. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 354 (Delegate Chang) - Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of 
Health; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 529; U.S. Social Security Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 343/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5