START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 330 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 330 
(Senator Ready) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Public Safety - Law Enforcement - Body-Worn Cameras (Body-Worn Camera 
Appropriation and Financing Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of General Services (DGS), in coordination with the 
Department of Information Technology (DoIT), to negotiate contracts, at the request of 
one or more law enforcement agencies, with third parties to acquire or maintain  
body-worn cameras (BWCs), equipment, or technology for law enforcement agencies. The 
contracts must meet specified criteria and not restrict the right of law enforcement agencies 
to receive related services. The bill also requires DoIT, in coordination with DGS, to study 
the cost and feasibility of implementing a statewide uniform storage and access system for 
BWC data. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by between $200,000 and $400,000 only 
in FY 2024 for the feasibility study; these costs may be mitigated to the extent that a recent 
prior study is applicable, as discussed below. DGS and DoIT can otherwise implement the 
bill with existing budgeted resources. Affected State law enforcement agencies may benefit 
from administrative efficiencies, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Although the bill does not directly affect local expenditures, affected local 
law enforcement agencies may benefit from administrative efficiencies, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 330/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  DGS must notify all law enforcement agencies of the contracts that it is 
negotiating by posting the contracts on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA). 
 
The study by DoIT must include an analysis of (1) best practices for the storage of BWC 
data and (2) alternatives to a statewide uniform storage and access system for BWC data. 
DoIT must report its findings by December 1, 2023, to the Senate Budget and Taxation 
Committee and the House Appropriations Committee. 
 
The bill applies only prospectively and does not affect any contract negotiated before the 
bill’s effective date. 
 
Current Law:  “Law enforcement agency” means a governmental police force, 
sheriff’s office, or security force or law enforcement organization of the State, a county, or 
a municipality that by law is authorized to enforce the general criminal laws of the State. 
It does not include specified members of the Maryland National Guard. 
 
State procurement law designates DGS as the primary procurement unit with jurisdiction 
over, among other things, (1) supplies; (2) services; (3) information processing equipment 
and associated services; and (4) telecommunications equipment, systems, or services. 
Within DGS, the Chief Procurement Officer is the head of all procurement activity for the 
Executive Branch. 
 
eMMA is the State’s cloud-based procurement portal. 
 
Body-worn Cameras 
 
Chapter 60 of 2021 requires, by July 1, 2023, the Department of State Police, the 
Anne Arundel County Police Department, the Howard County Police Department, and the 
Harford County Sheriff’s Office to require the use of a BWC by each law enforcement 
officer employed by the law enforcement agency who regularly interacts with members of 
the public as part of the law enforcement officer’s official duties, subject to the agency’s 
policy on the use of BWCs. A law enforcement agency of a county that is not subject to 
the July 1, 2023 deadline is required to comply with the aforementioned requirement by 
July 1, 2025. A BWC that possesses the requisite technological capability must 
automatically record and save at least 60 seconds of video footage immediately prior to the 
officer activating the record button on the device. 
 
A law enforcement agency subject to the BWC requirements must develop and maintain a 
written policy consistent with the policy published by the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission (MPTSC) for the use of BWCs. The policy must specify which law 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 330/ Page 3 
enforcement officers employed by the law enforcement agency are required to use BWCs. 
A law enforcement agency may not negate or alter any of the requirements or policies 
established in accordance with specified BWC-related provisions through collective 
bargaining. 
 
Under Chapters 128 and 129 of 2015, MPTSC developed a policy for the issuance and use 
of BWCs by law enforcement officers. MPTSC also published a Body-worn Camera 
Procedural Reference Guide that provides practical and detailed background information 
on BWCs as well as advisory language for use by law enforcement agencies. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:   
 
Department of Information Technology – Required Study 
 
DoIT advises that, as it lacks the in-house expertise to study the cost and feasibility of 
implementing a statewide uniform storage and access system for BWC data, it must hire a 
consultant at an estimated cost of as much as $400,000 in fiscal 2024 to conduct the 
feasibility study. The cost estimate is driven in part by the short timeframe (five months) 
in which the study must be conducted. The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
that the cost should not exceed $400,000 and advises that the cost could be as low as 
$200,000. 
 
In addition, MPTSC has advised that a similar feasibility study was commissioned by the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services in fiscal 2021 that 
examined the costs associated with BWCs, including data storage and access. To the extent 
that the findings and recommendations of that study are relevant to the study required by 
the bill, consultant costs for DoIT may be further mitigated. 
 
State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies 
 
Affected State and local law enforcement agencies may benefit from administrative 
efficiencies to the extent they request DGS negotiate BWC contracts on their behalf. The 
extent to which any contracts negotiated pursuant to the bill vary in cost from contracts 
that would otherwise be negotiated by State and local law enforcement agencies cannot be 
predicted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 330/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  HB 332 (Delegate J. Lewis, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Information Technology; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4