START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 305 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 305 
(Carroll County Senators) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Carroll County - Public Facilities Bond 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Carroll County Commissioners to issue up to $65.6 million in 
general obligation bonds for the acquisition, construction, improvement, or renovation of 
public buildings, facilities, and public works projects. The date of maturity of the bonds 
cannot exceed 30 years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County receives up to $65.6 million in bond proceeds. County debt 
service expenditures increase by an estimated $4.4 million annually over a 20-year period. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Commission counties do not have the legislative power to create debt; 
General Assembly authorization is required before any bonds can be sold. Carroll County 
is one of six counties that still operates under the commission form of government. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since 2013, Carroll County has received authorization by the 
General Assembly to issue up to $281.0 million in general obligation bonds for public 
facilities, as shown in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 2 shows the planned capital projects in 
Carroll County for fiscal 2024. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 305/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Bond Authorizations for Carroll County 
($ in Millions) 
 
Session 
Chapter  
Number 
Authorized  
Amount 
2013 
Ch. 63 
$40.0  
2014 
Ch. 63 
20.0 
2015 
Ch. 84 
17.0 
2016 
Ch. 254 
31.0 
2017 
Ch. 435 
25.0 
2018 
Ch. 89 
32.7 
2019 
Ch. 184 
28.5  
2020 
Ch. 285 
38.3 
2021 
Ch. 730 
48.5 
Total 
 
$281.0  
 
 
Carroll County revenues increase by up to $65.6 million from bond proceeds. Annual debt 
service costs for the bonds total approximately $4.4 million. This estimate is based on a 
2.97% interest rate and a 20-year term of maturity. To the extent that the bond issuance, 
interest rate, or term of maturity deviate from this assumption, debt service expenditures 
would adjust accordingly. 
 
At the end of fiscal 2021, Carroll County had approximately $281.2 million in total 
outstanding debt, which represents approximately 1.3% of the county’s assessable base and 
$1,626 on a per capita basis. The county currently has an AAA credit rating from  
Standard & Poor’s, an Aaa credit rating from Moody’s Investors Service, and an 
AAA credit rating from Fitch Ratings. 
 
Information on local debt measures for Maryland counties and Baltimore City can 
be found in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the 2023 report can 
be found on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 305/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
Carroll County Bond Authorization Request 
Fiscal 2024 
 
 
 
Project Description 
Project Amount 
 
Public Schools 
HVAC System Replacement – Carroll Springs 
$2,809,000 
HVAC System Replacement – Carrolltowne Elementary 
4,890,000 
HVAC System Replacement – Northwest Middle 
7,113,000 
HVAC System Replacement – Mount Airy Elementary 
4,956,000 
Roof Replacement – Spring Garden Elementary 
1,475,616 
Total Public Schools 
$21,243,616 
Conservation and Open Space 
Agricultural Land – Maryland Ag. Land Preservation Program 
$1,333,300 
Stormwater Facility Renovation 
300,000 
Watershed Assessment and Improvement (NPDES) 
2,750,000 
Total Conservation and Open Space 
$4,383,300 
Public Works 
Monroe Avenue Extension 
$365,000 
Pavement Management Program 
15,101,000 
Ramp and Sidewalk Upgrades 
92,000 
Small Drainage Structures 
266,000 
Storm Drain Rehabilitation 
266,000 
Brown Road over Roaring Run 
106,000 
Hawks Hill Road over Little Pipe Creek Tributary 
19,000 
Stem Road over Wolf Pit Branch 
288,000 
Upper Beckleysville Road over Murphy Run 
302,000 
Total Public Works 
      $16,805,000 
General Government 
County Building Systemic Renovations 
$1,001,000 
Fleet Lift Replacements 
255,000 
Generator Replacements 
168,000 
Sheriff’s Office – Headquarters 
21,744,084 
Total General Government 
$23,168,084 
Grand Total 
$65,600,000 
 
HVAC:  Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
NPDES:  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  
 
Source:  Carroll County Government 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 305/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 557 (Carroll County Delegation) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - February 23, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4