START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 371 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 371 
(Senator Hayes) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Baltimore City - Commercial Use - Definition 
 
 
This bill defines “commercial use,” under Title 10 (Baltimore City Zoning) of the Land 
Use Article of the Maryland Code, to include multifamily residential development if the 
development is located within (1) a waterfront commercial zoning district and (2) a 
0.5-mile radius of a commuter rail station. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local government operations or 
finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The term “commercial use” is not used in Title 10 of the Land Use Article. 
Among other things, the title: 
 
 
authorizes the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City – in order to promote the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the community – to regulate (1) the height, 
number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; (2) the percentage of a 
lot that may be occupied; (3) off-street parking; (4) the size of yards, courts, and 
other open spaces; (5) population density; and (6) the location and use of buildings, 
signs, structures, and land;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 371/ Page 2 
 
authorizes the Mayor and City Council to (1) divide the city into districts and zones 
best suited to carry out specified purposes and (2) within the districts and zones, 
regulate the construction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings, structures, or land; 
and  
 
establishes additional authority and requirements applicable to the adoption, 
modification, and implementation of zoning regulations and boundaries in 
Baltimore City.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 338 (Delegate Boyce, et al.) - Environment and 
Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2