START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 452

Chapter 452

(Senate Bill 322)

AN ACT concerning

Alcoholic Beverages – Class 4 Limited Winery License – Food Service

FOR the purpose of authorizing the holder of a Class 4 limited winery license to prepare,
sell, or serve certain food under certain conditions; removing altering certain
requirements for off–premises and on–premises consumption at a limited winery;
removing the notice requirement for certain planned promotional events at a limited
winery; and generally relating to Class 4 limited winery licenses.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages
Section 2–206
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages

2–206.

(a) There is a Class 4 limited winery license.

(b) (1) A license holder may:

(i) subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, from available
Maryland agricultural products:

1. ferment and bottle wine; and

2. distill and bottle pomace brandy; and

(ii) sell and deliver the wine and pomace brandy to:

1. a holder of a wholesaler’s license;

2. a holder of a permit that is authorized to acquire wine or
pomace brandy;

3. a person outside the State that is authorized to acquire
wine or pomace brandy; or
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 452 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. an individual in accordance with § 2–219 of this subtitle.

(2) A license holder:

(i) shall own or have under contract at least 20 acres of grapes or
other fruit in cultivation in the State for use in the production of wine; or

(ii) except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, if less than
20 acres are owned or under contract, shall ensure that at least 51% of the ingredients used
in the annual production of the license holder’s wine are grapes or other fruit grown in the
State.

(3) (i) The Secretary of Agriculture each year may grant a 1–year
exemption to an applicant from the percentage requirement under paragraph (2)(ii) of this
subsection.

(ii) The Secretary shall adopt regulations governing the granting of
an exemption under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, after consultation with the
Governor’s Wine and Grape Advisory Commission, the Maryland Grape Growers
Association, the Maryland Wineries Association, and other interested parties.

(4) Except as provided in Subtitle 3 of this title, a license holder need not
obtain any other license to possess, manufacture, sell, or transport wine or pomace brandy.

(5) A license holder may:

(i) sell wine and pomace brandy produced by the license holder for
ON– AND OFF–PREMISES consumption;

(ii) in an amount not exceeding 2 fluid ounces per brand, provide
samples of wine and pomace brandy that the license holder produces to a consumer:

1. at no charge; or

2. for a fee; and

(iii) subject to [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (6) AND (7) of this
subsection, PREPARE, sell, or serve only:

1. bread and other baked goods;

2. chili;

3. chocolate;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 452

4. crackers;

5. cured meat;

6. fruits (whole and cut);

7. hard and soft cheese (whole and cut);

8. salads and vegetables (whole and cut);

9. the following items made with Maryland wine:

A. ice cream;

B. jam;

C. jelly; and

D. vinegar;

10. pizza;

11. ~~prepackaged~~ sandwiches and other ~~prepackaged~~ ~~foods~~
ready to be eaten LIGHT FARE;

12. soup; and

13. condiments.

(6) A LICENSE HOLDER IS NOT LIMITED TO PREPARING, SELLING, OR
SERVING ONLY THE FOOD SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (5)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION
IF THE LICENSE HOLDER:

(I) IS ALSO LICENSED TO OPERATE A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
UNDER TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE; AND

(II) MEETS THE SAME RATIO OF GROSS RECEIPTS BETWEEN
FOOD AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES AS A HOLDER OF A CLASS D BEER AND
WINE LICENSE, OR AN EQUIVALENT LICENSE AS DETERMINED BY THE LOCAL
LICENSING BOARD.

(7) (i) A caterer is not limited to PREPARING, selling, or serving only
the foods specified in paragraph (5)(iii) of this subsection.

(ii) A license holder or entity in which the license holder has a
pecuniary interest may not act as a caterer of food.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 452 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(7)] (8) Subject to paragraph [(8)] (9) of this subsection, a license holder
may conduct the activities specified in paragraph (5) of this subsection[:

(i) for off–premises consumption of wine and pomace brandy and for
sampling, from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. each day; and

(ii) for on–premises consumption of wine and pomace brandy and
sales and service of food on the licensed premises:

1. from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. each day; or

2. if guests are attending a planned promotional event or
other organized activity on the licensed premises,] from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. each day.

[(8)] (9) Except as provided in Division II of this article, the license allows
the license holder to operate 7 days a week.

[(9) At least 14 days before holding a planned promotional event after 6
p.m., a license holder shall file a notice of the promotional event with the Comptroller on
the form that the Comptroller provides.]

(10) (9) Nothing in this subsection limits the application of relevant
provisions of Title 21 of the Health – General Article, and regulations adopted under that
title, to a license holder.

(c) The place listed on the license shall be in compliance with § 1–405(b) of this
article.

(d) A license holder may:

(1) store on its licensed premises, in a segregated area approved by the
Comptroller, the product of other Class 4 limited wineries to be used at Maryland Wineries
Association promotional activities, provided records are maintained and reports filed
regarding the storage under this item as may be required by the Comptroller;

(2) distill and bottle not more than 1,900 gallons of pomace brandy made
from available Maryland agricultural products;

(3) purchase bulk wine fermented by a manufacturer licensed under this
article and blend the wine with the license holder’s wine and pomace brandy if the
aggregate purchase does not exceed 25% of the license holder’s annual wine and pomace
brandy production;

(4) purchase pomace brandy only for blending with wine;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 452

(5) import, export, and transport its wine and pomace brandy in accordance
with this section; and

(6) produce wine and pomace brandy at a warehouse for which the license
holder has been issued an individual storage permit, if:

(i) the license holder does not serve or sell wine or pomace brandy
at a warehouse to the public; and

(ii) the Comptroller has full access at all times to the warehouse to
enforce this article.

(e) A Class 4 limited winery may be located only at the place stated on the license.

(f) If a license holder maintains the records and files the reports that the
Comptroller requires, the license holder may:

(1) in the State, conduct winemaking and packaging activities at another
federally bonded winery or limited winery; or

(2) outside the State, conduct winemaking and packaging activities, other
than fermentation, at another federally bonded winery.

(g) Throughout the winemaking process, the license holder shall:

(1) maintain ownership of the wine or pomace brandy; and

(2) ensure that the wine or pomace brandy returns to the location of the
limited winery.

(h) The annual license fee:

(1) shall be determined by the Commission; and

(2) may not exceed $200.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5