START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 310 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 310 
(Senators West and McKay) 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Black Bear Damage Prevention and Reimbursement Fund - 
Uses 
 
 
This bill renames the Department of Natural Resources’ (DNR) existing Black Bear 
Damage Reimbursement Fund as the Black Bear Damage Prevention and Reimbursement 
Fund and requires DNR to accept requests for grants from the fund for projects that seek 
to prevent damages caused by black bears and reduce conflicts between humans and black 
bears through nonlethal methods. The bill establishes provisions governing grant eligibility 
for such projects and caps total grant funding for such projects. The bill also modifies 
existing provisions governing reimbursements from the fund for damage caused by black 
bears. Finally, the Governor may include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of at 
least $50,000 to the fund. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $145,600 in FY 2024, including 
discretionary funding of $50,000 to the fund; out-years reflect annualization, ongoing 
costs, and ongoing discretionary funding of $50,000 annually to the fund. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly by $50,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2024. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
GF Expenditure 
$145,600 
$115,700 
$118,500 
$121,500 
$125,100 
SF Expenditure 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
Net Effect 
($145,600) 
($115,700) 
($118,500) 
($121,500) 
($125,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in local government grant revenues and expenditures 
beginning as early as FY 2024. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 310/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands an existing finding of the General Assembly to provide 
that it is in the public interest to provide funding to prevent conflicts with black bears before 
they occur. 
 
In determining eligibility for grant funding, DNR must consider projects that (1) reduce 
the availability of black bear attractants in communities, including agricultural 
communities; (2) discourage black bears from entering areas with high amounts of conflict 
between humans and black bears; (3) have local community support or a detailed plan to 
build such support; (4) use proven nonlethal methods or innovative solutions, as specified; 
(5) are cost-effective investments that have the potential to continue to be effective beyond 
the timeframe for the grant funding; or (6) include matching funds or an in-kind match. 
Entities eligible for grant funding include local governments, parks and recreation 
departments, landowners, farmers, businesses, tribes, institutions of higher education, and 
nonprofit organizations. 
 
DNR may not award grant funding for (1) the lethal removal of black bears; (2) stand-alone 
research, data collection, and analysis; or (3) the direct generation of revenue or profit. 
 
Grant funding for damage prevention and conflict reduction projects must be capped at an 
amount that leaves at least 10% of the total annual appropriation provided to the fund under 
the bill available for black bear damage reimbursement (the current use of the fund). With 
respect to existing provisions regarding such reimbursements, the bill increases the 
maximum amount a person may be reimbursed from the fund per year (from no more than 
$3,000 to no more than $5,000), subject to available funding. The bill repeals a provision 
relating to such reimbursements that requires DNR to pay an equal percent of each claim 
if money in the fund is insufficient to satisfy all claims. 
 
Finally, the bill expands the authorized funding sources for the fund by specifying that the 
fund also consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund. 
 
Current Law:  The General Assembly finds that it is in the public interest to provide 
funding to reimburse a person who has sustained damage to agricultural products or pets 
as a result of a black bear. 
 
The Black Bear Damage Reimbursement Fund within DNR is used to reimburse farmers 
for bear damage to agricultural products and livestock. Reimbursable damages include 
damage to a person’s beehives, fruit, or other crops, as well as damage to livestock, poultry, 
and pets. A person is eligible for reimbursement if (1) he/she has followed all black bear 
damage preventative measures recommended by DNR; (2) the damage amount is 
determined by a specified agent; and (3) DNR has verified that the damage was caused by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 310/ Page 3 
a black bear. Subject to available funding, a person may be reimbursed in an amount not 
less than $200 or more than $3,000 per year. If there are insufficient funds to satisfy all 
claims, DNR must pay an equal percent of each claim. 
 
The fund consists of (1) proceeds from the sale of conservation bear stamps or decals, 
which are $5 each and (2) gifts, grants, and contributions to the State that are designated 
for the fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Department of Natural Resources – Authorized Appropriation 
 
Although the bill does not establish a mandated appropriation to the fund, this analysis 
assumes that general fund expenditures increase by $50,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2024 to capitalize the fund consistent with the minimum amount specified in the 
bill’s authorized funding provision. This analysis also assumes that general funds are 
provided. 
 
Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly each 
year. This analysis assumes that DNR distributes the full amount of available funding for 
grants and reimbursements each year. 
 
Because statute does not explicitly state that the fund may be used for DNR’s 
administrative costs, it is assumed that general fund expenditures increase further to cover 
such costs, which are discussed below. 
 
Department of Natural Resources – Administrative Costs 
 
General fund administrative expenditures increase by $95,637 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one natural resources technician to (1) establish and administer the new grant 
program for projects that seek to prevent damages caused by black bears and reduce 
conflicts between humans and black bears and (2) administer a more robust black bear 
damage reimbursement program with the additional funding provided under the bill. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the purchase of a 
vehicle), and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
$50,000 is provided in the annual budget bill each year for the fund beginning in 
fiscal 2024; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 310/ Page 4 
 
the existing black bear damage reimbursement program averages $2,000 annually 
in total available funding, and in 2022, DNR investigated 80 incidents of 
agricultural damage from black bears; 
 
DNR personnel respond to more than 300 bear complaints annually; and 
 
the increase in available funding for reimbursements under the bill results in an 
increase in the number of annual reimbursement requests, which are for damages 
caused over a large geographic area that must each be evaluated during a field visit 
before any damage compensation funds can be disbursed. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$46,249 
Purchase of Truck 
39,036 
Other Operating Expenses 
  10,352 
FY 2024 DNR Admin. Expenditures 
$95,637 
 
Future year administrative expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Institutions of Higher Education as Potential Grant Recipients 
 
To the extent that institutions of higher education are grant recipients, higher education 
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly beginning as early as fiscal 2024. The 
Department of Legislative Services anticipates that any impact on institutions of higher 
education is most likely concentrated on those institutions located in the four westernmost 
counties in the State (Allegany, Frederick, Garrett, and Washington counties), where the 
State’s bear population primarily resides. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Similar to the impact described above for institutions of higher 
education, for any local governments (including local governments as landowners), local 
parks and recreation departments, and local institutions of higher education that receive 
grant funding, local grant revenues and expenditures increase, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024. 
 
Small Business Effect:  There is a potentially meaningful benefit for small 
businesses – particularly famers – under the bill. There is the potential for both a 
meaningful increase in the amount of reimbursements that are provided for compensation 
for black bear damage as well as the potential to receive a grant from the fund to implement 
a project that seeks to prevent damages caused by black bears or reduce conflicts between 
humans and black bears. Most of the reimbursements that are currently distributed from 
the fund are for agricultural damage from black bears, and most farms in the State are small 
businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 310/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 378 (Delegate Love, et al.) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Baltimore City; Baltimore City Community 
College; Morgan State University; University System of Maryland; Maryland Independent 
College and University Association; Department of Natural Resources; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5