START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 331 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 331 
(Senator Hayes) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Baltimore City – West North Avenue Development Authority – Membership and 
Procurement 
 
   
This emergency bill (1) alters the membership of the West North Avenue Development 
Authority (WNADA); (2) delays the date by which WNADA must report its 
comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy from October 1, 2023, to 
December 15, 2023; (3) requires the report to include information on WNADA’s 
procurement activities and adds the House Health and Government Operations Committee 
as a recipient; and (4) generally exempts WNADA from State procurement law. WNADA 
is still subject to written policy and procedure requirements for exempt units and the State’s 
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program. The bill terminates September 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations, as discussed 
below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
West North Avenue Development Authority 
 
Chapters 80 and 81 of 2021 established WNADA for the purpose of developing a 
comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy for the benefit of a specified “target 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 331/ Page 2 
area” and “buffer zone” in Baltimore City. The Acts establish provisions governing the 
membership, procedures, and duties of the authority.  
 
WNADA members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. WNADA is authorized to manage appropriated funds from Baltimore City and 
the State. WNADA may receive donated services from accountants, lawyers, or other 
consultants as necessary to carry out the authority’s duties. WNADA may also supervise, 
manage, and terminate staff and consultants as necessary. 
 
WNADA must support the development and approval of a comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization plan in the target area and the buffer zone to benefit (1) the residents; 
(2) housing; (3) neighborhoods; (4) economic development; and (5) transportation, 
including motor vehicles and pedestrians. WNADA must also work in coordination with 
the residents of the target area and the buffer zone to develop a comprehensive 
neighborhood revitalization plan. 
 
By October 1, 2023, WNADA must report its comprehensive neighborhood revitalization 
strategy to the Governor and to the Senate Budget and Taxation and House Appropriations 
committees. The Acts terminate September 30, 2026. 
 
Procurement Law – Exempt Entities and Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
Generally, each unit with an exemption from any provision of Division II of the State 
Finance and Procurement Article must have written policies and procedures for the 
exempted unit’s procurements. The written policies and procedures must include the types 
of procurement exempted from Division II, plus the methods for such procurements, and 
their advertising requirements, procurement goals (including MBE participation), and their 
approval process. Units that are governed by their own board, commission, council, or 
authority must submit their policies and procedures to their board, commission, council, or 
authority for approval.  
 
The State’s MBE program requires that a statewide goal for MBE contract participation be 
established biennially through the regulatory process under the Administrative Procedure 
Act. The Maryland Department of Transportation is the State’s MBE certification agency. 
The fiscal 2023 goal is 29% MBE participation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill exempts WNADA from most provisions of State procurement 
law, which generally requires oversight of procurement by the Board of Public Works, use 
of competitive procurement methods, and adherence to various procurement preference 
programs and requirements. However, WNADA is still subject to written policy and 
procedure requirements for exempt units and the State’s MBE program. Altering the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 331/ Page 3 
membership of the authority has minimal or no effect on State finances. As such, the bill 
does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
WNADA advises that the bill primarily allows for the expedited procurement of a contract 
to complete the comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy required under 
Chapters 80 and 81 (due December 15, 2023, under the bill). WNADA estimates the cost 
of the contract at $250,000, which will be paid for with existing funds. WNADA advises 
that other, smaller, contracts for specialized consulting services in housing, economic, and 
transportation development may also be expedited in the future as part of project 
development. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$11.4 million for WNADA, primarily for WNADA’s direct operations, including hiring 
additional staff and funding/initiating projects along West North Avenue in Baltimore City. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 627 (Delegate Amprey) - Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  West North Avenue Development Authority; Department of 
Commerce; Department of General Services; Baltimore City; Maryland Economic 
Development Corporation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3