START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 396 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 396 
(Cecil County Senators) 
Finance 
Ways and Means 
 
Economic Development - Upper Shore Regional Council - Membership 
 
   
This bill alters the voting membership of the Upper Shore Regional Council by removing 
the three Cecil County commissioner positions and replacing them with the 
County Executive of Cecil County and two members of the Cecil County Council. The bill 
also clarifies the nonvoting membership of the council. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Minimal. The bill does not alter overall voting membership on the council. 
In practice, three Cecil County councilmembers serve as voting members of the 
Upper Shore Regional Council, as the county no longer has commissioners following a 
transition to charter government. The bill alters current practice by substituting the 
Cecil County Executive for one councilmember as a voting member and clarifies that the 
remaining council members are nonvoting members.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Upper Shore Regional Council is one of five rural regional planning 
and development councils in the State. The purposes of the council are to foster the 
physical, economic, and social development of the region and effectively use the assistance 
provided to the region by the State. The council initiates and coordinates plans and projects 
for the development of human and economic resources of the region as a planning and 
development unit for the Upper Eastern Shore. The voting members of the council are: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 396/ Page 2 
 
from Cecil County, three commissioners, appointed by the Board of County 
Commissioners; 
 
from Kent County, the three commissioners; 
 
from Queen Anne’s County, three commissioners, appointed by the Board of 
County Commissioners; 
 
three municipal elected officials, one from each county, generally appointed by their 
respective municipalities; and 
 
if the majority of the member’s legislative district is in the region, each member of 
the General Assembly representing the region.   
 
The nonvoting members of the council are: 
 
 
each commissioner in the region who is not appointed as a voting member; 
 
each other member of the General Assembly representing the region if the majority 
of the member’s legislative district is not in the region; and 
 
three county administrators, one from each county. 
 
A member of the council is not entitled to compensation as a member of the council. The 
council may hire an executive director. The State and Cecil, Kent, and Queen Anne’s 
counties may jointly finance the council and its activities, subject to specified local funding 
minimums. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1229 (Cecil County Delegation) - Rules and Executive 
Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Cecil County; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 396/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 9, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3