START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 776

Chapter 776

(Senate Bill 351)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Legal Services Corporation – Affordable Life, Wills, and Estate
Planning for Seniors Grant Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Affordable Life, Wills, and Estate Planning for Seniors
Grant Program in the Maryland Legal Services Corporation; and generally relating
to the Affordable Life, Wills, and Estate Planning for Seniors Grant Program and
the Maryland Legal Services Corporation.

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 11–605
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

11–605.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE AFFORDABLE LIFE, WILLS,
AND ESTATE PLANNING FOR SENIORS GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) (1) THERE IS AN AFFORDABLE LIFE, WILLS, AND ESTATE PLANNING
FOR SENIORS GRANT PROGRAM IN THE CORPORATION.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE ELIGIBLE
SENIORS ~~WITH~~ ~~MODERATE~~ ~~FINANCIAL~~ ~~MEANS~~ ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE CIVIL
LAW–RELATED SERVICES.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE THE PROVISION OF SERVICES UNDER THE PROGRAM SHALL BE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE.

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING THE MAXIMUM INCOME LEVELS FOR CLIENT
ELIGIBILITY ESTABLISHED BY THE CORPORATION UNDER § 11–603 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, A CLIENT SHALL BE ELIGIBLE TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM IF THE
~~CLIENT:~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 776 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) IS AT LEAST 65 YEARS OLD; AND

(II) HAS A FAMILY INCOME THAT DOES NOT EXCEED 75% OF THE
MEDIAN FAMILY INCOME FOR THE STATE AS CERTIFIED ANNUALLY BY THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

(D) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE:

(1) ESTABLISH AN INTAKE METHOD, WHICH MAY INCLUDE A
REFERRAL HOTLINE, TO SCREEN CLIENTS BY ELIGIBILITY AND BY LEGAL NEED;

(2) ESTABLISH AN OUTREACH METHOD FOR MATCHING ELIGIBLE
CLIENTS TO A GRANTEE UNDER SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(3) PROVIDE FOR THE SERVICES OF AT LEAST ONE FULL–TIME
~~ATTORNEY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~REPRESENT~~ A GRANT PROGRAM TO FUND GRANTEES REPRESENTING
ELIGIBLE CLIENTS, PARTICULARLY IN RURAL COMMUNITIES, WHEN NO OTHER
ATTORNEYS ARE READILY AVAILABLE.

(E) THE CORPORATION SHALL PUBLICIZE THE PROGRAM, INCLUDING IN
RURAL COMMUNITIES.

(F) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE ELIGIBLE CLIENTS WITH LEGAL
SERVICES CONCERNING PRIMARILY:

(1) LAST WILL AND TESTAMENTS;

(2) POWERS OF ATTORNEY;

(3) SPECIAL NEEDS TRUSTS; AND

(4) ADVANCE HEALTH CARE DIRECTIVES; AND

(5) LIFE ESTATE DEEDS.

(G) THE CORPORATION MAY CONTRACT WITH A GRANTEE TO PROVIDE ALL
OR PART OF THE SERVICES REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(G) (H) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET
AN APPROPRIATION OF $500,000 $225,000 FOR THE PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 776

(2) IN ADDITION TO THE FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE FOR THE PROGRAM
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE CORPORATION MAY SEEK FUNDS
FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE TO AID IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM.

(H) (I) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2023,
THE CORPORATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
§ 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE
IMPLEMENTATION AND UTILIZATION OF THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3