START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 243

Chapter 243

(Senate Bill 325)

AN ACT concerning

Washington County – Sheriff’s Salary – Alteration

FOR the purpose of altering the salary of the Washington County Sheriff; repealing the
requirement for the Washington County Salary Study Commission to study and
issue a report that contains recommendations relating to the salary of the Sheriff of
Washington County; and generally relating to the Washington County Sheriff’s
salary.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–335(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–335(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 15–422(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Local Government
Section 28–207
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

2–335.

(a) This section applies only in Washington County.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 243 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) The [Sheriff of Washington County shall receive an annual salary of the
greater of:

(1) $100,000; or

(2) The salary set by the County Commissioners of Washington County
under Title 28, Subtitle 2 of the Local Government Article] SHERIFF’S SALARY IS 90% OF
THE SALARY OF THE STATE’S ATTORNEY OF WASHINGTON COUNTY.

Article – Criminal Procedure

15–422.

(a) This section applies only in Washington County.

(b) The State’s Attorney’s salary is 90% of the salary of a judge of the District
Court of Maryland.

Article – Local Government

28–207.

(a) The Commission shall study the salaries of:

(1) the County Commissioners of Washington County;

(2) the Washington County Board of Education;

(3) the Washington County Board of Liquor License Commissioners;

(4) the judges of the Orphans’ Court for Washington County; AND

(5) [the Sheriff of Washington County; and

(6)] the Treasurer of Washington County.

(b) On or before the December 1 following appointment, the Commission shall
issue a report that contains recommendations to the County Commissioners of Washington
County for review and consideration.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, pursuant to Article III, § 35
of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend or apply to the salary
or compensation of the Sheriff of Washington County while serving in a term of office
beginning before the effective date of this Act, but the provisions of this Act concerning the
salary or compensation of the Sheriff of Washington County shall take effect at the
beginning of the next following term of office. This limitation does not apply to an individual

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 243

appointed or elected after the effective date of this Act to fill out an unexpired term.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3