START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 637

Chapter 637

(Senate Bill 343)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program – Account
Establishment – Procedures

FOR the purpose of establishing certain procedures regarding the persons who may
establish or receive distributions from an ABLE account in the Maryland ABLE
Program for a certain eligible individual; requiring the Maryland 529 Board to adopt
certain procedures regarding the establishment and operation of an ABLE account
by a person other than a certain designated beneficiary; and generally relating to the
Maryland ABLE Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–19C–01, 18–19C–02(d), and 18–19C–04
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

18–19C–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “ABLE account” means an account described under § 529A(e) of the Internal
Revenue Code.

(c) “ABLE account contributor” means an individual who contributes money to
an ABLE account described under § 529A(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.

(d) “ABLE account holder” means an individual who has established an account
described under § 529A(e) of the Internal Revenue Code and is the designated beneficiary
of the account.

(e) “Board” means the Maryland 529 Board established under § 18–1904 of this
title.

(f) “Designated beneficiary” means an individual described in § 529A(e) of the
Internal Revenue Code.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 637 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(g) “ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN §
529A(E) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

(H) “Maryland ABLE Program” means a qualified ABLE program described in §
529A(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.

[(h)] (I) “Qualified disability expenses” means expenses described in § 529A(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.

18–19C–02.

(d) (1) The Board shall adopt procedures relating to:

(i) Enrollment for participation in the Maryland ABLE Program;
[and]

(ii) Start–up costs incurred by the State for the development of the
Maryland ABLE Program with these costs to be reimbursed to the State by the Maryland
ABLE Program; AND

(III) THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF AN ABLE
ACCOUNT BY A PERSON OTHER THAN A DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY AS DESCRIBED IN
§ 18–19C–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) The Board shall adopt any other procedures that the Board considers
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subtitle.

18–19C–04.

(a) (1) An eligible individual[, as defined in § 529A(e) of the Internal Revenue
Code,] may participate in and benefit from the Maryland ABLE Program.

(2) AN ABLE ACCOUNT MAY BE ESTABLISHED ONLY FOR AN
ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL BY:

(I) THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL;

(II) A PERSON SELECTED BY THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL; OR

(III) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND
EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF AN ELIGIBLE
INDIVIDUAL, WHETHER A MINOR OR AN ADULT, IS UNABLE TO ESTABLISH AN ABLE
ACCOUNT:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 637

1. THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL’S AGENT UNDER A POWER
OF ATTORNEY; OR

2. IF THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL DOES NOT HAVE A
POWER OF ATTORNEY, IN THE FOLLOWING ORDER, THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL’S:

A. CONSERVATOR OR LEGAL GUARDIAN;

B. SPOUSE;

C. PARENT;

D. SIBLING;

E. GRANDPARENT; OR

F. REPRESENTATIVE PAYEE APPOINTED FOR THE
ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL BY THE SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION.

(3) THE BOARD MAY ACCEPT A CERTIFICATION MADE UNDER THE
PENALTIES OF PERJURY FROM THE PERSON SEEKING TO ESTABLISH AN ABLE
ACCOUNT THAT INDICATES:

(I) THE BASIS OF THE PERSON’S AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH
THE ABLE ACCOUNT; AND

(II) THERE IS NO OTHER PERSON WITH A HIGHER PRIORITY TO
ESTABLISH THE ABLE ACCOUNT UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(4) THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS MAY NOT ESTABLISH AN ABLE
ACCOUNT ON BEHALF OF AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL:

(I) A MINOR;

(II) AN INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL
HAS OBTAINED A PEACE OR PROTECTIVE ORDER;

(III) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS BEEN HELD CIVILLY OR
CRIMINALLY LIABLE FOR FINANCIAL EXPLOITATION UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 6
OF THE ESTATES AND TRUSTS ARTICLE; OR

(IV) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF A CIVIL OR
CRIMINAL ORDER PROHIBITING CONTACT WITH THE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 637 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) [Distributions] SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF § 529A OF THE
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, DISTRIBUTIONS shall be requested by the designated
beneficiary [subject to the provisions of § 529A of the Internal Revenue Code] OR THE
PERSON AUTHORIZED TO ESTABLISH THE ABLE ACCOUNT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION.

(C) THE BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4