START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 375 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 375 
(Senator Ellis) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board of Physicians – Inactive and Emeritus Status 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Board of Physicians (MBP) to place a licensee on 
emeritus status under specified circumstances. MBP must reinstate a licensee on emeritus 
status, as specified. The bill repeals the current circumstances under which MBP must issue 
a license to an individual on inactive status and alters the requirements a licensee on 
inactive status must meet for reinstatement. The bill exempts a licensee on emeritus status 
or inactive status from the three-year limit on the term of a license and from continuing 
education requirements while holding a license under either status. A licensee on emeritus 
or inactive status may not (1) practice, attempt to practice, or offer to practice medicine in 
the State or (2) delegate medical acts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload on MBP can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. Any net impact on MBP special fund revenues associated with emeritus or 
inactive status licensee fees is anticipated to be minimal. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 375/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Emeritus Status License 
 
MBP may place a licensee on emeritus status if the individual submits an application and 
pays a fee set by the board. MBP must place a licensee on emeritus status if the individual: 
 
 
has an active, unrestricted license to practice medicine; 
 
is not under investigation by MBP for a specified violation; 
 
has practiced medicine in the State for at least 10 years; 
 
has not been the subject of a disciplinary action in a jurisdiction where the individual 
is licensed that resulted in the revocation or suspension of the individual’s license; 
and 
 
attests that the individual is retired and is no longer actively practicing medicine in 
this State. 
 
The current maximum three-year term of a license does not apply to a physician who is on 
emeritus status. A licensee on emeritus status is also exempt from continuing education 
requirements while holding a license on emeritus status.  
 
A licensee on emeritus status may use the words “Dr.,” “doctor,” “physician,” “D.O.,” or 
“M.D.” as long as the licensee does not represent to the public that the licensee is authorized 
to practice medicine in the State. 
 
MBP must reinstate the license of a physician on emeritus status if the physician meets 
specified renewal requirements (including continuing education requirements), pays a 
reinstatement fee, and submits satisfactory evidence of compliance with licensure 
qualifications and requirements for reinstatement. 
 
Inactive Status 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that MBP issue a license to an individual on inactive status 
if the individual submits (1) satisfactory evidence of compliance with a criminal history 
records check; (2) satisfactory evidence of compliance with continuing education 
requirements; and (3) a reinstatement fee. Instead, MBP must reinstate the license of a 
physician on inactive status if the physician meets specified renewal requirements 
(including continuing education requirements), pays a reinstatement fee, and submits 
satisfactory evidence of compliance with licensure qualifications and requirements for 
reinstatement. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 375/ Page 3 
The current maximum three-year term of a license does not apply to a physician on inactive 
status. A licensee on inactive status is also exempt from continuing education requirements 
while holding a license on inactive status.   
 
Current Law: 
 
Physician Licensure 
 
In general, an individual must be licensed by MBP to practice medicine. To qualify for a 
license, an applicant must be at least age 18, of good moral character, meet specified 
education requirements, pass an examination, submit to a criminal history records check, 
and meet any other requirements MBP establishes through regulations. 
 
Reinstatement 
 
MBP must reinstate the license of a physician who has failed to renew the license for any 
reason if the physician meets specified renewal requirements (including continuing 
education requirements and a criminal history records check); pays a reinstatement fee; and 
submits satisfactory evidence of compliance with the qualifications and requirements for 
license reinstatements. 
 
Renewal 
 
The term of a license may not exceed three years. MBP must send a licensee a renewal 
notice at least one month before the license expires. Before a license expires, a licensee 
may renew it for an additional term if the licensee (1) is otherwise entitled to be licensed; 
(2) is of good moral character; (3) pays a renewal fee; (4) submits a renewal application; 
and (5) submits satisfactory evidence of compliance with any continuing education 
requirements. Specified renewal applicants must also submit to a criminal history records 
check. 
 
Inactive Status 
 
MBP may place a licensee on inactive status if a licensee submits an inactive status 
application and fee. MBP must issue a license to an individual who is on inactive status if 
the individual submits the following:  (1) evidence of completing a criminal history records 
check; (2) evidence of compliance with continuing education requirements; and (3) a 
reinstatement fee. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 375/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4