START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 469 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 469 
(Senators Elfreth and Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Task Force to Study Solar Incentives 
 
 
This bill establishes a Task Force to Study Solar Incentives, staffed by the Maryland 
Energy Administration (MEA). Among other things, the task force must study the impact 
of existing solar incentives and make recommendations regarding measures and incentives 
needed to ensure that (1) the State meets the solar energy goals established in the State’s 
renewable energy portfolio standard (RPS) and (2) specified other objectives are met. The 
task force is required to report its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly 
by December 15, 2023. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MEA can staff the task force and provide any expense reimbursements for 
task force members with existing budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must study: 
 
 
the impact of solar grant programs, tax credits and exemptions, classification of 
solar energy property for assessment purposes, solar renewable energy credits, and 
other financial incentives on the State’s ability to meet the solar energy goals 
established in the RPS; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 469/ Page 2 
 
the impact of federal solar energy incentives and how to maximize the benefit of 
federal solar energy incentives in Maryland; 
 
how the solar alternative compliance fee under the RPS is calculated and its market 
relationship to the value of solar renewable energy credits; and 
 
whether different levels or types of incentives should exist for different types of 
solar development, including customer-sited residential and nonresidential, 
aggregated net metered, community, and utility scale, based on cost variance and 
other factors. 
 
The task force must make recommendations regarding measures and incentives needed to 
ensure (1) that the State meets the solar energy goals established in the RPS; (2) minority 
business enterprise participation in solar development in the State; (3) that solar 
development in the State creates good quality, family-sustaining jobs with training and 
outreach focused on the communities in which solar development is occurring; 
(4) equitable access to renewable energy in the State; and (5) the efficient use of land in 
the State by maximizing the production of solar energy on previously developed property, 
including rooftops, parking canopies, and brownfields sites or energy or transportation 
rights of way. 
 
To the extent practicable, the membership of the task force must reflect the racial, gender, 
ethnic, and geographic diversity of the State. Members of the task force may not receive 
compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the standard State 
travel regulations. The Director of MEA must designate the chair of the task force. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Solar Incentives 
 
There are various State and federal solar energy incentives. The Database of State 
Incentives for Renewables & Efficiency lists 47 State and federal solar incentives that are 
applicable in Maryland or have been in the recent past, including both financial incentives 
and regulatory policies. State financial incentives include sales and use tax and property 
tax incentives, as well as grant and rebate programs funded by the Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund (SEIF). Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic 
Energy Investment Program and the implementing SEIF to decrease energy demand and 
increase energy supply to promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. SEIF is funded 
through the proceeds from the auction of carbon allowances under the Regional 
Greenhouse Gas Initiative, and the fund also receives revenues from compliance fees –
often referred to as alternative compliance payments (ACPs) – generated under the RPS. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 469/ Page 3 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard and Alternative Compliance Payments 
 
Maryland’s RPS requires that renewable sources generate specified percentages of 
Maryland’s electricity supply each year, including specified percentages that must be 
generated specifically from solar energy. Electric companies (utilities) and other electricity 
suppliers must submit renewable energy credits equal to these percentages in each year or 
else pay an ACP equivalent to the shortfall. ACP revenues are deposited into SEIF and 
may only be used to make loans and grants to support the creation of new Tier 1 renewable 
energy sources in the State that are owned by or directly benefit low-income residents of 
the State. Solar ACPs must be accounted for separately in the fund and may only be used 
to make loans and grants to support the creation of new solar energy sources in the State 
that are owned by or directly benefit low-income residents of the State. 
 
For more information on the RPS, see the Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Energy Administration; Database of State Incentives 
for Renewables & Efficiency (operated by the North Carolina Clean Energy Technology 
Center at North Carolina State University); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - May 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 10, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 469/ Page 4 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and, beginning in 2023, 
new geothermal systems. Electric companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must 
submit renewable energy credits (RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity 
sales specified in statute each year or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) 
equivalent to their shortfall. Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely 
through RECs, with negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that 
was not the case in 2021. The Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for 
purposes related to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2023, the requirements are 31.9% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 6.0% from solar 
and 0.05% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 14.5% 
from solar, by 2030.  
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 469/ Page 5 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative.  
 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a three-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the Generation 
Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by PJM 
Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water-heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; waste-to-energy; refuse-derived fuel; thermal energy from a 
thermal biomass system; and raw or treated wastewater used as a heat source or sink for 
heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from 
Tier 1 beginning in 2022.  
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $409.8 million in 2021:  $332.7 million 
for 15.2 million RECs; and $77.1 million in ACPs. Costs and RECs are shown in Exhibit 1. 
This continues a multi-year trend of increasing compliance costs and, generally, average 
REC prices.  
 
In 2021, wind (50.8%), solar (13.2%), black liquor (12.5%), small hydroelectric (8.0%), 
and municipal solid waste (6.4%) were the primary energy sources used for Tier 1 RPS 
compliance. This continues a multi-year trend of increasing reliance on wind and solar 
energy. Maryland facilities generated 5.0 million RECs in 2021:  approximately 2.9 million 
Tier 1 RECs; and 2.1 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can be used for compliance in both 
Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are geographic and energy source 
restrictions.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 469/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2017-2021 
 
 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021  
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar RECs 
$50.0 
$56.4 
$79.3 
$99.8  
187.3 
Tier 1 Solar RECs 
21.3 
27.4 
55.2 
122.9 
144.4 
Tier 2 RECs 
0.7 
1.0 
0.06 
0.4 
1.0 
ACPs 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$7.7 
$0.1 
$77.1 
Total 
$72.1 
$84.9 
$142.3 
$223.2  
409.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar 
$7.14  
$6.54  
$7.77 
$8.24  
$14.36 
Tier 1 Solar 
38.18  
31.91  
47.26 
66.10  
72.59 
Tier 2 
0.48  
0.66  
1.05 
1.06  
6.45 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The vast majority of ACPs in 2021 
($76.9 million out of $77.1 million in total) were due to a shortfall of solar RECs. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Related Studies Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2021, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
A supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a goal of 
100% by 2040 is due by January 1, 2024. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6