START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 372

Chapter 372

(Senate Bill 434)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Restorative Aquaculture Pilot Program

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Natural Resources to establish and
implement a Restorative Aquaculture Pilot Program to provide financial incentives
to certain holders of aquaculture leases; authorizing a holder of an aquaculture lease
who is participating in the Pilot Program to meet certain requirements by shellfish
seed planting only; providing for the financing of the financial incentives under the
Pilot Program; and generally relating to the Restorative Aquaculture Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–11A–24
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

4–11A–24.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE RESTORATIVE
AQUACULTURE PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS THAT, WITH APPROPRIATE SITING,
ACTIVE USE REQUIREMENTS THAT REQUIRE ANNUAL SHELLFISH SEED PLANTINGS,
AND APPROPRIATE HUSBANDRY, SHELLFISH AQUACULTURE IS A RESTORATIVE
ACTIVITY THAT BENEFITS WATER QUALITY, OYSTER PRODUCTIVITY, AND HABITAT.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH AND IMPLEMENT A
RESTORATIVE AQUACULTURE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) THE PILOT PROGRAM SHALL BE DESIGNED TO PROVIDE
FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO A HOLDER OF AN AQUACULTURE LEASE WHO:

(I) MAINTAINS THE LEASE, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE CRITERIA FOR RESTORATIVE AQUACULTURE IDENTIFIED
BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 372 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) MAINTAINS THE RESTORATIVE CONDITIONS FOR AT LEAST
4 YEARS; AND

(III) MEETS ANY CRITERIA THE DEPARTMENT, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE AQUACULTURE COORDINATING COUNCIL, CONSIDERS
NECESSARY.

(D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL IDENTIFY CRITERIA AND METRICS FOR RESTORATIVE
AQUACULTURE THAT TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION:

(I) OYSTER DENSITY;

(II) OYSTER BIOMASS;

(III) HABITAT COMPLEXITY; AND

(IV) ANY OTHER CRITERIA AND METRICS DEVELOPED OR
IDENTIFIED IN COORDINATION WITH THE AQUACULTURE COORDINATING COUNCIL,
THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, OR
OTHER INTERESTED STAKEHOLDERS.

(2) THE CRITERIA AND METRICS IDENTIFIED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE TARGET CRITERIA
AND METRICS USED IN LARGE–SCALE OYSTER RESTORATION PROJECTS OVERSEEN
OR SUPPORTED BY THE CHESAPEAKE BAY PROGRAM.

(E) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND FINANCIAL
INCENTIVES FOR THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) THE FINANCIAL INCENTIVES ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE DESIGNED IN A MANNER THAT PAYS ELIGIBLE
LEASE HOLDERS:

(I) 1. ON A PER–ACRE BASIS; AND

2. AT A RATE DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE AQUACULTURE COORDINATING COUNCIL; OR

(II) FOR OYSTERS PURCHASED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR USE
IN OYSTER RESTORATION SANCTUARY PROJECTS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 372

(3) THE DEPARTMENT MAY CONSULT WITH INTERESTED
STAKEHOLDERS IN ESTABLISHING THE FINANCIAL INCENTIVES UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION.

(4) FINANCIAL INCENTIVES UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
FINANCED THROUGH:

(I) PRIVATE DONATIONS;

(II) FEDERAL FUNDING;

(III) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET
SPECIFICALLY FOR THE PAYMENT OF THE INCENTIVES; OR

(IV) ANY OTHER FUNDING FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE PAYMENT OF THE INCENTIVES.

(F) A HOLDER OF AN AQUACULTURE LEASE WHO IS PARTICIPATING IN THE
PILOT PROGRAM MAY MEET ANY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ACTIVE USE OF THE
LEASE BY SHELLFISH SEED PLANTING ONLY.

(G) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(2) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE PROVISIONS FOR THE VERIFICATION OF EXISTING
AND IMPROVED CONDITIONS ON AQUACULTURE LEASES THAT ARE PART OF THE
PILOT PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 6 years and, at the end of September
30, 2029, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3