START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 434 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 434 
(Senator Klausmeier) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Restorative Aquaculture Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to establish and implement 
a Restorative Aquaculture Pilot Program to provide financial incentives to a holder of an 
aquaculture lease to maintain their lease, or a part of their lease, under specified restorative 
conditions for at least four years. The bill terminates September 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $144,600 in FY 2024. 
Future years reflect annualization and inflation. These estimates do not account for the cost 
of the financial incentives, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
144,600 
171,300 
178,900 
186,900 
196,800 
Net Effect 
($144,600) 
($171,300) 
($178,900) 
($186,900) 
($196,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes that the General Assembly finds that, with appropriate 
siting, active use requirements that require annual shellfish seed plantings, and appropriate 
husbandry, shellfish aquaculture is a restorative activity that benefits water quality, oyster 
productivity, and habitat. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 434/ Page 2 
The pilot program must be designed to provide financial incentives to a holder of an 
aquaculture lease who:   
 
 
maintains the lease, in whole or in part, in accordance with specified criteria for 
restorative aquaculture identified by DNR; 
 
maintains the restorative conditions for at least four years; and 
 
meets any criteria the department, in consultation with the Aquaculture 
Coordinating Council, considers necessary. 
 
DNR must identify criteria and metrics for restorative aquaculture that take into 
consideration (1) oyster density; (2) oyster biomass; (3) habitat complexity; and (4) any 
other criteria and metrics developed or identified in coordination with the Aquaculture 
Coordinating Council, the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, or 
other interested stakeholders. The criteria and metrics must be at least as stringent as the 
target criteria and metrics used in large-scale oyster restoration projects overseen or 
supported by the Chesapeake Bay Program. 
 
DNR must establish eligibility requirements and financial incentives for the pilot program. 
The financial incentives must be designed in a manner that pays eligible lease holders 
(1) on a per-acre basis and at a rate determined by DNR in coordination with the 
Aquaculture Coordinating Council or (2) for oysters purchased by DNR for use in oyster 
restoration sanctuary projects. DNR may consult with interested stakeholders in 
establishing the financial incentives. The financial incentives must be financed through  
(1) private donations; (2) federal funding; (3) money appropriated in the State budget 
specifically for the payment of the incentives; or (4) any other funding from any other 
source accepted for the payment of the incentives. 
 
A holder of an aquaculture lease who is participating in the pilot program may meet any 
requirements for the active use of the lease by shellfish seed planting only. 
 
DNR must adopt regulations to carry out the pilot program by October 1, 2024. The 
regulations must include provisions for the verification of existing and improved conditions 
on aquaculture leases that are part of the pilot program. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Department of Natural Resources – Aquaculture 
 
Statute designates DNR as the lead agency for (1) the development and overall 
management of aquaculture and aquaculture products; (2) coordinating and streamlining 
the process of applying for a State aquaculture permit; (3) enforcing laws, regulations, and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 434/ Page 3 
rules related to aquaculture; and (4) identifying economic development opportunities 
related to aquaculture.  
 
Aquaculture Leases 
 
A person who wishes to obtain an aquaculture lease must pay an application fee and 
complete and submit an application to DNR. Statute establishes general provisions that a 
leaseholder must follow, including the requirement that a leaseholder actively use the lease 
and comply with any standards for planting, harvesting, and use of the leased area 
established by DNR. Leaseholders must also mark the lease area and comply with any other 
DNR marking requirements, pay rent, and comply with Maryland Department of Health 
regulations carrying out the National Shellfish Sanitation Program. All leaseholders must 
also obtain and possess a shellfish aquaculture harvesting permit prior to engaging in any 
aquaculture activities on their lease. 
 
Aquaculture Coordinating Council 
 
The Aquaculture Coordinating Council was created by the General Assembly in 2005, and 
has various statutory responsibilities, including formulating and making proposals for 
advancing Maryland aquaculture and undertaking various efforts to support, study, and 
advance the aquaculture industry. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $144,631 in 
fiscal 2024, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023, effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring a program administrator and a natural resource biologist to 
coordinate the process of establishing the program (including identifying criteria and 
metrics for restorative aquaculture and establishing eligibility requirements and financial 
incentives) and managing its implementation. DNR indicates that current staff are 
operating at capacity and cannot absorb the responsibilities of establishing and 
implementing the program. The estimate does not account for the cost of the financial 
incentives under the program, which cannot be reliably estimated at this time and may 
depend on (1) the outcome of consultation with interested stakeholders regarding the 
design of the incentives and (2) the level of participation in the pilot program. As mentioned 
above, the bill identifies several potential funding sources for the financial incentives. The 
estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$129,813 
Operating Expenses 
    14,818 
Minimum FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$144,631 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 434/ Page 4 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful positive impact on small business 
aquaculture leaseholders who participate in the pilot program and receive financial 
incentives. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1254 (Delegate Stein) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4