START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 414 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 414 
(Senator Augustine, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Commission to Advance and Strengthen Fire Fighting and Emergency Medical 
Services Within Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes the Commission to Advance and Strengthen Fire Fighting and 
Emergency Medical Services Within Maryland. The commission must study and make 
recommendations regarding (1) the effectiveness and viability of uniform incentives, 
offerings, or practices employed in other states to attract, support, and retain individuals in 
fire fighting and emergency medical services roles; (2) the suitability of comparable or 
similar incentives, offerings, and practices as compared to the landscape of the State; and 
(3) any other global issues the commission may consider useful in enhancing and 
supporting career and volunteer fire fighting and emergency medical services in the State. 
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) must provide staff for the commission. A 
commission member may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. By December 1, 2023, the commission must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $25,000 in FY 2024 only. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
25,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($25,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 414/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Several State entities are involved in fire, rescue, and emergency medical 
services:   
 
 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal within the Department of State Police is 
responsible for statewide fire, arson, and explosive investigations, enforcement of 
the State Fire Prevention Code, coordination of fire prevention efforts, and the 
collection of fire incident data; 
 
The Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute (MFRI) of the University of Maryland is 
responsible for providing classroom education and training for career and volunteer 
fire and rescue personnel. Among other things, MFRI cooperates with the Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) to train rescue 
personnel and emergency medical technicians; 
 
MIEMSS oversees and coordinates all components of the statewide Emergency 
Medical Services System; and 
 
The Maryland Department of Emergency Management administers the 
Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund, which provides 
grants to local jurisdictions for the purchase of fire and rescue equipment and 
building rehabilitation. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $25,041 in fiscal 2024 only, 
which accounts for a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date. 
MDL advises that it does not have staff available to support the work of the commission; 
thus, the agency has determined that one regular part-time position is needed to provide 
staff for the commission. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the 
added responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent and, thus, may be 
performed by a contractual employee. Accordingly, this estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one part-time contractual employee through December 31, 2023, to staff the commission 
and prepare the required report. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$18,162 
Operating Expenses 
   6,879 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$25,041 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for the 
specified contractual employee under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 414/ Page 3 
Any expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 788 (Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3