START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 411 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 411 
(Senator Watson) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Prince George's County - Judges of the Orphans' Court - Compensation 
 
 
This bill repeals statutory provisions that establish the annual compensation of 
orphans’ court judges for Prince George’s County and instead authorizes the County 
Executive and County Council of Prince George’s County to determine the annual 
compensation for the judges. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, any salary 
adjustments take effect at the beginning of the next terms of office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase or decrease in Prince George’s County expenditures 
beginning in FY 2027. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the Maryland Constitution, each county elects, for a term of 
four years, three judges to the orphans’ court of their respective jurisdictions, with the 
exception of Harford, Howard, and Montgomery counties, where a circuit court judge sits 
as the orphans’ court. The orphans’ courts are the State’s probate courts. The courts 
supervise the handling of estates and have certain jurisdiction over the guardianship of 
minors and their property. Compensation for orphans’ court judges is paid by each local 
government. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 411/ Page 2 
Pursuant to statute, the associate judges and chief judge of the orphans’ court for 
Prince George’s County receive annual salaries of $50,000 and $55,000, respectively. 
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public official from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill allows the county executive and county council to 
determine the salaries for the judges of the orphans’ court in Prince George’s County. 
Accordingly, expenditures may increase or decrease, depending on action taken by the 
county executive and county council. Prince George’s County anticipates that salaries will 
increase by an indeterminate amount each year. Because constitutional provisions prohibit 
the increase or decrease of salaries during a term of office, any potential impact regarding 
salaries is not realized until after the 2026 election (fiscal 2027). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2