START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 790

Chapter 790

(Senate Bill 491)

AN ACT concerning

Charles County ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ ~~–~~ ~~School~~ ~~Bus~~ ~~Contractor~~ ~~Employees~~ ~~–~~
~~Negotiations~~ – Task Force to Study School Bus Operator Contracts and Wages

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Charles~~ ~~County~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ ~~be~~ ~~considered~~
~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~joint~~ ~~employer~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~school~~ ~~bus~~ ~~contractor~~ ~~employees~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~purposes;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~representatives~~ ~~who~~ ~~reflect~~ ~~the~~ ~~interests~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~employees~~ ~~in~~ ~~negotiations~~ ~~over~~ ~~a~~ ~~master~~ ~~school~~ ~~bus~~ ~~service~~ ~~contract;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~
~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Charles~~ ~~County~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ ~~and~~ ~~school~~ ~~bus~~ ~~contractor~~
~~employees~~ establishing the Task Force to Study School Bus Operator Contracts and
Wages in Charles County; and generally relating to the Task Force to Study School
Bus Operator Contracts and Wages.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Local~~ ~~Government~~
~~Section~~ ~~11–602~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2013~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Local~~ ~~Government~~

~~11–602.~~

(A) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE CHARLES COUNTY BOARD
OF EDUCATION SHALL BE CONSIDERED AS A JOINT EMPLOYER OF SCHOOL BUS
~~CONTRACTOR~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
~~LOCAL~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~AGENCY~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~A~~ ~~MASTER~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~BUS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~CONTRACT~~
REGARDING MATTERS OF SCHOOL BUS CONTRACTOR WAGES, BENEFITS, AND
WORKPLACE RULES AND POLICIES.

(B) THE CHARLES COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL INCLUDE
~~REPRESENTATIVES~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~REFLECT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INTERESTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~BUS~~ ~~CONTRACTOR~~
~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~IN~~ ~~NEGOTIATIONS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~BUS~~ ~~CONTRACTORS~~ ~~OVER~~ ~~A~~ ~~MASTER~~
SCHOOL BUS SERVICE CONTRACT.

(a) There is a Task Force to Study School Bus Operator Contracts and Wages in
Charles County.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 790 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland who represents Charles County,
appointed by the President of the Senate;

(2) one member of the House of Delegates who represents Charles County,
appointed by the Speaker of the House;

(3) one Charles County Commissioner, designated by the President of the
~~Commission~~ Commissioner;

(4) the Chair of the Charles County Board of Education, or the Chair’s
designee;

(5) the Superintendent of Charles County Public Schools, or the
Superintendent’s designee;

(6) three members of the Charles County Bus Contractors Association,
designated by the President of the Association; and

(7) three members of the Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 689,
designated by the President of the Union.

(c) The President of the ~~Commission~~ Commissioner shall designate the chair of
the Task Force.

(d) The Maryland Department of Labor shall provide staff for the Task Force.

(e) A member of the Task Force:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Task Force shall:

(1) study issues related to student transportation, bus driver wages, and
multiyear contracts for bus contractors in Charles County; and

(2) research best practices in surrounding jurisdictions related to the
facilitation of student transportation.

(g) On or before September 1, 2023, the Task Force shall report its findings and
recommendations to the members of the Charles County Delegation to the General
Assembly in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 790

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of_1 year and, at the end of June 30, 2024,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3