START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 429 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 429 
(Senator Corderman) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Business Regulation - Home Improvement Commission - Guaranty Fund and 
Award Limits 
 
 
This bill increases, from $250,000 to $1,000,000, the minimum level at which the 
Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC) must keep the Home Improvement 
Guaranty Fund. The bill also increases, from $100,000 to $250,000, the maximum possible 
amount that may be awarded by MHIC from the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund to all 
claimants for acts or omissions of one contractor unless, after MHIC has paid out the 
$250,000, the contractor reimburses $250,000 to the fund. Similar to current requirements, 
if MHIC finds that, because of pending claims, the amount of the fund may fall below 
$1,000,000 (rather than $250,000 under current statutory requirements), MHIC must assess 
each contractor a fee, as specified. The bill also makes other technical and conforming 
changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHIC can likely implement the bill with existing resources. Nonbudgeted 
revenues and expenditures for Home Improvement Guaranty Fund increase by an 
indeterminate, but likely significant, amount, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 429/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Home Improvement Guaranty Fund 
 
MHIC must establish a Home Improvement Guaranty Fund that must be kept at a minimum 
level of $250,000 to compensate homeowners for an “actual loss” that results from an act 
or omission by a licensed home improvement contractor or other violations, as discussed 
in further detail below.  
 
If the balance of the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund is projected to fall below 
$250,000, the commission must (1) assess each licensed contractor a fee of $50 and 
(2) submit a report to specified committees of the General Assembly. The report must be 
made within 30 days of any such projection and must detail actions that are being taking 
to restore the balance of the fund to a sustainable level. 
 
One-half of the fine revenue collected through the commission’s civil citation program is 
deposited into the general fund of the State, and one-half of such revenue must be deposited 
into a separate account within the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund and earmarked for 
expenses related to the use of an expert witness to resolve a disputed Home Improvement 
Guaranty Fund claim between a homeowner and a contractor licensed by the commission. 
 
Initial Fees and Assessments 
 
A new home improvement licensee must pay $100 to the Guaranty Fund, and each licensee 
must pay $125 upon license renewal (every two years). Awards from the Guaranty Fund 
are capped at $30,000 for one claimant or $100,000 to all claimants for the acts or 
omissions of a single contractor (unless the contractor reimburses the fund). After MHIC 
pays a claim from the Guaranty Fund, the contractor against whom the claim was made 
must reimburse the fund for the full amount of the claim. Revenues and expenditures for 
the Guaranty Fund are nonbudgeted.  
 
An owner may recover compensation from the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund for an 
actual loss that results from an act or omission by a licensed contractor or a violation of 
provisions of State law that require a specified written notice in a home improvement 
contract, as found by MHIC or a court of competent jurisdiction.  
 
For purposes of recovery from the fund, the act or omission of a licensed contractor 
includes the act or omission of a subcontractor, salesperson, or employee of the licensed 
contractor, whether or not an express agency relationship exists. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 429/ Page 3 
A claimant must comply with a written agreement to submit a dispute to arbitration before 
seeking recovery from the fund. 
 
MHIC may deny a claim if it finds that the claimant unreasonably rejected good faith 
efforts by the contractor to resolve the claim. 
 
MHIC may not award from the fund:   
 
 
more than $30,000 to one claimant for acts or omissions of one contractor (raised 
from $20,000 by Chapter 647 of 2022); 
 
more than $100,000 to all claimants for acts or omissions of one contractor unless, 
after MHIC has paid out $100,000 on account of acts or omissions of the contractor, 
the contractor reimburses $100,000 to the fund; 
 
an amount for attorney fees, consequential damages, court costs, interest, personal 
injury damages, or punitive damages; 
 
an amount as a result of a default judgment in court; or 
 
an amount in excess of the amount paid by or on behalf of the claimant to the 
contractor against whom the claim is filed. 
 
Claims may not be made by specified persons (e.g., a spouse or other immediate relative 
of the contractor), and an owner may make a claim only if the owner resides in the home 
or does not own more than three residences or dwelling places. 
 
A claim must be brought against the fund within three years after the claimant discovered 
or, by use of ordinary diligence, should have discovered the loss or damage. 
 
After the commission pays a claim from the fund, it has a right to reimbursement by the 
contractor responsible for the act or omission. The contractor is responsible for the amount 
paid from the fund plus annual interest of at least 10%. If, within 60 days after MHIC gives 
notice, a contractor on whose account a claim was paid does not reimburse the fund in full, 
MHIC may sue the contractor in a court of competent jurisdiction for the unreimbursed 
amount. 
 
Payments from the Fund 
 
MHIC may order payment of a claim against the fund only if: 
 
 
the decision or order is final in accordance with specified provisions of State law 
and all rights of appeal are exhausted; or  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 429/ Page 4 
 
the claimant provides the commission with a certified copy of a final judgment of a 
court of competent jurisdiction or a final award in arbitration, with all rights of 
appeal exhausted, in which the court of arbitrator expressly has found on the merits 
that the claimant is entitled to recover, as specified, and has found the value of the 
actual loss. 
 
Generally, the commission must pay approved claims in the order submitted. If approved 
claims against a contractor exceed $100,000 ($250,000 under the bill) less the amount of 
unreimbursed claim payments previously made for the contractor, the commission may pay 
the approved claims proportionately so that each claimant receives the same percentage 
payment of the claims. After the fund is reimbursed, the commission must pay unsatisfied 
approved claims. 
 
If there is not enough money in the fund to pay an approved claim (wholly or partly), the 
commission must pay the unpaid claim (1) when enough money is deposited into the fund 
and (2) in the order that each claim was filed with a court of competent jurisdiction or 
submitted to the commission. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although MHIC may have to process larger monetary awards, the 
operational staff requirements needed to process the larger awards are assumed to remain 
the same and additional staff and/or supplies are likely unnecessary. 
 
MHIC did not respond to repeated requests for comment on the bill as amended, 
including for information about the current fund balance or assessments necessary to 
reach the $1.0 million threshold. Thus, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) is 
unable to provide a precise estimate regarding the fiscal impact of the bill on the Guaranty 
Fund or related assessments.  
 
Under the bill, the minimum required balance of the Guaranty Fund quadruples; 
consequently, assessments may need to increase similarly to maintain the same fund 
reserve needed to meet future expenditures. For a new applicant, the guaranty assessment 
may total as much as $400; similarly, for a renewal applicant, the assessment may total as 
much as $500. 
 
DLS advises that it is unclear how significantly the bill may impact the Guaranty Fund 
over time. Although the bill authorizes higher payouts, it does not require them, and 
payment amounts are dependent on the size of the claims submitted. Therefore, losses to 
the fund over time may be mitigated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small licensed home improvement businesses may be affected to 
the extent they have to repay greater amounts under the bill in order to compensate the fund 
for any additional losses resulting from acts or omissions of a contractor, particularly given 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 429/ Page 5 
the higher minimum fund level required under the bill (i.e., $1.0 million rather than 
$250,000) and the potential larger payouts with the higher fund balance. MHIC licensees 
may also have to pay higher Guaranty Fund assessments to enable the fund to reach and 
maintain the higher threshold required by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5