START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 491 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 491 
(Charles County Senators) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Charles County - Task Force to Study School Bus Operator Contracts and 
Wages 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force to Study School Bus Operator Contracts and Wages in 
Charles County. The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) must provide staff for the task 
force. A member of the task force may not receive compensation but is entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State Travel Regulations. The task force 
must (1) study issues related to student transportation, bus driver wages, and multi-year 
contracts for bus contractors in Charles County and (2) research best practices in 
surrounding jurisdictions related to the facilitation of student transportation. The task force 
must report its findings and recommendations to the Charles County Delegation to the 
General Assembly by September 1, 2023. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and 
terminates June 30, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDL can staff the task force with existing resources, but staff may be 
diverted from other critical functions. Any expense reimbursements for task force members 
are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Charles County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  At its own expense, a county governing body may provide transportation 
for public school students (in addition to the transportation provided by the State). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 491/ Page 2 
Student transportation services in the State are generally provided by a combination of 
government-owned school vehicles and private contractors. Charles County Public Schools 
(CCPS) primarily uses private contractors to transport students. Contractors operating the 
buses are not considered CCPS employees. 
 
Additional Comments:  A copy of the CCPS master school bus contract for the 
2022-2023 school year is available online. 
 
The fiscal 2023 CCPS budget includes $38.6 million in funding for student transportation 
services. The school system’s current operational bus fleet consists of 382 total buses 
(13 buses owned by CCPS and 369 contractual buses). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; Charles County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2