START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 448 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 448 
(Senators Gile and Hester) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Alcoholic Beverages – Manufacturer’s Licenses and Off–Site Permits 
 
 
This bill extends the termination dates for provisions of Chapters 359 and 360 of 2021 and 
Chapters 477 and 478 of 2022 related to the sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages by 
certain alcoholic beverages manufacturers from June 30, 2023, to June 30, 2024. The bill 
also delays the date from July 1, 2023, to July 1, 2024, that specified license holders are 
authorized to sell up to 288 ounces of beer to a person at an off-site permitted event. Under 
the bill, only holders of manufacturer’s licenses that received authorization for direct 
shipment of alcohol from the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC) by April 6, 2023, 
may ship alcohol directly. The bill also restricts the amount of liquor or beer that holders 
of specified manufacturer’s licenses may ship directly to a consumer during a calendar 
year. Holders that sold and delivered a product produced under the holder’s license to an 
individual located in the State must submit a report to ATC, as specified. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal general fund revenues and expenditures for ATC are maintained 
beyond the amended June 30, 2023, termination date. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, an authorized holder of a Class 1 distillery license, Class 4 
limited winery license, Class 5 brewery license, Class 7 micro-brewery license, Class 8 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 448/ Page 2 
farm-brewery license, or Class 9 limited distillery license may not directly ship to a 
consumer during a calendar year (1) more than the equivalent of 18 standard size 
750 milliliter bottles of liquor or (2) more than 3,456 ounces of beer. 
 
Current Law:  Alcoholic beverages manufacturer’s licenses are issued and regulated at 
the State level by ATC. Each of the nine types of manufacturer’s licenses confer different 
privileges related to the type of alcoholic beverage that may be produced (beer, wine, or 
liquor), how much may be produced each year, and whether the alcoholic beverages can 
be sold for on- or off-premises consumption. For example, a Class 1 distillery license and 
Class 2 limited distillery license allow the production and sale of liquor, while a 
Class 3 winery license and Class 4 limited winery license allow the production and sale of 
wine.  
 
Other special permits exist that can be applied for and obtained by specified manufacturers 
to, among other things, sell and deliver some of the manufacturer’s product directly at 
wholesale. Additionally, manufacturers are also authorized to obtain certain permits from 
ATC to attend special events, such as farmer’s markets and festivals, to advertise, sell, or 
serve their manufactured products. 
 
Chapters 359 and 360 of 2021 made various changes to the regulation of these entities and 
these changes originally were to terminate December 31, 2022; however, this termination 
date was extended to June 30, 2023, by Chapters 477 and 478 of 2022. Broadly, 
Chapters 359 and 360 of 2021:   
 
 
repealed differing permits that allowed manufacturers to attend and participate in 
special events and, instead, established a manufacturer’s off-site permit and a 
brewery special event permit; 
 
altered the fee structure for most manufacturer’s licenses by allowing ATC to set 
the fees and establishing the previous statutory fees as the maximum amount that 
the fee may be set; 
 
authorized most manufacturers to sell and deliver their own alcoholic beverages 
products directly to customers if specified procedures are followed; 
 
altered the limitations of the Class 7 limited beer wholesaler’s license to allow 
certain beer manufacturers to sell some of their own beer at wholesale; 
 
altered the privileges associated with Class 1 distillery licenses to allow additional 
sampling and product sales to consumers that visit the distillery; and 
 
altered the privileges associated with Class 8 farm-brewery licenses to allow the 
sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. 
 
Chapters 477 and 478 of 2022, in addition to other changes, limited the sale of beer at 
authorized events by specified beer manufacturers to up to 288 ounces of beer per customer 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 448/ Page 3 
for off-premises consumption at an approved off-site permitted event effective 
July 1, 2023. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The extension of various provisions of Chapters 359 and 360 of 
2021 and Chapters 477 and 478 of 2022 continues to allow a small business alcoholic 
beverages manufacturer to obtain various permits to increase its business. Additionally, the 
extension continues to allow a small business manufacturer to deliver its own alcoholic 
beverages products, subject to specified limits under the bill, which likely results in 
increased sales. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 595 (Delegate Qi) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Alcohol and 
Tobacco Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3