START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 735

Chapter 735

(Senate Bill 426)

AN ACT concerning

University System of Maryland – Board of Regents – Quasi–Endowment Funds

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of Regents of the University System of Maryland
to make transfers of a certain amount subject to certain conditions to establish
certain quasi–endowment funds; authorizing the Board to use investment income
produced by certain quasi–endowment funds in accordance with certain rules to
provide need–based student financial aid; and generally relating to the Board of
Regents of the University System of Maryland.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 12–104(a) through (b–1), (c), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 12–104(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

12–104.

(a) In addition to any other powers granted and duties imposed by this title, and
subject to the provisions of Title 11 of this article and any other restriction imposed by law
by specific reference to the University System of Maryland, or by any trust agreement
involving a pledge of property or money, the Board of Regents has the powers and duties
set forth in this section.

(b) In addition to the powers set forth elsewhere in this title, the University may:

(1) Exercise all the corporate powers granted Maryland corporations under
the Maryland General Corporation Law;

(2) Adopt and alter an official seal;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 735 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Sue and be sued, complain, and defend in all courts;

(4) Maintain offices at the places the Board of Regents may designate;

(5) Enter into contracts of any kind, and execute all instruments necessary
or convenient with respect to its carrying out the powers in this subtitle to accomplish the
purposes of the University;

(6) Subject to the provisions of subsections (g) and (h) of this section,
acquire, hold, lease, use, encumber, transfer, exchange, or dispose of real and personal
property;

(7) Borrow money from any source to acquire personal property as provided
in § 12–105(c) of this subtitle; and

(8) In addition to the powers set forth in Title 19 of this article and subject
to the approval of the Board of Public Works, borrow money from any source for any
corporate purpose, including working capital for its operations, reserve funds or interest,
and mortgage, pledge, or otherwise encumber the property or funds of the University, and
contract with or engage the services of any person in connection with any financing,
including financial institutions, issuers of credit, or insurers.

(b–1) The University System of Maryland shall establish its corporate headquarters
in Baltimore City at a place designated by the Board.

(c) The Board of Regents:

(1) Is responsible for the management of the University System of
Maryland and has all the powers, rights, and privileges that go with that responsibility,
including the power to conduct or maintain any institutions, schools, or departments in the
University at the locations the Board determines;

(2) Shall consult with the presidents in developing policies, guidelines, and
plans for the University System of Maryland; and

(3) May not be superseded in its authority by any other State agency or
office in managing the affairs of the University System of Maryland or of any constituent
institutions and centers under the Board’s jurisdiction.

(d) In addition to the powers conferred on it by this title, the Board has all the
powers conferred on it by:

(1) The act of incorporation of the Maryland College of Agriculture;

(2) The Charter of the University of Maryland; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 735

(3) The charter of any constituent institution.

(e) (1) The Board may:

(i) Apply for, accept, and spend any gift or grant from the federal
government, any foundation, or any other person; and

(ii) Maintain and manage gift and endowment funds.

(2) (i) Subject to subparagraphs (ii), (iii), and (iv), AND (V) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE Board may maintain and manage quasi–endowment funds.

(ii) The Board may only make a one–time transfer of no more than
$50,000,000 from the non–State supported fund balance held and invested by the State
Treasurer to the quasi–endowment fund.

(iii) 1. Subject to the limitation under subsubparagraph 2 of this
subparagraph, the Board may make only a one–time transfer of no more than $50,000,000
from the State–supported fund balance held and invested by the State Treasurer to the
quasi–endowment fund.

2. The Board may use the investment proceeds for facility
renewal projects relating only to capital facilities used for State–supported activities.

(iv) 1. Subject to the limitation under subsubparagraph 2 of this
subparagraph, the Board may make only a one–time transfer of no more than $25,000,000
from the non–State supported fund balance held and invested by the State Treasurer to the
quasi–endowment fund.

2. The Board may use the investment proceeds only to match
a privately funded scholarship program at the University of Maryland, College Park
Campus.

3. (V) 1. SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATION UNDER
SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH SUBPARAGRAPH (IV)2
SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF THIS PARAGRAPH SUBPARAGRAPH, THE BOARD MAY MAKE
TRANSFERS OF NO MORE THAN $150,000,000 FROM FUND BALANCES HELD AND
INVESTED BY THE STATE TREASURER TO ESTABLISH A QUASI–ENDOWMENT FUND.

4. 2. THE BOARD MAY USE THE INVESTMENT INCOME
PRODUCED BY THE QUASI–ENDOWMENT FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND POLICY ON ENDOWMENT FUND SPENDING
RULE TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR NEED–BASED STUDENT FINANCIAL AID.

(3) On or before November 1 each year, the Board shall submit to the
Governor, the Comptroller, the State Treasurer, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 735 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

State Government Article, the General Assembly, an annual investment performance
report comparing the various components of the University’s gift, endowment, and
quasi–endowment investment portfolio to appropriate benchmarks.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4