START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 452 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 452 
(Senator Griffith, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Film Production Activity Income Tax Credit - Alterations and Maryland 
Entertainment Council 
 
 
This bill alters the film production activity tax credit by (1) expanding eligible film 
production activities; (2) expanding eligible costs; (3) increasing the amount of eligible 
costs that qualify; and (4) increasing the maximum amount of credits the Department of 
Commerce may award each year (from $12.0 million) to $15.0 million for fiscal 2024, 
$17.5 million for fiscal 2025, and $20.0 million for fiscal 2026. The bill also establishes 
the Maryland Entertainment Council to assess Maryland’s existing assets, opportunities, 
and competitive position with the film, television, and entertainment industry, study 
specified related topics, and make related recommendations. The bill specifies related 
legislative intent. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and 
beyond; provisions related to the council terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues decrease by $3.0 million in FY 2024, $5.5 million in FY 2025, 
and $8.0 million in FY 2026. Most of that amount each year is general funds, as shown 
below. The FY 2024 general fund revenue reduction is assumed in the FY 2024 budget. 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) and Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues 
decrease by the remaining amounts each year. TTF expenditures for local highway user 
revenue grants decrease by $0.1 million to $0.3 million from FY 2024 through 2026. 
Commerce can staff the council with existing resources, but general fund expenditures 
increase by up to $100,000 in both FY 2024 and 2025 for study and evaluation costs. The 
Comptroller’s Office can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($2.3) 
($4.2) 
($6.0) 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
($0.7) 
($1.3) 
($2.0) 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
($0.1) 
($0.2) 
($0.3) 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($3.0) 
($5.4) 
($7.7) 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 452/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease by $0.1 million to $0.3 million 
annually from FY 2024 through 2026. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Film Production Activity Tax Credit Changes 
 
“Film production activity” includes a documentary or a talk, reality, or game show. “Total 
direct costs” with respect to film production activity includes salaries, wages, or other 
compensation for writers, directors, or producers. 
 
Generally, the percentage of total direct costs that qualify for a tax credit certificate is 
increased by three percentage points. For most production types, including a Maryland 
small or independent film entity, the increase is from 25% to 28%; for a television series, 
the increase is from 27% to 30%. 
 
The maximum amount of credits Commerce may award in each year is increased (from 
$12.0 million) to $15.0 million for fiscal 2024, $17.5 million for fiscal 2025, and 
$20.0 million for fiscal 2026.  In fiscal 2027 and later, Commerce may award up to 
$12.0 million in credits annually, consistent with current law. 
 
Maryland Entertainment Council 
 
The Maryland Entertainment Council is established, consisting of specified membership, 
and staffed by Commerce. A member of the council may not receive compensation as a 
member of the council but is entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. The council 
must:   
 
 
assess Maryland’s existing assets, opportunities, and competitive position within the 
film, television, and entertainment industry; 
 
study State, local, and private assets that currently support Maryland’s film, 
television, and entertainment industry, including key infrastructure, existing 
workforce, workforce pipelines, scenic profile, emerging specialties, and 
independent creative communities; 
 
study existing State programs, agencies, offices, grant programs, and commissions 
across State agencies that support the film, television, and entertainment industry; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 452/ Page 3 
 
study models, competitive profiles, methods, and legislation that states have utilized 
to incentivize necessary infrastructure and workforce to support the film, television, 
and entertainment industry; 
 
study industry needs, disruptive trends, and emerging technologies within the film, 
television, and entertainment industry; 
 
study complementary industries, aligned businesses, and potential corporate, 
philanthropic, and other partners for the film, television, and entertainment industry; 
and 
 
make recommendations on the development of a coordinated, comprehensive 
strategic plan to position Maryland as an emerging leader in the film, television, and 
entertainment industry. 
 
By December 1, 2023, the council must submit a preliminary report to the Governor, the 
Secretary of Commerce, and the General Assembly that includes specified information and 
recommendations. By September 1, 2024, the council must submit its final report to the 
Governor, the Secretary of Commerce, and the General Assembly on the matters included 
in the council’s preliminary report plus additional recommendations, including for 
additional State investment in the film, television, and entertainment industry. 
 
Current Law:  A qualified film production entity that meets specified requirements and is 
approved by Commerce may receive a refundable tax credit equal to 25% of qualified film 
production costs incurred in the State. For a television series, the value of the credit is 
increased to 27%. The Secretary of Commerce may not award in the aggregate more than 
$10 million for a single film production activity. This limitation applies to each season of 
a television series. 
 
In order to qualify for the tax credit, the estimated total direct costs incurred in the State 
must exceed $250,000. A qualified small or independent film entity with estimated total 
direct costs of at least $25,000 may receive a refundable income tax credit of up to 25%, 
with a maximum tax credit amount per project of $125,000. Commerce must award 10% of 
all tax credits in each fiscal year to qualified small or independent film entities. 
 
Any salary, wages, or other compensation for personal services of an individual who 
receives more than $500,000 in salary, wages, or other compensation for personal services 
in connection with any film production activity may not be included in total direct costs. 
Total direct costs do not include any salary, wages, or other compensation for writers, 
directors, or producers. 
 
The film production entity must notify Commerce of its intent to seek the tax credit before 
the production activity begins. A film production entity is also required to submit an 
application containing specified information, including the project’s estimated total 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 452/ Page 4 
budget, employment and wage estimates, and the anticipated dates for carrying out the 
major elements of the film production activity. 
 
“Film production activity” is defined as the production of a film or video product that is 
intended for nationwide commercial distribution and includes a feature film, television 
project, commercial, corporate film, music video, or digital animation project. 
 
The Secretary of Commerce may award a maximum of $12 million in tax credits each 
fiscal year. Credits not issued in a fiscal year may be carried forward and issued in 
subsequent years. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes Commerce to award an additional 
$3.0 million in tax credits in fiscal 2024, an additional $5.5 million in tax credits in 
fiscal 2025, and an additional $8.0 million in tax credits in fiscal 2026. Assuming the 
maximum credits are awarded under both current law and the bill, State revenues decrease 
in total by those amounts each year from fiscal 2024 through 2026, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
Most revenue losses each year are general funds. As noted above, the estimated fiscal 2024 
general fund revenue reduction is assumed in the fiscal 2024 budget. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Projected Effect on State and Local Revenues 
Fiscal 2024-2026 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 
State Revenues 
 
 
 
General Fund 
($2.3) 
($4.2) 
($6.0) 
Higher Education Investment Fund 
(0.2) 
(0.3) 
(0.5) 
Transportation Trust Fund 
(0.5) 
(1.0) 
(1.5) 
Total 
($3.0) 
($5.5) 
($8.0) 
Local Revenues 
 
 
 
Local Highway User Revenues 
($0.1) 
($0.2) 
($0.3) 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
A portion of TTF revenues from the corporate income tax is used to provide capital 
transportation grants to local governments (local highway user revenues). Thus, local 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 452/ Page 5 
highway user revenues decrease by $0.1 million to $0.3 million annually from fiscal 2024 
through 2026; State TTF expenditures decrease correspondingly. 
 
This estimate assumes that all tax credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, 
consistent with current credits. To the extent tax credits are claimed against the personal 
income tax, the effect on general fund revenues increases and the effect on TTF/HEIF 
revenues, and TTF expenditures decreases. 
 
Under the above assumptions, changes to eligibility and credit percentages do not affect 
the total dollar amount of tax credits awarded each fiscal year, although credits may be 
reallocated between recipients. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide services to film productions benefit 
from any film production activities that occur in the State due to the expanded tax credit in 
fiscal 2024 through 2026. Affected businesses may include hotels, restaurants, caterers, 
vehicle rental companies, cleaning services, and event production companies, depending 
on the type of film production. This assumes that at least some additional activity would 
not occur in absence of the bill; the greater the inducement of activity, the more meaningful 
the effect on small businesses. Small film production businesses also benefit from the 
additional funding available under the program. The bill’s changes to eligible film 
production activities may also reallocate funding across different types of projects and 
affect the related small businesses, particularly in years when enhanced funding is not 
provided. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 452/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
Enrolled - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6