START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 426 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 426 
(Senator King, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
University System of Maryland - Board of Regents - Quasi-Endowment Funds 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Board of Regents of the University System of Maryland (USM) to 
make transfers of no more than $150.0 million from fund balances to establish a 
quasi-endowment fund. The board may use the investment income produced by the 
quasi-endowment fund in accordance with the USM Policy of Endowment Fund Spending 
Rule to provide funding for need-based student financial aid. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming authorized transfers totaling $150.0 million are made in FY 2024, 
USM fund balances decrease by $150.0 million with a commensurate increase in 
quasi-endowment funds to be invested. Beginning in FY 2025, higher education revenues 
may increase due to the quasi-endowment funds earning higher rates of return; higher 
education expenditures may also increase as soon as FY 2025 for a portion of the funds to 
be used for scholarships, as explained below. However, investment returns may be 
significantly lower or higher due to market risks, and the State’s return may vary annually. 
In addition, the principal amount may be lost due to market risks. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 266 of 2013 authorized the Board of Regents of USM to establish 
a quasi-endowment fund and authorized the board to make a one-time-only transfer of no 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 426/ Page 2 
more than $50.0 million from the non-State-supported fund balance held and invested by 
the State Treasurer to the quasi-endowment fund. 
 
Chapters 741 and 742 of 2017 authorized the Board of Regents of USM to make a 
one-time-only transfer of no more than $50.0 million from the State-supported fund 
balance held and invested by the State Treasurer to the quasi-endowment fund to be used 
only for facility renewal projects at capital facilities used for State-supported activities. 
 
Chapters 392 and 393 of 2018 authorized the Board of Regents of USM to make a 
one-time-only transfer of no more than $25.0 million from the non-State-supported fund 
balance to the quasi-endowment fund. The board may use the investment proceeds only to 
match a privately funded scholarship program at the University of Maryland, College Park 
Campus (UMCP). The Acts expressed legislative intent that the USM Board of Regents 
make the transfer from UMCP’s fund balance. 
 
The Board of Regents of USM is authorized to maintain and manage gift and endowment 
funds. The board must submit an annual investment performance report on its gifts and 
endowments by November 1. State agencies are generally required to maintain all cash and 
investments with the State Treasurer, who invests and manages the funds. The governing 
boards of Morgan State University and St. Mary’s College of Maryland are also authorized 
to maintain and manage gift and endowment funds outside the State Treasurer’s Office. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  USM did not provide any details on plans for funds to be allocated to 
the quasi-endowment fund under the bill. Assuming the Board of Regents makes transfers 
totally $150.0 million from USM institution fund balances in fiscal 2024, USM fund 
balances for the participating institutions decrease by a total $150.0 million, with a 
commensurate increase in quasi-endowment funds to be invested. Beginning in fiscal 2025, 
higher education revenues increase by an estimated $1.6 million annually due to 
quasi-endowment funds earning higher rates of return. This estimate is based on the 
assumption that Treasurer-held investments are making approximately 1.06% annually or 
approximately $1.6 million per $150.0 million, while the USM Foundation-held 
investments are making approximately 2.1% or approximately $3.2 million per 
$150.0 million. 
 
However, investment returns may be significantly lower or higher due to the market. The 
quasi-endowment fund reported investment returns of 2.1% in fiscal 2022 and 27.2% in 
fiscal 2021. In addition, the principal mount may be lost due to market risks. 
 
On the expenditure side, this estimate assumes that USM’s policy of 4.25% of the rolling 
three-year average value of the fund is used for the purposes of the bill. Thus, 
approximately $6.4 million will be available beginning in fiscal 2025 for scholarships. This 
estimate reflects investment returns as discussed above and ongoing spending of 4.25% of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 426/ Page 3 
the fund’s value annually. Over time, assuming continuing investment returns and spending 
at the assumed rates, annual revenues and expenditures increase or decrease incrementally 
based on the annual rate of return. It is assumed that the scholarship is managed with 
existing funds and that scholarship funds are distributed to institutions in proportion to fund 
balance transfers. A lower or higher market value over time may result in a spending rate 
lower or higher than 4.25%. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; University System of 
Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3