START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 546

Chapter 546

(Senate Bill 470)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Land Conservation – Establishment of Goals and Programs
(Maryland the Beautiful Act)

FOR the purpose of establishing certain goals and programs related to land conservation;
establishing the Local Land Trust Revolving Loan Program to provide loans to
certain land trusts to purchase land for conservation purposes; authorizing the
Maryland Environmental Trust to exercise certain remedies under certain
circumstances; prohibiting a person from making any false statements affecting a
Local Land Trust Revolving Loan Program loan; providing that a person who violates
certain provisions of law is subject to certain penalties; establishing the Local Land
Trust Revolving Loan Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring interest
earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; ~~requiring~~ authorizing the Governor,
beginning in a certain fiscal year, to include in the annual budget bill a certain
appropriation to the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Environmental~~ Trust to be used to provide certain
grants through the Keep Maryland Beautiful Program; establishing the 40 x 40 Land
Conservation Implementation Grant Program to support implementation of land
conservation goals; authorizing certain excess revenue from the transfer tax
collected in a certain fiscal year to be allocated to the Local Land Trust Revolving
Loan Fund; and generally relating to land conservation in the State.

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
New part designation “Part I. General Provisions” to immediately precede Section
3–201; Section 3–214 through ~~3–216~~ 3–217 to be under the new part “Part II.
Local Land Trust Revolving Loan Program”; and 5–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 3–210
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 546 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 13–209(f)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the new part designation “Part I. General Provisions” be added to immediately
precede Section 3–201 of Article – Natural Resources of the Annotated Code of Maryland.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

3–210.

(A) (1) Any function or activity of the Governor’s Committee to Keep Maryland
Beautiful is transferred to the Trust.

(2) These functions and activities include, by way of enumeration and not
limitation:

[(1)] (I) Educating Maryland citizens and visitors in their individual
responsibility in litter prevention and care of the out–of–doors through a two–fold
approach:

[(i)] 1. Awareness–publicity through radio, TV, newspapers, and
other public media; and

[(ii)] 2. Action–cleanup and beautification projects carried out by
civic organizations, county committees, and community groups in cooperation with public
agencies;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 546

[(2)] (II) Efficient use of public and private funds spent on cleaning up
highways, parks, beaches, and other public and private property;

[(3)] (III) Increasing beauty through stimulation of private business,
community, and public planting projects; and

[(4)] (IV) Stimulating pride and appreciation for home, community, and
State.

(B) (1) IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF $235,000 TO THE TRUST, TO BE USED IN THE FOLLOWING AMOUNTS FOR THE
FOLLOWING PURPOSES:

(I) $50,000 PER YEAR TO PROVIDE LAND STEWARDSHIP
CAPACITY–BUILDING GRANTS OF UP TO $10,000 TO LAND TRUSTS TO SUPPORT
MONITORING AND STEWARDSHIP SCHOLARSHIPS, LAND MONITORING AND
STEWARDSHIP EQUIPMENT, OR ORGANIZATIONAL ACCREDITATION AND
CERTIFICATION TRAININGS;

(II) $50,000 PER YEAR TO PROVIDE LAND STEWARDSHIP
IMPROVEMENT GRANTS OF UP TO $10,000 TO LAND TRUSTS TO SUPPORT IMPROVED
MONITORING AND STEWARDSHIP OF AGRICULTURAL LANDS, FOREST LANDS, OR
LANDS FACING A HIGH DEGREE OF THREAT FROM INVASIVE SPECIES OR THE
EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE; AND

(III) $135,000 PER YEAR TO PROVIDE CITIZEN STEWARDSHIP
GRANTS OF UP TO $5,000 TO NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS, COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATIONS, SCHOOLS, AND MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS TO ENGAGE
COMMUNITY MEMBERS, ESPECIALLY CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS, IN
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND STEWARDSHIP.

(2) FUNDS PROVIDED TO THE TRUST UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION ARE SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND ARE NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE
OF FUNDING THAT WOULD OTHERWISE BE APPROPRIATED TO THE TRUST FOR
GRANTS ADMINISTERED UNDER THE KEEP MARYLAND BEAUTIFUL PROGRAM.

3–212. RESERVED.

3–213. RESERVED.

PART II. LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM.

3–214.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 546 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ADVISORY COMMITTEE” MEANS THE LAND PRESERVATION RAPID
RESPONSE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(C) “BOARD OF TRUSTEES” MEANS THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST.

(D) “EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE” MEANS THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE
MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST.

(E) “FUND” MEANS THE LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

(F) “LAND TRUST” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3–2A–01 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(G) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN
PROGRAM.

(H) “TRUST” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST.

3–215.

(A) THERE IS A LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO:

(1) SUPPORT THE EFFORTS OF LOCAL LAND TRUSTS THAT WORK
WITH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES AND THAT HAVE DIFFICULTY
ACCESSING MONEY FROM EXISTING PROGRAM OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
PROGRAMS IN A TIMELY MANNER; AND

(2) PROVIDE REVOLVING LOANS TO LAND TRUSTS ON A ROLLING
BASIS TO ASSIST THE LAND TRUSTS TO PURCHASE FEE SIMPLE OR EASEMENT
INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY FOR CONSERVATION PURPOSES.

(C) (1) THE TRUST SHALL:

(I) ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 546

(II) ESTABLISH APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND ELIGIBILITY
CRITERIA FOR PROGRAM LOANS.

(2) IF THE TRUST APPROVES AN APPLICANT’S REQUEST FOR A
PROGRAM LOAN, THE TRUST SHALL:

(I) PREPARE THE LOAN DOCUMENTS; AND

(II) ESTABLISH THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE LOAN.

(C) (D) A LAND TRUST THAT RECEIVES A PROGRAM LOAN TO PURCHASE
PROPERTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION SHALL REPAY
THE FUND:

(1) AT A RATE TO BE DETERMINED BY THE MARYLAND
ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST, NOT TO EXCEED ONE POINT BELOW THE PRIME INTEREST
RATE; AND

(2) AFTER THE PROPERTY IS:

(I) PLACED UNDER A CONSERVATION EASEMENT; OR

(II) TRANSFERRED TO A STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY.

(D) THE PROGRAM IS ADMINISTERED BY THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL
~~TRUST.~~

(E) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION OBLIGATES A STATE OR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ENTITY TO ACCEPT OR PURCHASE FROM A LAND TRUST A
CONSERVATION EASEMENT OR TRANSFERRED PROPERTY PURCHASED WITH A
PROGRAM LOAN.

(F) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (D)(2) OF THIS SECTION, A LAND
TRUST SHALL REPAY A PROGRAM LOAN AND ANY ACCRUED INTEREST WITHIN 5
YEARS AFTER RECEIVING THE PROGRAM LOAN, UNLESS THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
APPROVES AN EXTENSION OF TIME BASED ON EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES.

(G) IF A LAND TRUST VIOLATES ANY PROVISION OF THE LOAN DOCUMENTS
OR CEASES TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE, ON REASONABLE
NOTICE TO THE LAND TRUST, THE TRUST MAY EXERCISE ANY REMEDY AVAILABLE
UNDER LAW, INCLUDING ANY REMEDIES PROVIDED FOR IN THE LOAN DOCUMENTS.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 546 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY MAKE OR CAUSE TO BE MADE ANY
FALSE STATEMENT OR REPORT, INCLUDING ANY UNDERSTATEMENT OR
OVERSTATEMENT OF FINANCIAL CONDITION FOR A NEW LOAN OR AFFECTING A LOAN
ALREADY MADE UNDER THIS SUBTITLE:

(I) IN ANY APPLICATION OR IN ANY DOCUMENT FURNISHED TO
THE TRUST; OR

(II) FOR THE PURPOSE OF INFLUENCING THE ACTION OF THE
TRUST ON AN APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE OR FOR THE PURPOSE OF
INFLUENCING ANY ACTION OF THE TRUST AFFECTING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
WHETHER OR NOT SUCH ASSISTANCE MAY HAVE ALREADY BEEN EXTENDED.

(2) ANY PERSON, AIDER, OR ABETTOR WHO VIOLATES ANY PROVISION
OF THIS SUBTITLE IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT
TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $50,000 OR IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 5 YEARS OR
BOTH.

3–216.

(E) (A) (1) THERE IS A LAND PRESERVATION RAPID RESPONSE
ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(2) (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE IS TO:

(I) (1) REVIEW AND PRIORITIZE PROGRAM LOAN
APPLICATIONS FOR FINAL APPROVAL BY THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
CONSIDERATION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES; AND

(II) (2) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE BOARD OF TRUSTEES ON:

1. (I) WHICH PROJECTS TO FUND, WHETHER IN WHOLE OR
IN PART; AND

2. (II)THE FUNDING TO BE ALLOCATED TO EACH PROJECT.

(3) (C) THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE CONSISTS OF:

(I) (1) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT,
SELECTED BY THE SECRETARY; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 546

(II) (2) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, SELECTED BY THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES:

1. (I) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND
ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST THAT IS NOT A MEMBER OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE;

2. (II)A REPRESENTATIVE OF A NONPROFIT LAND
CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION IN THE STATE;

3. (III)A REPRESENTATIVE OF A LOCAL PARKS AND
RECREATION DEPARTMENT IN THE STATE; AND

4. (IV) AN INDIVIDUAL WITH EXPERIENCE IN LOAN
UNDERWRITING.

~~3–216.~~ 3–217.

(A) THERE IS A LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO FINANCE THE PROGRAM.

(C) THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST SHALL ADMINISTER THE
FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(3) REPAYMENTS OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST FROM LOANS MADE
UNDER THE PROGRAM; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 546 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) IN FISCAL YEAR 2025, THE THE GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $10,000,000 TO THE FUND.

(G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR THE
PROGRAM.

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(J) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE PROGRAM IS
SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT
OTHERWISE WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR THE PROGRAM.

5–104.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CONSERVE” MEANS TO PERMANENTLY PROTECT LAND FROM
DEVELOPMENT THROUGH PURCHASE, DONATION, A PERPETUAL CONSERVATION OR
AN OPEN SPACE EASEMENT, OR FEE OWNERSHIP IN ORDER TO PRESERVE THE
CULTURAL, HISTORICAL, ECOLOGICAL, OR AGRICULTURAL VALUE OF THE LAND.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE 40 X 40 LAND CONSERVATION
IMPLEMENTATION GRANT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF
THIS SECTION.

(4) “SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET” MEANS THE SMART GROWTH
SUBCABINET ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–1406 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

(5) “TRUST” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST.

(B) (1) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT:

(I) BY 2030, 30% OF LANDS IN THE STATE BE CONSERVED; AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 546

(II) BY 2040, 40% OF LANDS IN THE STATE BE CONSERVED.

(2) THE CONSERVATION GOALS ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE ACCOMPLISHED THROUGH MULTIPLE EFFORTS,
INCLUDING:

(I) WORKING WITH LOCAL COMMUNITIES, COUNTIES,
MUNICIPALITIES, AMERICAN INDIAN COMMUNITIES, AND PRIVATE LANDOWNERS TO
CONSERVE NATURAL PLACES AND RESOURCES;

(II) IMPROVING ACCESS TO NATURE FOR ALL INDIVIDUALS IN
THE STATE, INCLUDING COMMUNITIES OF COLOR AND ECONOMICALLY
DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES;

(III) SEQUESTERING CARBON AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
IN THE LANDS AND WATERS OF THE STATE;

(IV) INCREASING PUBLIC INCENTIVES FOR PRIVATE
LANDOWNERS TO VOLUNTARILY CONSERVE AND PROTECT AREAS OF
DEMONSTRATED CONSERVATION VALUE AND AREAS THAT HAVE A HIGH CAPACITY
TO SEQUESTER CARBON AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS;

(V) FOCUSING CONSERVATION WORK AT A LARGE LANDSCAPE
SCALE THAT IS BIOLOGICALLY AND ECOLOGICALLY MEANINGFUL;

(VI) PREVENTING THE EXTINCTION OF NATIVE PLANT AND
ANIMAL SPECIES BY RECOVERING AND RESTORING THE SPECIES;

(VII) STABILIZING ECOSYSTEMS AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES,
RESTORING DEGRADED ECOSYSTEMS, AND MAINTAINING ECOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS;
AND

(VIII) INCREASING ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES FOR FARMERS,
RANCHERS, FISHERS, AND FORESTERS.

(C) (1) THE TRUST SHALL ADMINISTER A 40 X 40 LAND CONSERVATION
IMPLEMENTATION GRANT PROGRAM TO SUPPORT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
GOALS ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) PROGRAM GRANTS SHALL:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 546 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) BE AWARDED EACH YEAR ON A COMPETITIVE BASIS TO A
~~STATEWIDE~~ NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT FOCUSES ON SUPPORTING THE
PERMANENT CONSERVATION OF THE LANDS OF THE STATE; AND

(II) PROVIDE AT LEAST:

1. $150,000 TO THE GRANT RECIPIENT FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PROVIDING TOOLS AND RESOURCES, ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT, AND
CAPACITY BUILDING TO LOCAL LAND TRUSTS; AND

2. $100,000 TO THE GRANT RECIPIENT FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PROVIDING STATEWIDE EDUCATIONAL CONFERENCES AND TRAININGS
FOR LOCAL LAND TRUSTS ON THE TOPICS OF EASEMENT ACQUISITION,
CONSERVATION PROGRAMS AND TOOLS, LAND MANAGEMENT AND STEWARDSHIP,
AND OTHER RELEVANT SUBJECTS.

(3) IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF $250,000 TO THE TRUST FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING THE GRANTS
REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) (1) IN ORDER TO MEET THE CONSERVATION GOALS ESTABLISHED
UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET, IN
COORDINATION WITH RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS, SHALL:

(I) COORDINATE THE ACTIONS OF STATE AGENCIES, LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS, AND NONGOVERNMENTAL PARTNERS;

(II) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, DEVELOP AND PUBLISH A
PLAN TO MEET THE STATE’S CONSERVATION GOALS AND UPDATE THE PLAN AS
NEEDED, BUT NOT LESS THAN EVERY 5 YEARS THEREAFTER; AND

(III) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EACH DECEMBER
1 THEREAFTER, REPORT TO THE SENATE EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE
ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE ENVIRONMENT AND
TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE STATE’S PROGRESS TOWARD MEETING THE
CONSERVATION GOALS.

(2) THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET SHALL MAKE THE ANNUAL
REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION AVAILABLE ON
ITS WEBSITE.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 546

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN FUND.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

13–209.

(f) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of this
paragraph, for any fiscal year in which the actual transfer tax revenue collections are
greater than the revenue estimates used as the basis for the appropriations required under
this section for the fiscal year, the amount of the excess shall be allocated to the special
fund under subsection (a) of this section as provided under subsections (c) and (d) of this
section for the second fiscal year following the fiscal year in which there is an excess.

(ii) 1. Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of this paragraph or
any other provision of law, $21,776,868 of the transfer tax collected but not appropriated
or transferred in fiscal 2004 shall be transferred to the General Fund of the State.

2. NOTWITHSTANDING SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH OR ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, IF IN FISCAL YEAR 2023 THE
ACTUAL TRANSFER TAX REVENUE COLLECTIONS ARE GREATER THAN THE REVENUE
ESTIMATES USED AS THE BASIS FOR THE APPROPRIATIONS REQUIRED UNDER THIS
SECTION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 2023, THE AMOUNT OF THE EXCESS MAY BE

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 546 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ALLOCATED TO THE LOCAL LAND TRUST REVOLVING LOAN FUND IN FISCAL YEAR
2025.

(iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of this paragraph or any other
provision of law, in any fiscal year in which an appropriation or transfer is made from the
special fund to the General Fund, if the actual transfer tax revenue collections for the prior
fiscal year exceed the budget estimate for the prior fiscal year, the excess shall be allocated
in the current fiscal year for Program Open Space, the Agricultural Land Preservation
Fund, the Rural Legacy Program, and the Heritage Conservation Fund. Funds made
available under this subparagraph shall be allocated as provided under subsection (d) of
this section.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023. Section 3 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at
the end of September 30, 2026, Section 3 of this Act, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12