START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 457 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 457 
(Senator Bailey) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
St. Mary's County - Public Facilities Bond 
 
 
This bill authorizes the St. Mary’s County Commissioners to issue up to $56.0 million in 
general obligation bonds for the acquisition, construction, improvement, or renovation of 
public buildings, facilities, and public works projects. The date of maturity of the bonds 
cannot exceed 30 years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County receives up to $56.0 million in bond proceeds. County 
debt service expenditures increase by an estimated $3.8 million annually over a 
20-year period. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Commission counties do not have the legislative power to create debt; 
General Assembly authorization is required before any bonds can be sold. 
St. Mary’s County is one of six counties that still operates under the commission form of 
government. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since 2008, St. Mary’s County has received authorization by the 
General Assembly to issue up to $208.9 million in general obligation bonds for public 
facilities, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 457/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Bond Authorizations for St. Mary’s County 
($ in Millions) 
 
Session 
Chapter 
Number 
Authorized 
Amount 
2008 
Ch. 78 
$35.0 
2013 
Ch. 96 
30.0 
2017 
Ch. 427 
26.3 
2018 
Ch. 109 
24.6 
2019 
Ch. 180 
30.0 
2020 
Ch. 596 
33.0 
2021 
Ch. 731 
30.0 
Total 
 
$208.9 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
St. Mary’s County revenues increase by up to $56.0 million from bond proceeds. Annual 
debt service costs for the bonds total approximately $3.8 million. This estimate is based on 
a 3.37% interest rate and a 20-year term of maturity. To the extent that the bond issuance, 
interest rate, or term of maturity deviate from this assumption, expenditures would adjust 
accordingly. 
 
At the end of fiscal 2021, St. Mary’s County had approximately $229.0 million in total 
outstanding debt, which represents approximately 1.7% of the county’s assessable base and 
$2,010 on a per capita basis. The county currently has an AA+ rating from 
Standard & Poor’s, an Aa1 credit rating from Moody’s Investors Service, and an 
AA+ rating from Fitch Ratings. 
 
Information on local debt measures for Maryland counties and Baltimore City can be found 
in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the 2023 report can be found on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
Exhibit 2 shows the planned capital projects in St. Mary’s County. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 457/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
St. Mary’s County Bond Authorization Request 
Fiscal 2024 
 
Project Description 
Amount 
Public Facilities 
 
Airport Improvements 
$216,333 
Sheriff’s Headquarters Facility 
9,714,025 
Total Public Facilities 
$9,930,358 
Highways 
 
Bridge Culvert/Replacement 
$1,000,000 
County Bridge Repair and Replacement 
700,000 
Neighborhood Drainage Improvements 
430,000 
Retrofit Sidewalk Program 
254,000 
Roadway and Safety Improvements 
6,083,922 
Southampton Neighborhood Revitalization 
2,410,620 
Total Highways 
$10,878,542 
Marine Projects 
 
St. Jerome Creek Jetty 
$1,367,000 
Total Marine Projects 
$1,367,000 
 
 
Parks and Recreation 
Recreation Facility and Park Improvements 
$3,300,000 
YMCA – Great Mills 
15,000,000 
Total Parks and Recreation  
$18,300,000 
Public Schools 
Building Infrastructure – Critical 
$386,000 
Building Infrastructure – Programmatical 
252,100 
Chopticon High School – HVAC System Renovation 
1,112,000 
Great Mills High School – Partial Roof Replacement 
4,043,000 
Green Holly Elementary School Roof/HVAC System 
5,374,000 
Lettie Dent Elementary School Modernization 
1,859,000 
Piney Point Elementary School HVAC System Renovation 
2,498,000 
Total Public Schools 
$15,524,100 
Grand Total  
$56,000,000 
 
HVAC:  heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
 
Source:  St. Mary’s County Government 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 457/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 574 (St. Mary's County Delegation) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 9, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4