START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 695

Chapter 695

(Senate Bill 411)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Judges of the Orphans’ Court – Compensation

FOR the purpose of authorizing the County Executive and County Council of Prince
George’s County to determine the compensation for the judges of the Orphans’ Court
for Prince George’s County; and generally relating to compensation for judges of the
Orphans’ Court for Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Estates and Trusts
Section 2–108(p)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Estates and Trusts

2–108.

(p) [The salary of each associate] EACH judge of the Court for Prince George’s
County shall [be $50,000 per annum, and the salary of the Chief Judge shall be $55,000
per annum] RECEIVE AN ANNUAL COMPENSATION AS DETERMINED BY THE COUNTY
EXECUTIVE AND COUNTY COUNCIL.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, in accordance with Article
III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution, the County Council of Prince George’s County may
not extend or apply changes to the salary or compensation of a judge while serving in a
term of office beginning before the effective date of this Act, but may implement changes
concerning the salary or compensation of a judge to take effect at the beginning of the
judge’s subsequent term of office. The County Council may implement changes concerning
the salary or compensation of a judge appointed or elected after the effective date of this
Act to fill out an unexpired term.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1