START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 471 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 471 
(Senator Elfreth) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Sediment Control Plans, Discharge Permits for Stormwater Associated With 
Construction Activity, and Notice and Comment Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to review and 
update the specifications for sediment control plans by December 1, 2025, and every 
five years thereafter. When conducting the review and updates, MDE must (1) meet 
specified requirements; (2) consult with specified groups and stakeholders; and (3) ensure 
that any updates and revisions are not applied retroactively under specified circumstances. 
By November 1, 2023, MDE must report to the General Assembly on its plans for 
reviewing and updating the specifications. The bill also establishes enhanced public 
comment requirements for construction activities located in certain sensitive areas, such as 
the Critical Area Buffer and specified areas identified by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA).  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Known MDE general fund expenditures increase by $83,303 in FY 2024, 
and by at least $100,000 annually thereafter, for staff. MDE incurs potentially significant 
additional costs beginning in FY 2024 to review and update the specifications; MDE 
intends to apply for federal grants to cover those costs, but if federal grants are not obtained, 
additional general funds are needed. Other potential effects on State agencies, as permit 
holders, are discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase for enforcement. The potential 
effects on local governments, as permit holders, are discussed below. Local revenues are 
not directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 471/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Specifications for Sediment Control Plans  
 
By December 1, 2025, and every five years thereafter, MDE must review and update the 
specifications for sediment control plans. In reviewing and updating the specifications, 
MDE must (1) revise water quantity control standards using the most recent precipitation 
data available; (2) as necessary, ensure that any updates and revisions are designed to 
protect the waters of the State from pollution; (3) ensure that any updates and revisions are 
not applied retroactively to projects with approved sediment control plans if the sediment 
control plan has not yet expired, construction contracts have been awarded (if applicable), 
and construction activities have commenced; and (4) consult with specified groups and 
stakeholders. Before finalizing an update to the specifications, MDE must report to the 
General Assembly on the proposed update.  
 
By November 1, 2023, MDE must report to the General Assembly on its plans for 
reviewing and updating the specifications. 
 
Enhanced Public Notice and Comment Requirements for Stormwater Permits 
 
MDE is prohibited from authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with 
construction activity under a general discharge permit for a construction site with a total 
proposed disturbed area of five acres or more until specified enhanced public notice and 
comment requirements are met. These enhanced requirements must be followed if any 
portion of the area of disturbance is located in (1) a watershed or catchment that drains to 
a receiving water designated as high quality under MDE regulations; (2) the Critical Area 
Buffer; or (3) an area identified by FEMA as having a 1% chance of annual flooding.   
 
If MDE receives a written request within the public notice period of an affected general 
discharge permit, MDE must extend the public notice period to 60 days to provide the 
requestor an opportunity to comment on the potential impact of inadequate construction 
site controls on waters of the State. MDE must promptly (1) acknowledge receipt of the 
written request; (2) notify the permit applicant and include details regarding potential 
inadequacies of proposed construction site controls; (3) request an electronic copy of the 
approved sediment control plan from the permit applicant and provide a copy to the 
requestor; and (4) notify the permit applicant if any updates to the sediment control plan 
are required prior to final authorization of the general discharge permit.  
 
These provisions do not apply to construction activity that (1) does not result in the 
establishment of any permanent residential, commercial, or industrial building or (2) is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 471/ Page 3 
solely intended to restore natural resources, reduce water pollution, or improve water 
quality.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, the federal Environmental Protection Agency delegates 
authority to issue NPDES permits to MDE. MDE’s Water and Science Administration and 
Land and Materials Administration issue discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water 
resources by controlling industrial and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water 
discharges are regulated through combined State and federal permits under NPDES. 
Groundwater discharges are regulated through State-issued groundwater discharge 
permits. 
 
Discharge Permits for Construction Activities 
 
Any construction project that disturbs one or more acres of earth must apply for either a 
general or individual permit for stormwater discharge associated with construction activity 
and obtain coverage under the permit before beginning earth disturbance or any part of the 
project. These discharge permits are types of NPDES permits. A notice of intent (NOI) is 
one of the first steps in acquiring a construction general permit for stormwater discharge. 
However, prior to submitting an NOI, a final erosion and sediment control plan must be 
submitted to the appropriate approval authority (such as the Soil Conservation District). 
Applications fees are required for certain projects and are calculated based on the total 
disturbed acreage. A permitting authority may require any construction site to apply for an 
individual permit rather than using the general permit, but according to MDE, individual 
projects are rarely used. When they are, they are most often used for very large projects or 
projects located in sensitive watersheds. 
 
Maryland’s High Quality Waters (Tier II) and the Critical Area Buffer 
 
Tier II, high quality waters are those that have an existing water quality that is significantly 
better than the minimum requirements, as specified in water quality standards.  
 
Chapter 794 of 1984 identified the Critical Area as all land within 1,000 feet of the mean 
high-water line of tidal waters or the landward edge of tidal wetlands and all waters of and 
lands under the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. In 2002, the affected area was expanded 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 471/ Page 4 
to include the State’s coastal bays. The Critical Area Buffer is the area of least 100 feet 
located directly adjacent to the State’s tidal waters, wetlands, and tributaries. The buffer 
services as an important protective area for aquatic resources and shoreline habitat and is, 
therefore, subject to more stringent requirements than the rest of the Critical Area. In 
general, new development activities that result in disturbance to land or natural vegetation 
or that involve the construction of a structure or result in new lot coverage are not permitted 
in the buffer.  
 
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System Permits 
 
Surface water discharges in the State are regulated through combined State and federal 
permits under NPDES, which is a component of CWA. Among other things, NPDES 
regulates stormwater discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s). 
There are 10 jurisdictions in Maryland that hold NPDES Phase I MS4 permits 
(Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, 
and Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City). Additionally, the State Highway 
Administration (SHA) holds a Phase I MS4 permit. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:           
 
Maryland Department of the Environment  
 
Known Administrative Costs to Implement Enhanced Public Participation and Notice 
Requirements:  Known MDE general fund expenditures increase by $83,303 in fiscal 2024, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one regulatory and compliance engineer to implement the changes to the public 
notice and participation requirements for affected general discharge permits. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$74,064 
Operating Expenses 
9,239 
Known FY 2024 MDE Admin. Costs 
$83,303 
 
Future year administrative expenditures, which range from $99,851 in fiscal 2025 to 
$114,358 by fiscal 2028, reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Additional Costs to Review and Update the Specifications for Sediment Control Plans and 
Potential Federal Funding:  MDE expenditures also increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in fiscal 2024, to review and update the specifications for sediment control plans. 
Exact costs are unknown but are anticipated to exceed $500,000 in fiscal 2024, with the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 471/ Page 5 
need for additional permanent staff. MDE anticipates that it will have a more concrete 
estimate of the actual costs to review and update the specifications after it develops its 
plans for doing so, which must be submitted to the General Assembly by  
November 1, 2023.  
 
According to MDE, reviewing and updating the specifications for sediment control plans 
requires significant background work, including engineering and design work, modeling, 
testing, and literature reviews. Additionally, when MDE updates the specifications, the 
Maryland Responsible Personnel Training Program (sometimes referred to as the 
“Green Card” program), which is an erosion and sediment control training course, must 
also be updated, and the 23,931 individuals who are currently certified must take a refresher 
course that provides outreach and information about the updated specifications.  
 
MDE notes there are federal grant programs that may be able to fund substantial portions 
of the engineering, planning, research, training program updates, and other background 
work that must be completed as part of the review of and updates to the sediment control 
plan specifications. MDE intends to apply for such grant funding. To the extent that MDE 
successfully obtains federal grant funding, the costs discussed above – or at least a 
substantial portion of them – are covered with federal funds. To the extent MDE does not 
receive sufficient federal grant funding to cover the costs of these efforts, general funds are 
needed.  
 
Impact on State Agencies as Permit Holders 
 
The potential impact on State agencies, as permit holders, is discussed in the Additional 
Comments section below. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local soil conservation districts are the approving authorities for 
erosion and sediment control plans and for all projects other than State and federal projects. 
Additionally, many local jurisdictions have delegated enforcement authority to implement 
erosion and sediment control plans. Thus, the ongoing updates to the specifications for 
sediment control plans affect these entities and may result in an increase in training and 
enforcement costs. These impacts likely do not occur before fiscal 2026 since the 
first review and update must take place by December 1, 2025.  
 
The potential impact on local government agencies, as permit holders, is discussed in the 
Additional Comments section below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small developers and engineering firms that design for erosion 
and sediment control are affected to the extent that MDE updates the specifications for 
sediment control plans. As mentioned above, any modification to the specifications will 
require an update to Maryland’s Responsible Personnel Training Program. According to 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 471/ Page 6 
MDE, there are currently 23,931 people who are certified in the current program who will 
need to take a refresher course that provides outreach on the updated specifications.  
 
The potential impact on small businesses, as permit holders, is discussed in the Additional 
Comments section below. 
 
Additional Comments:  The enhanced public notice and response requirements under the 
bill result in permit delays for affected construction projects. In addition, the requirements 
may increase overall project costs. Affected permit holders could include State agencies, 
local governments, and small businesses.  
 
Additionally, the ongoing review of and updates to the specifications for sediment control 
plans may increase uncertainty in the permitting process and increase compliance costs for 
affected projects. Overall, the impacts from the ongoing updates to the specifications will 
depend on the actual frequency and content of any updates.  
 
Finally, according to MDE, MS4 permittees (which include SHA and specified local 
governments), are required under their MS4 permits to implement the State-mandated 
erosion and sediment control program and must ensure that no grading permit is issued 
until a compliant plan is approved in accordance with the minimum specifications. Thus, 
ongoing updates to the specifications may affect MS4 permittees, though likely not before 
fiscal 2026.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 607 (Delegate Love) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Charles, and Garrett counties; Maryland Association 
of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 471/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - May 2, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 2, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7