START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 442 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 442 
(Senator Corderman) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Economic Development – Sports Entertainment Facilities – Financing and 
Construction 
 
   
This bill increases the amount of bonds that the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) may 
issue for “sports entertainment facilities” from $200.0 million to $220.0 million. The bill 
also allows a nonprofit organization that will own or operate a sports entertainment facility, 
instead of only certain governmental entities, to request financing from MSA and enter into 
a written agreement with MSA related to the ownership, marketing, promotion, 
maintenance, and repair of such a facility. The nonprofit organization is incorporated into 
an existing reporting requirement. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
    
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for the Sports Entertainment 
Facilities Financing Fund (SEFFF) increase by $15.0 million in FY 2024 and $5.0 million 
in FY 2025 from additional bonds issued and the proceeds being used for authorized 
purposes. General fund revenues decrease by $1.1 million in FY 2026 and by $1.5 million 
in FY 2027 and 2028 for debt service payments (and by similar amounts thereafter until 
payments cease). Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for SEFFF increase 
correspondingly as funds are received and used for debt service payments. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
($1.1) 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
NonBud Rev. 
$15.0 
$5.0 
$1.1 
$1.5 
$1.5 
NonBud Exp. 
$15.0 
$5.0 
$1.1 
$1.5 
$1.5 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
($1.1) 
($1.5) 
($1.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Potential meaningful, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 442/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 61 of 2022 established the current $200.0 million limit on the 
amount of bonds that MSA may issue for “sports entertainment facilities” and established 
related conditions, as described below. 
 
“Sports entertainment facility” means a structure or other improvement in the State at 
which minor league games are played or other non-major league sporting events are held. 
It includes parking lots, garages, and other property adjacent and directly related to the 
facility. It does not include a facility located at Camden Yards; a sports facility; or a  
high school, collegiate, or recreational venue that does not generate positive incremental 
tax benefits to the State. 
 
Written Request, Agreement, and Approval 
 
Generally, to finance site acquisition, design, construction, equipping, and furnishing of 
any segment of a sports entertainment facility, MSA must have received a written request 
for financing and construction management services from the State, county, or local 
government in which the sports entertainment facility is located or will be located. 
 
MSA must secure a written agreement with the State, county, or local government in which 
the sports entertainment facility is located under which the source of funding and the order 
in which funds will be spent is described, and the State, county, or local government agrees 
to (1) own, market, promote, and operate or contract for the marketing, promotion, and 
operation of the sports entertainment facility in a manner that maximizes the facility’s 
economic return; (2) maintain and repair or contract for the maintenance and repair of the 
facility; and (3) any other terms or conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by MSA. 
 
MSA must obtain the approval of the Board of Public Works of the proposed bond issue, 
the financing plan, and the written agreement. MSA must also notify the fiscal committees 
of the General Assembly, as specified. 
 
The county or local government in which a sports entertainment facility financed under the 
Act is located must annually report to the fiscal committees of the General Assembly on 
the facility’s assessment of the maintenance and repair needed to keep the facility in 
operating order. 
 
Sports Entertainment Facilities Financing Fund 
 
SEFFF is a continuing, nonlapsing fund established to enable MSA to (1) use the fund as 
a revolving fund for implementing Chapter 61 as it relates to sports entertainment facilities 
and (2) pay any expenses incurred by MSA that are related to sports entertainment 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 442/ Page 3 
facilities. Beginning in fiscal 2023, up to $25.0 million must be paid annually in 
two installments to SEFFF from the State Lottery Fund. No part of the fund may revert or 
be credited to the general fund or any special fund of the State. 
 
A bond issued to finance a sports entertainment facility is a limited obligation of MSA, and 
the sole source of payment for bonds issued for a sports entertainment facility must be 
money on deposit in SEFFF. 
 
Maryland Stadium Authority 
 
MSA was established in 1986 as an independent unit in the Executive Department to be 
responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities for use by 
professional baseball and/or football teams. In 1992, legislation was enacted, which 
assigned to the authority the responsibility for expansion of the Baltimore City Convention 
Center. MSA’s responsibility was further extended in 1995 when legislation was enacted 
to have MSA participate in and manage construction of the Ocean City Convention Center. 
Legislation in 1996 authorized MSA to participate with Montgomery County in the 
construction of a conference center, and in 2000, MSA was authorized to participate in 
construction of the Hippodrome Performing Arts Center in Baltimore. Since then, MSA 
has been authorized to construct a variety of other projects and facilities. MSA may, in 
fact, manage any type of construction project for local governments and State agencies 
upon request and approval by the General Assembly. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MSA advises that the bill results in $15.0 million in additional bond 
issuances in fiscal 2024 and $5.0 million in additional bond issuances in fiscal 2025 to fund 
additional SEFFF expenditures. These amounts are in addition to an assumed $50.0 million 
annually from fiscal 2024 through 2027 expected under the original $200.0 million 
authorization. Accordingly, nonbudgeted revenues for SEFFF increase by $15.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 and by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025 from additional bonds issued. Nonbudgeted 
expenditures for SEFFF increase in total by that amount as the proceeds are used for 
authorized purposes, which may occur over several years. However, for purposes of this 
estimate, the funds are assumed to be spent in the year of issuance. 
 
Assuming 30-year bonds with two years of capitalized interest, general fund revenues 
decrease by about $1.1 million in fiscal 2026 and by about $1.5 million annually thereafter 
until the debt service is repaid to provide State lottery revenues to SEFFF for debt service 
on the additional bonds. However, the actual debt service may vary depending on the 
timing and terms of the bonds issued. The amount for debt service covered through this 
distribution is capped at $25.0 million, which is more than sufficient to cover these 
additional debt service costs. Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for SEFFF increase 
correspondingly as funds are received and used for debt service payments. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 442/ Page 4 
This estimate assumes no additional MSA staff are required due to the relatively small 
increase in bond issuances under the bill compared to the original $200.0 million 
authorization. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Generally, local government revenues increase from construction and 
related activities supported by the additional bond proceeds spent by MSA under the bill. 
Local government expenditures may increase to support the additional spending. 
 
MSA advises that the inclusion of nonprofit entities under the bill allows for participation 
by the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility, which upon completion, will be 
owned and operated by the Hagerstown-Washington County Industrial Foundation (known 
as “CHIEF”). Therefore, Washington County expenditures potentially increase to support 
MSA expenditures made eligible under the bill for the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and 
Events Facility. However, the MSA funds would be reallocated from other eligible 
purposes. 
 
The net effect on any particular local government’s finances is unknown. 
 
Small Business Effect:  An additional $20.0 million in State funding is available for 
construction and related activities at sports entertainment facilities, which may be further 
supported by additional local expenditures, some of which may benefit small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Stadium Authority; Board of Public Works; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4