START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 530 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 530 
(Senators Klausmeier and McCray) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Insurance – Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Assessments 
 
 
This bill increases the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund’s (MAIF) share of uninsured 
motorist penalties collected by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) by $2.0 million 
for fiscal 2024 only and makes conforming changes. The bill also alters the assessment 
collection process that takes place when MAIF experiences a significant operating loss and, 
on June 1, 2023, requires the Industry Automobile Insurance Association (IAIA) Board of 
Directors to authorize MAIF to withdraw from the money held by MAIF from a prior 
overassessment. By July 1, 2023, MAIF must submit a report to the General Assembly on 
the application of the overassessment funds withdrawn and all fund balances in its insured 
and uninsured divisions. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted fund balance totaling $10.2 million is transferred to MAIF in 
FY 2023 (reflected below as an increase in expenditures). General fund revenues decrease 
by $2.0 million in FY 2024. This bill modifies a mandated distribution in FY 2024. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($2.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
NonBud Exp. 
10.2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($10.2) 
($2.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
MAIF Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues for MAIF increase by $10.2 million in FY 2023 
(due to the fund balance transfer that year) and increase by $2.0 million in FY 2024. MAIF 
can complete the required report using existing budgeted resources.  
   
($ in millions) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
NonBud Rev. 
$10.2 
$2.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$10.2 
$2.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 530/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Assessments to Fund the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund 
 
Promptly after the certification of an assessment by the Board of Trustees for commercial 
auto or private passenger auto insurers, the IAIA Board of Directors must notify the 
Commissioner of the certification. On the Commissioner’s verification of the Board of 
Trustee’s certification, the IAIA Board of Directors must authorize MAIF to withdraw 
from the money held by MAIF from a prior overassessment (1) an amount equal to the 
commercial auto or private passenger auto assessment, if the assessment balance for that 
portion exceeds the assessment or (2) the entire commercial auto or private passenger 
auto balance, if the assessment equals or exceeds the balance for that portion. Additionally, 
on June 1, 2023, the IAIA Board of Directors must authorize MAIF to withdraw from the 
money held by MAIF from a prior overassessment. Funds withdrawn by MAIF in this 
manner must be credited to MAIF’s surplus and may not be credited to IAIA members. 
 
Association members may not be subject to an annual assessment if the amount of money 
held by MAIF from a prior overassessment is equal to or greater than the assessment. 
Association members are subject to an annual assessment if the amount of money held by 
MAIF from a prior overassessment is less than the assessment, based on the difference 
between the commercial auto assessment or private passenger auto assessment and the 
applicable amount of money held by MAIF from a prior overassessment. 
 
Overassessments on Association Members 
 
If an IAIA member overpays for their portion of the assessment, then IAIA must promptly 
return the excess to the member and is no longer authorized to deposit the overpayment 
into the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund. An association member who receives a 
refund must either (1) refund the excess to the policyholders who paid the excess or 
(2) apply the excess as an expense reduction in a subsequent rate filing. Obsolete provisions 
related to overpayment credits against future assessments and any such overpayment 
revenue in the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund are repealed. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 530/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund 
 
Created by the General Assembly in 1972, MAIF is an independent nonbudgeted State 
agency. Through its Insured Division, MAIF provides automobile liability insurance to 
residents of the State who are unable to obtain policies in the private insurance market. As 
the insurer of last resort, MAIF is not in direct competition with the private insurance 
industry because a customer must generally have been turned down by other insurers (and 
meet other requirements) in order to obtain a policy with MAIF. 
 
Like other insurers, MAIF is primarily funded through premiums on the insurance policies 
it issues; however, MAIF is authorized to issue an assessment paid by other motor vehicle 
insurers in the State if it experiences a significant operating loss (as defined by State law) 
and meets other specified conditions. This is to ensure MAIF’s continued viability as the 
insurer of last resort. The assessment is grouped and paid separately by private passenger 
auto insurers and commercial auto insurers. Once an insurer pays the assessment, they are 
authorized to recoup the cost from their policyholders. MAIF has not issued an assessment 
since 1989. 
 
Industry Automobile Insurance Association and Assessments 
 
IAIA is an association that consists of all insurers in the State (except for MAIF) that are 
licensed to issue motor vehicle liability insurance or motor vehicle physical damage 
insurance. Any such insurer must join IAIA as a condition of its authority to sell insurance. 
IAIA is governed by its Board of Directors, and it is responsible for, among other things, 
working with the Commissioner and MAIF to calculate, assess, and collect the MAIF 
assessment. The assessment must be deposited into the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve 
Fund and then the amount of the assessment must be remitted to MAIF from that fund. 
 
In the event that an association member overpays and recoups too much from its 
policyholders, the excess must be retained in the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund, 
and the member must receive a credit against any future assessment. IAIA may adjust the 
assessment allocation percentages for an association to account for any such overpayment 
or an underpayment. 
 
Uninsured Motorist Penalties and Revenue Distribution 
 
MVA may assess the owner of a vehicle a penalty of $150 for each vehicle without the 
required security for the first 30 days. Beginning on the thirty-first day, the fine increases 
by a rate of $7 per day, but the total fine may not exceed $2,500 annually, not including 
the additional misdemeanor penalty of up to $500, which may be prepaid with a fine of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 530/ Page 4 
$290. Knowingly operating a vehicle without adequate security is a misdemeanor, subject 
to maximum penalties of a $1,000 fine and/or one year imprisonment for a first offense 
and a $1,000 fine and/or two years imprisonment for a subsequent offense. The violation 
requires a court appearance, results in the imposition of five points on the driver’s record, 
and subjects the driver to participation in the Driver Improvement Program. 
 
A portion of the fines collected under the escalating penalty structure for lapsed security is 
retained in MVA (30%) for specified purposes; the rest (70%) is directed under the 
following allocation formula:   
 
 
$600,000 to the Safe Schools Fund;  
 
$2.0 million to the State Police’s Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund; 
 
a specified amount to MAIF based on the amount provided in the prior fiscal year 
adjusted for inflation; and 
 
the balance to the general fund. 
 
State/MAIF Fiscal Effect:  MAIF is currently operating at a deficit as the projected 
income for its uninsured division for fiscal 2023 is $5.2 million, while projected costs are 
$5.5 million. The uninsured division has a surplus of $1.8 million, but this amount can only 
keep MAIF’s uninsured division solvent for about six years (or fewer if the annual 
operating deficit increases). Moreover, MAIF’s insured division has had difficulties in 
recent years ensuring that premium revenues are adequate to cover all claims and expenses. 
 
The bill assists MAIF by increasing its revenues in two separate ways. First, the bill alters 
the distribution of uninsured motorist penalties by increasing MAIF’s share of the revenues 
and decreasing the general fund share of the revenues for fiscal 2024. Second, the bill alters 
the process by which assessments are issued to automobile insurers in the State and 
collected when MAIF experiences a significant operating loss and, in doing so, allows 
MAIF to access overpayment reserve funds that were collected during the 1989 assessment. 
 
In summary, nonbudgeted revenues for MAIF (1) increase by $10.2 million in fiscal 2023 
as the nonbudgeted reserve funds become available to MAIF and (2) increase by 
$2.0 million in fiscal 2024 due to redistribution of uninsured motorist penalties in that year 
only. 
 
Uninsured Motorist Penalty Distribution 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the distribution of the assumed $70.7 million in uninsured motorist 
penalties collected by MVA for fiscal 2024, with MAIF receiving an additional 
$2.0 million that would otherwise have gone to the general fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 530/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Uninsured Motorist Penalties 
Distribution Under Current Law vs. as Proposed Under the Bill 
Fiscal 2024 
 
Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Change 
MVA 
$21,237,244 
$21,237,244 
$0 
MAIF 
4,400,307 
6,400,307 
2,000,000 
Safe Schools Fund 
600,000 
600,000 
0 
Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 
0 
General Fund (remainder) 
42,430,491 
40,430,491 
-2,000,000 
Total Fines 
$70,668,042 
$70,668,042 
$0 
 
MAIF:  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund 
MVA:  Motor Vehicle Administration 
 
Source:  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund, Motor Vehicle Administration  
 
 
Changes to Assessments 
 
MAIF advises that, during the 1989 assessment, more than 100 insurers doing business in 
the State overpaid their assessments resulting in credits totaling $9.7 million from private 
passenger insurers and $478,000 from commercial insurers. These funds are in the 
Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund but cannot be used until the insurer liabilities to 
its policyholders are paid and the credit is subsequently redeemed. However, given that the 
last assessment was 34 years ago, many insurers cannot provide a return to their 
policyholders because the insurer is no longer doing business in Maryland (which is true 
for more than 50 insurers), or the policyholder is no longer with the insurer. 
 
The bill allows MAIF to access these nonbudgeted reserve funds, increasing MAIF 
revenues by $10.2 million in fiscal 2023 (since the bill takes effect June 1, 2023). Also, 
should there be any future assessments, the bill requires insurers to immediately return any 
overpayments to insureds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 530/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - April 5, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 3, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6