START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 554 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 554 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland National Guard - Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program - 
Establishment (Health Care for Heroes Act of 2023) 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes a TRICARE Premium Reimbursement Program in the 
Military Department. The department may award grants of up to $60 per month to an 
“eligible recipient” who meets the reimbursement application requirements for a premium 
paid for individual or dependent coverage under TRICARE Reserve Select or the 
TRICARE Dental Program. “Eligible recipient” means an individual who is (1) eligible for 
TRICARE Reserve Select coverage and (2) a member of the Maryland National Guard 
(MDNG). The department must adopt regulations to implement and administer the 
program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by up to $1.0 million in FY 2024 as the 
budget includes contingent funding totaling $1.0 million, effectuated by the bill, most of 
which is to provide premium reimbursement grants to eligible recipients. Approximately 
$280,600 is needed for personnel to implement and administer the program. Out-year 
general fund expenditures reflect elimination of one-time costs and assume a minimum 
level of participation in the premium reimbursement program. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1,000,000 
871,300 
882,600 
894,500 
909,200 
Net Effect 
($1,000,000) 
($871,300) 
($882,600) 
($894,500) 
($909,200) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 554/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDNG is part of the State’s organized militia. MDNG includes the 
Maryland Army National Guard and the Maryland Air National Guard. Generally, MDNG 
is part of the reserve components of the U.S. Armed Forces under dual control of the State 
and the federal government. 
 
The Governor may order the militia into State active duty (1) in times or on reasonable 
apprehension of imminent public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, insurrection, 
invasion, tumult, or breach of peace; (2) when martial law is declared; (3) to enforce the 
laws; or (4) to carry on any function of the militia of the State. 
 
Title 32 of the U.S. Code establishes the conditions when MDNG may be mobilized with 
the consent of the Governor, on the condition of approval of the President or the Secretary 
of Defense. Title 32 mobilization includes State active duty and full-time National Guard 
duty within the United States and U.S. territories, which generally relates to specified 
events, such as natural disasters, periods of civil unrest, or terrorist attacks. 
 
Background:  Individuals serving in MDNG may receive health insurance coverage 
through their employer or their spouse’s employer or may purchase coverage directly or 
through Maryland Health Connection (the State’s health benefit exchange). As members 
of the Selected Reserves, they are also eligible for coverage under TRICARE Reserve 
Select and the TRICARE Dental Program. Unlike active-duty personnel who are 
automatically enrolled in TRICARE, Selected Reserves personnel must individually 
contract 
through 
the 
Defense 
Enrollment 
Eligibility 
Reporting 
System 
for 
TRICARE Reserve Select. 
 
TRICARE Reserve Select is a premium-based health insurance plan available for Selected 
Reserves members and their families who are not on active duty, not covered under the 
Transitional Assistance Management Program (TAMP), and not eligible for or enrolled in 
the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program. Individuals enrolled in TRICARE Reserve 
Select pay monthly premiums, an annual deductible, copayments for in-network covered 
services, and a percentage cost share for out-of-network covered services. For 
calendar 2023, premiums are $48.47 per month for individual/sponsor coverage and 
$239.69 per month for family coverage. 
 
The 
TRICARE 
Dental 
Program 
is 
a 
premium-based 
dental 
plan 
for 
National Guard/Reserve members who are not on active duty, not covered under TAMP, 
family members of a National Guard/Reserve member, or family members of an 
active-duty service member. For calendar 2023, premiums are $11.94 per month for 
sponsor-only coverage and $89.53 for family coverage. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 554/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$750,000 in general funds for the department, contingent on the enactment of this bill or 
its cross file. Another $250,000 in general funds is contingent on legislation to establish a 
program that provides health benefits for National Guard members (without reference to a 
specific bill); this analysis assumes that the bill’s provision of premium reimbursement 
grants qualifies as a health benefit and meets that contingency. Accordingly, the bill 
effectuates $1.0 million in general fund appropriations in fiscal 2024, at least $588,753 of 
that amount is expended in the first year of the program. This analysis assumes the 
$250,000 is applied toward the $280,593 in administrative costs and the $750,000 is used 
for premium reimbursement grants (subsidies) and to supplement personnel costs as 
needed, as discussed further below. 
 
Personnel and Administrative Costs 
 
To establish and implement a new premium reimbursement program, the department 
requires additional personnel. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by at least 
$280,593 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2023 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager and two accounts payable 
specialists to implement the premium reimbursement program, adopt regulations, conduct 
outreach to eligible recipients during the fall open enrollment period, and administer the 
program, which is assumed to be in place by January 1, 2024. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$257,571 
Operating Expenses 
    23,022 
Total FY 2024 Personnel/Administrative Expenditures 
$280,593 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual increases in salaries and employee turnover as well 
as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent participation in the 
subsidy program is greater, additional staff may be needed in future years. 
 
As noted above, since the bill appears to meet the contingency in the budget bill, it 
effectuates the $250,000 general fund appropriation in the fiscal 2024 budget for such 
staffing costs. 
 
Premium Reimbursement Grants 
 
As of February 7, 2023, the strength of MDNG was 5,666 personnel (including 
4,358 Maryland Army National Guard members and 1,308 Maryland Air National Guard 
members). An estimated 8% of MDNG members are currently enrolled in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 554/ Page 4 
TRICARE Reserve Select. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, an estimated 7.1% of 
Maryland residents younger than age 65 are uninsured. 
 
This analysis assumes that a minimum of 15.1% of MDNG members elect to receive a 
premium subsidy under the bill, reflecting the 8% estimated to be currently enrolled in 
TRICARE Reserve Select and the 7.1% estimated to be uninsured (who would make the 
choice to enroll in that insurance coverage due to the premium reimbursement program). 
Should 15.1% of MDNG members (856) participate, costs increase by up to $308,160 in 
fiscal 2024, to provide six months of premium subsidies of up to $60 per month, assuming 
the program is operational by January 1, 2024. To provide a full year of premium subsidies, 
expenditures increase by $616,320. To the extent additional individuals enroll, costs 
increase further. 
 
While availability of a $60 per month premium subsidy for TRICARE Reserve Select and 
TRICARE Dental provides a financial incentive for individuals to elect such coverage, the 
number of MDNG members who enroll in the premium reimbursement program depends 
on the availability of other health insurance coverage options (and their cost) and which 
option works best for each individual member and their family. Thus, actual enrollment in 
the premium reimbursement program cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
Regardless, the bill effectuates the $750,000 contingent appropriation for such premium 
subsidies in the fiscal 2024 budget. Accordingly, that amount of funding is available for 
the six months of premium subsidies assumed to be provided in fiscal 2024. If only 
15.1% of MDNG members participate, costs for the subsidies total $308,160 and the 
funding is greater than necessary for subsidies in the first year. If premium subsidies are 
provided for more than six months and/or a greater percentage of MDNG members 
participates, premium subsidy costs increase correspondingly. Excess funding budgeted 
for premium subsidies is assumed to be transferred via budget amendment to help cover 
the staffing costs discussed above (as there is no prohibition against doing so); any 
unexpended or unencumbered funds revert to the general fund. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, the cost to provide premium subsidies for 100% of 
MDNG members in fiscal 2024 (regardless of insurance coverage) would be $2.0 million 
for six months of subsidies ($4.1 million on an annual basis). 
 
Additional Comments:  Provision of a $60 per month subsidy in fiscal 2024 would fully 
cover the cost of TRICARE Select or TRICARE Dental premiums for individual (sponsor 
only) coverage and 99.3% of the cost of coverage for both TRICARE Select and Dental 
premiums for individuals. For family coverage, the subsidy would cover 67.0% of 
TRICARE Dental premiums, 25.0% of TRICARE Select premiums, and 18.2% of 
TRICARE Select and TRICARE Dental premiums. To the extent premiums increase in 
future years, the percentage of premiums covered is reduced. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 554/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 553 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Military Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 8, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 554/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland National Guard - Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program - 
Establishment (Health Care for Heroes Act of 2023) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0554/HB0553 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Brad Fallon 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation will create an avenue for members of the Maryland National Guard and their 
families to receive healthcare and dental care without monthly payments. In addition to serving as 
a recruitment tool for the Guard, this will allow more families to afford health care and dental care. 
This may increase visits to healthcare providers and generally produce economic growth. The 
savings in healthcare costs may also be used to purchase other services and products in the state. 
 

END OF PAGE 6