START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 584 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 584 
(Senators Gile and Elfreth) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Public Health - Parkinson's Disease - Advisory Committee and Website 
 
 
This bill requires the Parkinson’s Disease Registry Advisory Committee to (1) consult with 
entities that may be able to collect data and work with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) to aid CDC in creating a national Parkinson’s disease registry; 
(2) beginning July 1, 2023, meet at least quarterly; and (3) by July 1, 2024, submit a report 
to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee on recommendations for a path forward toward the establishment of a fully 
functional State Parkinson’s Disease Registry. By October 1, 2023, the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), in collaboration with the State-designated health 
information exchange (HIE), must establish a website that includes specified information 
on Parkinson’s disease in the State. The website must be updated by January 1 annually. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. MDH general fund expenditures increase beginning 
in FY 2024 for two part-time (50%) staff. Future years reflect the elimination of one-time 
start-up costs, ongoing operating costs, and a reduction in one part-time position to 25% in 
FY 2025. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
129,700 
93,100 
97,000 
101,300 
106,500 
Net Effect 
($129,700) 
($93,100) 
($97,000) 
($101,300) 
($106,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 584/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 340 of 2022 established the Parkinson’s Disease Registry 
Advisory Committee to (1) assist in the development and implementation of a Parkinson’s 
disease registry; (2) determine what data must be collected and stored in such a registry 
and the methods to ensure the privacy and confidentiality of data collected and stored in 
the registry; and (3) advise MDH on Parkinson’s disease and maintaining a Parkinson’s 
disease registry. The advisory committee includes a neurologist, a movement disorder 
specialist, a primary care provider, a physician informaticist, a patient with Parkinson’s 
disease, a public health professional, a population health researcher familiar with disease 
registries, a Parkinson’s disease researcher, and any other individuals the Secretary 
determines necessary. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, the advisory committee must (1) begin meeting at 
least quarterly (rather than as specified by the Secretary under current law); (2) consult 
with entities that may be able to work in partnership with CDC regarding a national 
Parkinson’s disease registry; and (3) submit a report by July 1, 2024, on recommendations 
regarding a State Parkinson’s disease registry. MDH (in collaboration with the 
State-designated HIE) must also establish and maintain a website that includes specified 
data in a downloadable format on the incidence of Parkinson’s disease in Maryland. To 
implement these requirements, MDH requires additional personnel. 
 
Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $129,663 in fiscal 2024, which 
reflects a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) health policy analyst to staff the advisory 
committee’s meetings (which must be at least quarterly), prepare the advisory committee 
report, coordinate activities with the State-designated HIE and other entities that may be 
able to consult with CDC, and oversee website development and maintenance; and 
one part-time (50%) epidemiologist to conduct data analysis to post on the website and 
provide consultation to the advisory committee on a State Parkinson’s disease registry. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2024 
Full-time Equivalent Positions 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$105,561 
One-time Start-up Expenses 
16,004 
Operating Expenses 
8,098 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$129,663 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. However, MDH anticipates 
reducing the part-time epidemiologist position from 50% to 25% effective July 1, 2024 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 584/ Page 3 
(fiscal 2025). As the advisory committee must meet at least quarterly in perpetuity and the 
website must be annually updated, these part-time positions are permanent and ongoing. 
 
Additional Comments:  In 2016, the Parkinson’s Foundation’s Prevalence Project 
estimated that there were 13,800 cases of Parkinson’s disease in Maryland. The 
Parkinson’s Disease Advisory Committee met five times in 2022. The last meeting was 
October  1, 2022. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 703 (Delegate Kerr, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3