START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

Chapter 535

(Senate Bill 530)

AN ACT concerning

Insurance – Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Assessments

FOR the purpose of altering the formula for the calculation of certain assessments by the
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; requiring the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Insurance~~
~~Commissioner~~ Board of Trustees of the Fund, under certain circumstances, to
authorize the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Automobile~~ ~~Insurance~~ Fund to withdraw certain amounts
from ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~overassessment~~ ~~account~~ the money held by the Fund from a prior
overassessment ~~to~~ ~~offset~~ ~~certain~~ ~~private~~ ~~passenger~~ ~~auto~~ ~~and~~ ~~commercial~~ ~~auto~~
~~assessments;~~ prohibiting members of the Industry Automobile Insurance
Association from being subject to an annual assessment under certain
circumstances; requiring certain Association members to return certain excess
surcharges, rather than depositing the excess in a certain reserve fund; ~~requiring~~ ~~in~~
~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year~~ ~~that~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~percentage~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~fines~~ ~~collected~~ ~~from~~
~~uninsured~~ ~~motorists~~ ~~be~~ ~~paid~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ requiring in a certain fiscal year that
additional funds be allocated to the Fund; and generally relating to the Maryland
Automobile Insurance Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 20–401
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 20–404, 20–405, 20–409, and 20–410
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 17–106(e) ~~and~~ ~~(f)~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

20–401.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 535 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

There is an Industry Automobile Insurance Association.

20–404.

(a) On or before March 15 of each year, the Fund shall determine and the Board
of Trustees shall certify to the Board of Directors the information required under
subsections (b) and (c) of this section.

(b) Subject to subsection (f) of this section, the following information certified to
the Board of Directors shall be separately identified by commercial auto and private
passenger auto results:

(1) the statutory operating loss for the immediately preceding calendar
year;

(2) a calculation to yield a private passenger auto assessment limit that is
determined by subtracting the year–end total surplus of the Fund for the immediately
preceding calendar year from an amount equal to 25% of the average of net direct written
private passenger auto premiums of the Fund for each of the three immediately preceding
calendar years; and

(3) a calculation to yield a commercial auto assessment limit that is
determined by subtracting the year–end commercial auto surplus of the Fund for the
immediately preceding calendar year from an amount equal to 25% of the average of net
direct written commercial auto premiums of the Fund for each of the 3 immediately
preceding calendar years.

(c) The assessment certified to the Board of Directors shall be equal to:

(1) subject to subsection (d) of this section, the assessment limit, if the
assessment limit is less than or equal to the statutory operating loss; or

(2) the statutory operating loss, if the assessment limit is greater than the
statutory operating loss.

(d) If the calculation under subsection (b)(2) of this section yields a number that
is less than or equal to zero, the assessment limit is zero.

(e) The statutory operating loss or assessment certified to the Board of Directors
may not include:

(1) assessment money received for a prior year; or

(2) money transferred between the commercial auto and private passenger
auto divisions within the Fund.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

(f) In a calculation made under this section, income or expenses not clearly
attributable to either commercial auto or private passenger auto may be allocated pro rata
for that year.

(G) PROMPTLY AFTER THE CERTIFICATION OF A TOTAL AN ASSESSMENT BY
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR COMMERCIAL AUTO OR PRIVATE PASSENGER AUTO
UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL
NOTIFY THE COMMISSIONER OF THE CERTIFICATION.

(H) NOTWITHSTANDING THE COMMERCIAL AUTO AND PASSENGER AUTO
PORTIONS OF THE OVERASSESSMENT ACCOUNT HELD BY THE FUND, ON APPROVAL
OF THE CERTIFICATION BY THE COMMISSIONER, THE COMMISSIONER ON THE
COMMISSIONER’S VERIFICATION OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES’ CERTIFICATION,
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL AUTHORIZE THE FUND TO WITHDRAW FROM THE
MONEY HELD BY THE FUND FROM A PRIOR OVERASSESSMENT:

(1) AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THE TOTAL COMMERCIAL AUTO OR
PRIVATE PASSENGER AUTO ASSESSMENT, IF THE TOTAL ASSESSMENT BALANCE FOR
THAT PORTION EXCEEDS THE TOTAL ASSESSMENT; OR

(2) THE ENTIRE COMMERCIAL AUTO OR PRIVATE PASSENGER AUTO
BALANCE IN THE ACCOUNT, IF THE TOTAL ASSESSMENT EQUALS OR EXCEEDS THE
BALANCE IN THE ACCOUNT FOR THAT PORTION.

(I) ASSOCIATION MEMBERS MAY NOT BE SUBJECT TO AN ANNUAL
ASSESSMENT IF FUNDS IN THE THE AMOUNT OF MONEY HELD BY THE FUND FROM A
PRIOR OVERASSESSMENT ~~ACCOUNT~~ ~~ARE~~ IS EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN THE ~~TOTAL~~
ASSESSMENT.

(J) ASSOCIATION MEMBERS ARE SUBJECT TO AN ANNUAL ASSESSMENT
UNDER § 20–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE IF FUNDS IN THE THE AMOUNT OF MONEY HELD
BY THE FUND FROM A PRIOR OVERASSESSMENT ACCOUNT ARE IS LESS THAN THE
TOTAL ASSESSMENT, BASED ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN:

(1) THE TOTAL COMMERCIAL AUTO ASSESSMENT OR PRIVATE
PASSENGER AUTO ASSESSMENT; AND

(2) THE APPLICABLE FUNDS IN THE AMOUNT OF MONEY HELD BY THE
FUND FROM A PRIOR OVERASSESSMENT ACCOUNT.

(K) MONEY WITHDRAWN BY THE FUND UNDER SUBSECTION (H) OF THIS
~~SECTION~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 535 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(K) (1) ON JUNE 1, 2023, THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL AUTHORIZE
THE FUND TO WITHDRAW FROM THE MONEY HELD BY THE FUND FROM A PRIOR
OVERASSESSMENT.

(2) THE FUNDS WITHDRAWN:

(1) (I) SHALL BE ALLOCATED TO THE SURPLUS OF THE FUND; AND

(2) (II) MAY NOT BE CREDITED TO ASSOCIATION MEMBERS.

(L) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2023, THE FUND SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE APPLICATION OF THE FUNDS WITHDRAWN UNDER
THIS SECTION AND ALL FUND BALANCES IN THE FUND’S INSURED AND UNINSURED
DIVISIONS.

20–405.

(a) In this section, “net direct written premiums” means direct gross premiums
written on all policies of motor vehicle liability insurance and motor vehicle physical
damage insurance less return premiums or dividends paid or credited to policyholders with
respect to those policies.

(b) On or before June 30 of each year in which the Board of Directors receives the
certification of an actual commercial auto or private passenger auto assessment for a
preceding calendar year, the Board of Directors shall perform the duties specified in this
section.

(c) The Board of Directors shall obtain from the Commissioner the aggregate net
direct written premiums of all Association members during the most recent calendar year
determined by the Commissioner for commercial auto and private passenger auto divisions
of motor vehicle liability insurance and motor vehicle physical damage insurance.

(d) (1) The Board of Directors shall calculate assessment allocation
percentages for commercial auto and private passenger auto divisions by dividing the most
recent certified assessment for commercial auto and private passenger auto divisions by
the total of:

(i) the respective aggregate net direct written premiums obtained
under subsection (c) of this section; and

(ii) the respective total net direct written premiums of the Fund for
the same period.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

(2) The assessment allocation percentage for the private passenger auto
division may not exceed 3%.

(e) The Board of Directors shall give notice of the assessment allocation
percentages determined under this section to the Fund, the Commissioner, and all
Association members.

(f) The Board of Directors promptly shall assess and collect from each Association
member for the commercial auto and private passenger auto divisions an assessment
obtained by:

(1) multiplying the Association member’s net direct written premiums in
each division for the most recent calendar year determined by the Commissioner by the
appropriate assessment allocation percentage, calculated under subsection (d) of this
section; and

(2) adjusting the resulting product for any [surcharge excess or] shortfall
experienced by the Association member for the previous applicable surcharge year.

(g) An Association member may deduct an assessment payment from a
retaliatory tax but may not deduct the payment from any other assessment or tax required
by law.

(h) (1) The Association:

(i) first, shall deposit the certified assessment into the Insufficiency
Assessment Reserve Fund that is created under § 20–410 of this subtitle and apply the
appropriate parts of the certified assessment to the private passenger auto and commercial
auto divisions of the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund; and

(ii) then, shall pay to the Fund the entire certified assessment in one
sum, less the part of the certified assessment allocated to the Fund.

(2) Any money in the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund from a
previous year shall be paid to the Fund on December 31 of each year.

20–409.

(a) If the aggregate amount of assessment surcharges received by an Association
member during a surcharge year is less than that Association member’s assessment
payment, the Association member’s assessment surcharge authorized under § 20–406 of
this subtitle shall be increased accordingly for the next appropriate surcharge year.

(b) (1) If the aggregate amount of assessment surcharges received by an
Association member during a recoupment year exceeds the Association member’s
assessment payment, the Association [member shall deposit the excess in the Insufficiency

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 535 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Assessment Reserve Fund as provided in § 20–410 of this subtitle and shall receive a credit
for the amount deposited against the next appropriate assessment imposed under this
subtitle] SHALL PROMPTLY RETURN THE EXCESS TO THE ASSOCIATION MEMBER.

(2) AN ASSOCIATION MEMBER TO WHOM AN EXCESS IS RETURNED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) REFUND THE EXCESS TO THE POLICYHOLDERS WHO PAID
THE EXCESS; OR

(II) APPLY THE EXCESS AS AN EXPENSE REDUCTION IN A
SUBSEQUENT RATE FILING.

[(c) The Association may adjust the annual assessment allocation percentage for
an Association member to reflect any surcharge excess or shortfall for the previous
applicable surcharge year.]

20–410.

(a) There is an Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund.

(b) The Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund shall be maintained by the
Association and shall consist of[:

(1) payments of] assessment [surcharges] PAYMENTS collected by the
Association [to cover any actual operating loss that the Fund sustains;

(2) any gross excess surcharges received by an Association member on
account of an assessment made under this subtitle; and

(3) the full amount of the income from assessment payments and gross
excess surcharges in investments] AND INTEREST, IF ANY.

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Association
shall hold money of the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund in trust in a separate
interest–bearing account in a financial institution in the State for the use of the Fund.

(2) The Association may authorize the financial institution where the
money is deposited to invest all or part of the money in investments allowed for casualty
insurers, as provided in §§ 5–601 through 5–609 of this article.

(d) An Association member shall deposit with the Association any gross excess
surcharges received because of a future assessment not later than October 15 after the
surcharge year in which the gross excess surcharge was received.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

Article – Transportation

17–106.

(e) (1) (i) 1. Except as provided in subparagraphs (iv) and (v) of this
paragraph, in addition to any other penalty provided for in the Maryland Vehicle Law, if
the required security for a vehicle terminates or otherwise lapses during its registration
year, the Administration may assess the owner of the vehicle with a penalty of $150 for
each vehicle without the required security for a period of 1 to 30 days.

2. If a fine is assessed, beginning on the 31st day the fine
shall increase by a rate of $7 for each day.

(ii) Each period during which the required security for a vehicle
terminates or otherwise lapses shall constitute a separate violation.

(iii) The penalty imposed under this subsection may not exceed
$2,500 for each violation in a 12–month period.

(iv) The Administration may not assess a penalty under this
subsection if:

1. The registration plates of the vehicle are returned to the
Administration within 10 days after the termination or lapse of the required security, as
shown by the records of the Administration; and

2. A. The certificate of title for the vehicle has been
transferred to a new owner;

B. The registered owner has moved out–of–state and the
registration plates are returned by mail;

C. A salvage certificate has been issued for the vehicle; or

D. A licensed dealer has taken possession of the vehicle with
an obligation to return the registration plates.

(v) Before the Administration may assess a penalty under this
subsection, the Administration shall first verify that the registration plates for the vehicle
were not returned to the Administration within 10 days after the termination or lapse of
the required security.

(2) (i) Except as provided under paragraph (3) of this subsection, a
penalty assessed under this subsection shall be paid as follows:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 535 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. A. [70%] FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024, 50% to be
allocated as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph; [and]

B. FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER, 70% TO BE ALLOCATED AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
~~PARAGRAPH;~~

2. 30% to the Administration, which may be used by the
Administration, subject to subsection (f) of this section, to provide funding for contracts
with independent agents to assist in the recovery of evidences of registration as authorized
in subsection (d)(3) of this section; AND

3. FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024, 20% TO THE MARYLAND
~~AUTOMOBILE~~ ~~INSURANCE~~ ~~FUND.~~

(ii) For each fiscal year beginning on or after July 1, 2014, the
percentage of the penalties specified under subparagraph (i)1 of this paragraph shall be
allocated among the Safe Schools Fund, the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund[, the Maryland
Automobile Insurance Fund,] and the General Fund as follows:

1. $600,000 to the Safe Schools Fund;

2. $2,000,000 to the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund; AND

3. [To the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund, the:

A. EXCEPT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024 AND EXCEPT AS
PROVIDED UNDER ITEM B C OF THIS ITEM, THE amount distributed to the Maryland
Automobile Insurance Fund in the prior fiscal year under the provisions of this paragraph
adjusted by the change for the calendar year preceding the fiscal year in the Consumer
Price Index – All Urban Consumers – Medical Care as published by the United States
Bureau of Labor Statistics; ~~and~~

B. FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025, THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED
TO THE MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND IN FISCAL YEAR 2023 UNDER
~~THE~~ ~~PROVISIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~PARAGRAPH~~ ~~ADJUSTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHANGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
CALENDAR YEAR PRECEDING THE FISCAL YEAR IN THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX –
ALL URBAN CONSUMERS – MEDICAL CARE AS PUBLISHED BY THE UNITED STATES
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS 2024, THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED TO THE
MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND IN THE PRIOR FISCAL YEAR UNDER THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH ADJUSTED BY THE CHANGE FOR THE CALENDAR
YEAR PRECEDING THE FISCAL YEAR IN THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – ALL URBAN
CONSUMERS – MEDICAL CARE AS PUBLISHED BY THE UNITED STATES BUREAU OF
LABOR STATISTICS PLUS AN ADDITIONAL $2,000,000; AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

C. FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025, THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED
TO THE MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND CALCULATED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH ITEM A OF THIS ITEM EXCLUDING THE $2,000,000 DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND
IN FISCAL YEAR 2024; AND

4.] The balance to the General Fund.

(3) Beginning July 1, 2018, any uninsured motorist penalties the
Administration receives under the Program to Incentivize and Enable Uninsured Vehicle
Owners to Be Insured established under § 20–612 of the Insurance Article shall be paid to
the Uninsured Division of the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund.

(4) If the Administration assesses a vehicle owner, co–owner, or lessee with
a penalty under this subsection, the Administration may not take any of the following
actions until the penalty is paid:

(i) Reinstate a registration suspended under this subsection;

(ii) Except for a temporary registration as provided under §
13–602(a)(2) of this article, issue a new registration for any vehicle that is owned,
co–owned, or leased by that person and is titled after the violation date; or

(iii) Renew a registration for a vehicle that is owned, co–owned, or
leased by that person.

(5) (i) In this paragraph, “family member” means any individual whose
relationship to the vehicle owner is one of those listed under § 13–810(c)(1) of this article
as being exempt from paying the excise tax imposed on the transfer of a vehicle.

(ii) The monetary penalties provided in this subsection may not be
avoided by transferring title to the vehicle.

(iii) Except as provided in paragraph (1)(iv) and (v) of this subsection,
regardless of whether money or other valuable consideration is involved in the transfer, if
title to a vehicle is transferred by an individual who has violated this subtitle to a family
member, any suspension of the vehicle’s registration that occurred before the transfer shall
continue as if no transfer had occurred and a new registration may not be issued until the
penalty fee is paid.

(6) An amount equal to the monetary penalties paid to the Administration
under paragraph (2) of this subsection may be used by the Administration only for the
enforcement of this subtitle.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 535 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(f)~~ ~~From~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~distributed~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Administration~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~
[(e)(2)(i)2] (E)(2)(I)3 of this section, expenditures to fund contracts entered into under
~~subsection~~ ~~(d)(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~May~~ ~~not~~ ~~exceed~~ ~~$1,000,000~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~May~~ ~~be~~ ~~made~~ ~~only:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~Pursuant~~ ~~to~~ ~~an~~ ~~appropriation~~ ~~approved~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~
~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~State~~ ~~budget;~~ ~~or~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~Through~~ ~~the~~ ~~budget~~ ~~amendment~~ ~~procedure~~ ~~provided~~ ~~for~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~
~~7–209~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~provided~~ ~~that:~~

~~1.~~ ~~The~~ ~~budget~~ ~~amendment~~ ~~and~~ ~~supporting~~ ~~information~~ ~~have~~
~~been~~ ~~submitted~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~budget~~ ~~committees~~ ~~for~~ ~~review~~ ~~and~~ ~~comment;~~ ~~and~~

~~2.~~ ~~At~~ ~~least~~ ~~45~~ ~~days~~ ~~have~~ ~~elapsed~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~time~~ ~~the~~ ~~budget~~
~~amendment~~ ~~and~~ ~~supporting~~ ~~information~~ ~~were~~ ~~submitted~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~budget~~ ~~committees.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10