START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 537 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 537 
(Senator King) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Video Lottery Operation License - Renewal 
 
 
This bill extends the initial renewal term of a video lottery operation license from 10 to 
15 years and establishes the same term for subsequent renewals. A video lottery operation 
licensee must pay, for each 5-year period of its initial renewal term, a fee equal to 0.75% of 
the average annual proceeds from the operation of video lottery terminals (VLTs) and table 
games at the video lottery facility for the preceding 3-year period, to be paid in equal 
annual installments and credited to the Education Trust Fund (ETF). However, each 
licensee receives the equivalent of 20% of its fee payment for costs associated with 
marketing, advertising, and promotions that exclusively target out-of-state audiences. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  ETF revenues increase by $225,300 in FY 2026 and, once all video lottery 
operation licensees have renewed their licenses and are subject to annual renewal fees, 
ETF revenues increase by approximately $2.7 million annually beginning in FY 2032. 
Special fund expenditures increase by $1.3 million in FY 2027 and by $2.6 million in 
FY 2032. General fund expenditures decrease by amounts equivalent to special fund 
expenditure increases. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$225,300 
$1,094,100 
$1,173,200 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$0 
($1,319,400) 
($1,173,200) 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$1,319,400 
$1,173,200 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$225,300 
$1,094,100 
$1,173,200 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 537/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Within 2 to 5 years before the video lottery operation license term expires, 
the licensee must file with the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) a 
notice of intent to apply for a renewal of the license. Within 1 to 5 years before a video 
lottery operation license term ends, a video lottery operation licensee may file an 
application to renew the license. Upon application for renewal, SLGCC must renew the 
license unless it finds that the licensee is no longer qualified for the license. Before denying 
an application, SLGCC must provide the licensee an opportunity for a hearing. 
 
Current Law:  A video lottery operation license initially expires 15 years from the date 
on which the video lottery facility is issued the license by SLGCC. Two years before a 
video lottery operation license expires, the licensee must file with SLGCC a notice of intent 
to reapply for the license. Within 1 year of the end of the initial 15-year license term, a 
video lottery operation licensee may reapply for a 10-year license term with a license fee 
to be determined by statute. If a video lottery operation licensee has its license revoked or 
otherwise surrenders the license, the license reverts to the State. 
 
Licensees paid an initial license fee of at least $3 million for every 500 video lottery 
terminals (except for the Allegany County facility licensee), which accrued to the ETF. 
Licensees pay annual assessments into the Problem Gambling Fund of $425 per slot 
machine and $500 per table game to fund programs to treat and prevent gambling addiction. 
 
Gross VLT proceeds are generally distributed from the proceeds of VLTs at each facility 
to a small, minority, and woman-owned business investment account; the State lottery for 
administrative costs; local impact grants; horse racing purses, bred funds, and track 
renewal; licensees; and ETF. From table game proceeds, licensees receive 80%, 15% is 
distributed to ETF, and 5% is distributed to local jurisdictions where a video lottery 
terminal facility is located. 
 
ETF provides funding for education and public schools. After specified allocations for 
school construction financing under the Built to Learn Act, ETF funds are directed to the 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF), which serves as the primary funding source 
for BMFF’s education programs. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill provides for 0.75% of average annual proceeds to be paid to 
ETF in the form of license renewal fees, and also requires that an amount equivalent to 
20% of the fees be remitted to video lottery operation licensees. Therefore, the net effect 
on ETF revenues under the bill is equivalent to 0.60% of average annual proceeds from 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 537/ Page 3 
VLTs and table games. A video lottery operation licensee must make three 5-year sets of 
annual license renewal fee payments during its initial 15-year renewal term. The bill has 
no immediate fiscal effect because the first video lottery operation license renewal is not 
until fiscal 2026, at which time ETF revenues increase by $225,250. Once all video lottery 
operation licensees have renewed their licenses and are subject to annual renewal fee 
payments by fiscal 2032, ETF revenues increase by approximately $2.7 million annually, 
as shown in Exhibit 1. These estimates are based upon the current projections of VLT and 
table game gross revenues at each of the six video lottery facilities. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Increased Education Trust Fund Revenues by 
Video Lottery Operation Licensee 
Fiscal 2026-2032 
 
Licensee 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cecil County 
$106,815 
$106,815 
$106,815 
$106,815 
$106,815 $111,771 
$111,771 
Worcester County 
118,435 
118,435 
118,435 
118,435 
118,435 
127,600 
127,600 
Anne Arundel County 
- 
868,859 
868,859 
868,859 
868,859 
868,859 
936,008 
Allegany County 
- 
- 
79,121 
79,121 
79,121 
79,121 
79,121 
Baltimore City 
- 
- 
- 
- 
245,595 
245,595 
245,595 
Prince George’s County 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,168,575 
Total 
$225,250 $1,094,109 $1,173,230 $1,173,230 $1,418,825 $1,432,946 
$2,668,670 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
BMFF revenues are projected to be sufficient to cover mandated annual increases in 
expenditures for the Blueprint through fiscal 2026. However, current projections indicate 
that, under current law, revenues in BMFF, including prior-year fund balances, may be less 
than the required increases to annual expenditures under the Blueprint beginning in 
fiscal 2027. Thus, increases to ETF in fiscal 2026 and 2027 under the bill are assumed to 
translate into increased BMFF special fund expenditures in fiscal 2027, and beginning in 
fiscal 2028, annual increases in ETF revenues translate into increased BMFF special fund 
expenditures in those same years. General fund expenditures for education decrease to the 
same extent that BMFF expenditures increase under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 537/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming 
Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4