START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 561 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 561 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Goodwill Industries of Chesapeake Excel Center in Baltimore City - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the name of the recipient of a mandated appropriation from the Goodwill 
Excel Center to the Goodwill Industries of Chesapeake Excel Center. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying in nature and does not alter the amount of funding 
provided or the recipient of the funding. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 359 of 2022 requires the Governor to include an appropriation of 
$500,000 for the Goodwill Excel Center in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2024 and 2025. 
The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes the appropriation in the budget of the 
Maryland State Department of Education’s Aid to Education program. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Goodwill Industries of the Chesapeake Excel Center is a 
planned adult high school in Baltimore City for individuals age 21 and over. According to 
the center’s website, it plans to open in 2023. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 561/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Goodwill Industries of 
the Chesapeake; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2