START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 266

Chapter 266

(Senate Bill 591)

AN ACT concerning

Labor and Employment – Noncompete and Conflict of Interest Provisions –
Application of Prohibition

FOR the purpose of altering the application of the prohibition on including a noncompete
or conflict of interest provision in an employment contract or similar document or
agreement that restricts the ability of an employee to enter into employment with a
new employer or to become self–employed in the same or similar business or trade;
and generally relating to noncompete and conflict of interest provisions.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–413(c) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–716
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–413.

(c) (1) Subject to § 3–413.1 of this subtitle and except as provided in paragraph
(2) of this subsection, the State minimum wage rate is:

(i) for the 12–month period beginning July 1, 2017, $9.25 per hour;

(ii) for the 18–month period beginning July 1, 2018, $10.10 per hour;

(iii) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2020, $11.00 per
hour;

(iv) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2021, $11.75 per
hour;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 266 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2022, $12.50 per
hour;

(vi) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2023, $13.25 per
hour;

(vii) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2024, $14.00 per
hour; and

(viii) beginning January 1, 2025, $15.00 per hour.

(2) Subject to § 3–413.1 of this subtitle, the State minimum wage rate for
a small employer is:

(i) for the 18–month period beginning July 1, 2018, $10.10 per hour;

(ii) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2020, $11.00 per
hour;

(iii) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2021, $11.60 per
hour;

(iv) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2022, $12.20 per
hour;

(v) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2023, $12.80 per
hour;

(vi) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2024, $13.40 per
hour;

(vii) for the 12–month period beginning January 1, 2025, $14.00 per
hour;

(viii) for the 6–month period beginning January 1, 2026, $14.60 per
hour; and

(ix) beginning July 1, 2026, $15.00 per hour.

(d) An employer may pay an employee a wage that equals a rate of 85% of the
State minimum wage established under this section if the employee is under the age of 18
years.

3–716.

(a) (1) This section applies:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 266

(i) to an employment contract or a similar document or agreement
concerning an employee who earns equal to or less than[:

1. $15 per hour; or

2. $31,200 annually] 150% OF THE STATE MINIMUM
WAGE RATE ESTABLISHED UNDER § 3–413 OF THIS TITLE; and

(ii) whether or not the employer and employee entered into the
employment contract or similar document or agreement in the State.

(2) This section does not apply to an employment contract or a similar
document or agreement with respect to the taking or use of a client list or other proprietary
client–related information.

(b) A noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment contract or a
similar document or agreement that restricts the ability of an employee to enter into
employment with a new employer or to become self–employed in the same or similar
business or trade shall be null and void as being against the public policy of the State.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3