START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

Chapter 525

(Senate Bill 579)

AN ACT concerning

Residential Property – ~~Exclusive~~ ~~Listing~~ ~~Agreements~~ ~~–~~ ~~Limit~~ ~~on~~ ~~Duration~~
Service Agreements – Prohibitions

FOR the purpose of prohibiting ~~an~~ ~~exclusive~~ ~~listing~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~sale~~ ~~of~~ ~~residential~~
~~property~~ ~~from~~ ~~being~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~ ~~1~~ ~~year;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Real~~ ~~Estate~~
~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~an~~ ~~assessment~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~exclusive~~ ~~listing~~ ~~agreements~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~annual~~ ~~report;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~exclusive~~ ~~listing~~ ~~agreements~~ certain
service agreements for the maintenance, purchase, or sale of residential property
from containing certain provisions; prohibiting the recordation of service agreements
prohibited under this Act; and generally relating to residential property and service
agreements.

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section ~~10–803~~ 14–801 through 14–809 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 8.
Residential Property Service Agreements”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Occupations~~ ~~and~~ ~~Professions~~
~~Section~~ ~~17–101(a),~~ ~~(d),~~ ~~(l),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(n)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2018~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Occupations~~ ~~and~~ ~~Professions~~
~~Section~~ ~~17–210~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2018~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxvi)
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 525 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xxxvii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

~~10–803.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) (I) “EXCLUSIVE LISTING AGREEMENT” MEANS ANY
~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~BETWEEN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RESIDENTIAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANOTHER~~
~~PERSON~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~PROVIDES~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXCLUSIVE~~ ~~RIGHT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~SELL~~ ~~THE~~
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.

(II) “EXCLUSIVE LISTING AGREEMENT” INCLUDES:

1. ANY AGREEMENT BETWEEN AN OWNER OF
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY AND A REAL ESTATE BROKER, AS DEFINED IN § 17–101 OF
THE BUSINESS OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS ARTICLE, THAT PROVIDES THE
~~REAL~~ ~~ESTATE~~ ~~BROKER~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXCLUSIVE~~ ~~RIGHT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~SELL~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESIDENTIAL~~
PROPERTY; AND

2. ANY AGREEMENT BETWEEN AN OWNER OF
~~RESIDENTIAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANOTHER~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~PROVIDES~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~WITH~~
THE EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO SELL THE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY IN THE FUTURE.

(3) “RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY” MEANS REAL PROPERTY IMPROVED
BY FOUR OR FEWER SINGLE–FAMILY DWELLING UNITS THAT ARE DESIGNED
PRINCIPALLY AND ARE INTENDED FOR HUMAN HABITATION.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO AN EXCLUSIVE LISTING AGREEMENT
ENTERED INTO ON OR AFTER JUNE 1, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(C) (1) AN EXCLUSIVE LISTING AGREEMENT MAY NOT BE EFFECTIVE FOR
MORE THAN 1 YEAR.

(2) AN EXCLUSIVE LISTING AGREEMENT THAT PURPORTS TO BE
EFFECTIVE FOR MORE THAN 1 YEAR SHALL BE VOID AND OF NO FURTHER EFFECT
AFTER 1 YEAR.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Occupations~~ ~~and~~ ~~Professions~~

~~17–101.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(d)~~ ~~“Commission”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Real~~ ~~Estate~~ ~~Commission.~~

~~(l)~~ ~~“Provide~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~brokerage~~ ~~services”~~ ~~means~~ ~~to~~ ~~engage~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~following~~ ~~activities:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~for~~ ~~consideration,~~ ~~providing~~ ~~any~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~services~~ ~~for~~ ~~another~~
~~person:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~selling,~~ ~~buying,~~ ~~exchanging,~~ ~~or~~ ~~leasing~~ ~~any~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate;~~ ~~or~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~collecting~~ ~~rent~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~use~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~for~~ ~~consideration,~~ ~~assisting~~ ~~another~~ ~~person~~ ~~to~~ ~~locate~~ ~~or~~ ~~obtain~~ ~~for~~
~~purchase~~ ~~or~~ ~~lease~~ ~~any~~ ~~residential~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~engaging~~ ~~regularly~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~business~~ ~~of~~ ~~dealing~~ ~~in~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~or~~ ~~leases~~ ~~or~~
~~options~~ ~~on~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~engaging~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~business~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~ ~~purpose~~ ~~of~~ ~~which~~ ~~is~~ ~~promoting~~ ~~the~~
~~sale~~ ~~of~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~through~~ ~~a~~ ~~listing~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~publication~~ ~~issued~~ ~~primarily~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~promotion~~ ~~of~~
~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~sales;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~engaging~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~business~~ ~~that~~ ~~subdivides~~ ~~land~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~located~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~state~~
~~and~~ ~~sells~~ ~~the~~ ~~divided~~ ~~lots;~~ ~~or~~

~~(6)~~ ~~for~~ ~~consideration,~~ ~~serving~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~consultant~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~any~~ ~~activity~~ ~~set~~
~~forth~~ ~~in~~ ~~items~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~through~~ ~~(5)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection.~~

~~(n)~~ ~~“Real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~broker”~~ ~~means~~ ~~an~~ ~~individual~~ ~~who~~ ~~provides~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~brokerage~~
~~services.~~

~~17–210.~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 525 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~The~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~submit~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Secretary~~ ~~an~~ ~~annual~~ ~~report~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~activities~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~that~~ ~~includes:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~a~~ ~~statement~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~total~~ ~~receipts~~ ~~from~~ ~~license~~ ~~fees;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~a~~ ~~statement~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~total~~ ~~expenditures~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~broker~~ ~~licenses,~~ ~~associate~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~broker~~
~~licenses,~~ ~~and~~ ~~real~~ ~~estate~~ ~~salesperson~~ ~~licenses~~ ~~issued~~ ~~in~~ ~~each~~ ~~county;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~hearings~~ ~~held;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~complaints~~ ~~received;~~

~~(6)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~investigations~~ ~~made;~~

~~(7)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~applications~~ ~~for~~ ~~licenses~~ ~~denied;~~

~~(8)~~ ~~the~~ ~~total~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~licenses~~ ~~suspended~~ ~~or~~ ~~revoked;~~

~~(9)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~cases~~ ~~resolved~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~schedule~~ ~~adopted~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~
~~17–208(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle;~~

~~(10)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~Guaranty~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~awards~~ ~~made~~ ~~that~~ ~~reach~~ ~~the~~ ~~statutory~~
~~cap~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~time~~ ~~the~~ ~~award~~ ~~is~~ ~~made,~~ ~~the~~ ~~corresponding~~ ~~amounts~~ ~~claimed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~complainant~~
~~in~~ ~~each~~ ~~case,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~damages~~ ~~that~~ ~~would~~ ~~have~~ ~~been~~ ~~reimbursable~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
complainant if the statutory cap did not exist; [and]

(11) AN ASSESSMENT OF THE USE OF EXCLUSIVE LISTING
AGREEMENTS, AS DEFINED IN § 10–803 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE, AND ANY
~~DETRIMENTAL~~ ~~IMPACT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THESE~~ ~~AGREEMENTS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~TRANSACTIONS~~ ~~FOR~~
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY; AND

[(11)] (12) any other information that reflects the work of the Commission.

SUBTITLE 8. RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY SERVICE AGREEMENTS.

14–801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “RECORD” MEANS THE ACT OF ADDING ANY DOCUMENT OR DATA THAT
AFFECTS RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY TO STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(C) (1) “RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY” MEANS REAL PROPERTY IMPROVED
BY FOUR OR FEWER SINGLE–FAMILY DWELLING UNITS THAT ARE DESIGNED
~~PRINCIPALLY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~INTENDED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~HUMAN~~ ~~HABITATION~~ A DWELLING UNIT THAT
IS DESIGNED PRINCIPALLY AND IS INTENDED FOR HUMAN HABITATION.

(2) “RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY” INCLUDES:

(I) A RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM UNIT; AND

(II) A UNIT IN A COOPERATIVE PROJECT, AS DEFINED IN §
5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE.

(D) (1) “SERVICE AGREEMENT” MEANS AN AGREEMENT WHERE A
SERVICE PROVIDER AGREES TO PROVIDE AN INDIVIDUAL SERVICES FOR:

(I) THE MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY THAT THE
INDIVIDUAL OWNS; OR

(II) THE PURCHASE OR SALE OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.

(2) “SERVICE AGREEMENT” INCLUDES ANY MEMORANDUM, NOTICE,
AGREEMENT, OR SIMILAR DOCUMENT THAT IS USED BY A SERVICE PROVIDER TO
CAUSE A SERVICE AGREEMENT TO BE RECORDED.

(E) (1) “SERVICE PROVIDER” MEANS A PERSON THAT PROVIDES
SERVICES TO AN INDIVIDUAL THROUGH A SERVICE AGREEMENT FOR:

(I) THE MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY THAT THE
INDIVIDUAL OWNS; OR

(II) THE PURCHASE OR SALE OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.

(2) “SERVICE PROVIDER” INCLUDES ANY PERSON ACTING AS AN
AGENT OR DESIGNEE OF A SERVICE PROVIDER.

14–802.

(A) THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES ONLY TO A SERVICE AGREEMENT ENTERED
INTO ON OR AFTER JUNE 1, 2023.

(B) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 525 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) A HOME WARRANTY OR SIMILAR PRODUCT THAT COVERS THE
COST OF MAINTENANCE OF A MAJOR HOME SYSTEM SUCH AS PLUMBING,
ELECTRICAL, OR HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR–CONDITIONING;

(2) AN INSURANCE CONTRACT;

(3) AN OPTION OR RIGHT OF REFUSAL TO PURCHASE RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY;

(4) A DECLARATION CREATED IN THE FORMATION OF A COMMON
INTEREST COMMUNITY, AS DEFINED IN § 1–801 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE;

(5) A MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO BY A
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, AS DEFINED IN § 11B–101 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(6) A MORTGAGE LOAN OR A COMMITMENT TO MAKE OR RECEIVE A
MORTGAGE LOAN;

(7) AN AGREEMENT RELATING TO THE SALE OR RENTAL OF
PERSONAL PROPERTY;

(8) WATER, SEWER, ELECTRICAL, TELEPHONE, CABLE, OR OTHER
REGULATED UTILITY PROVIDERS; OR

(9) A MECHANICS LIEN, AS ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 9 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

14–803.

A SERVICE AGREEMENT, OR ANY PART OF A SERVICE AGREEMENT, MAY NOT:

(1) BE EFFECTIVE FOR MORE THAN 1 YEAR; OR

(2) (I) PURPORT TO RUN WITH THE LAND OR BIND SUBSEQUENT
BONA FIDE PURCHASERS;

(II) PURPORT TO CREATE A LIEN, ENCUMBRANCE, OR SECURITY
INTEREST ON THE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY OF A PARTY TO THE SERVICE
AGREEMENT; OR

(III) ALLOW THE SERVICE PROVIDER TO ASSIGN OR TRANSFER
THE RIGHT TO PROVIDE SERVICES UNDER THE SERVICE AGREEMENT TO ANOTHER

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

PERSON WITHOUT NOTICE OR THE CONSENT OF A PARTY TO THE SERVICE
AGREEMENT.

14–804.

A SERVICE AGREEMENT THAT VIOLATES § 14–803 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL
BE VOID AND UNENFORCEABLE.

14–805.

(A) A VIOLATION OF § 14–803 OF THIS SUBTITLE BY A SERVICE PROVIDER
IS:

(1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN
THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

(2) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS
CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PREVENT AN INDIVIDUAL FROM PURSUING
ANY OTHER REMEDY PROVIDED BY LAW.

14–806.

(A) A SERVICE PROVIDER MAY NOT SUBMIT A SERVICE AGREEMENT THAT IS
IN VIOLATION OF § 14–803 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO THE CLERK OF A CIRCUIT COURT
OR A STATE OR LOCAL AGENCY FOR RECORDING.

(B) A SERVICE PROVIDER WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT
NOT EXCEEDING 6 MONTHS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 OR BOTH.

14–807.

THE CLERK OF A CIRCUIT COURT OR A STATE OR LOCAL AGENCY MAY DENY A
REQUEST TO RECORD A SERVICE AGREEMENT IF IT IS DETERMINED THAT THE
SERVICE AGREEMENT IS IN VIOLATION OF § 14–803 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

14–808.

A RECORDED SERVICE AGREEMENT THAT IS IN VIOLATION OF § 14–803 OF
THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT PROVIDE ACTUAL OR CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF A LIEN

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 525 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ARISING FROM THE SERVICE AGREEMENT TO A SUBSEQUENT BONA FIDE
PURCHASER OF THE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.

14–809.

(A) IF A SERVICE AGREEMENT THAT IS IN VIOLATION OF § 14–803 OF THIS
SUBTITLE IS RECORDED, ANY PERSON WITH AN INTEREST IN THE RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY THAT IS SUBJECT TO A LIEN ARISING FROM THE SERVICE AGREEMENT
MAY BRING AN ACTION AGAINST THE SERVICE PROVIDER IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF
THE COUNTY WHERE THE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY IS LOCATED TO REQUEST A
DETERMINATION THAT THE SERVICE AGREEMENT IS VOID AND UNENFORCEABLE
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) IF A SERVICE AGREEMENT IS DETERMINED TO BE VOID AND
UNENFORCEABLE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE PERSON WHO
BROUGHT THE ACTION MAY SEEK:

(1) COMPENSATORY DAMAGES; AND

(2) REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES AND COSTS.

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xxxv) Section 11–210 of the Education Article; [or]

(xxxvi) Title 14, Subtitle 44 of this article; or

(XXXVII) SECTION 14–805 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE;
OR

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8