START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 534 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 534 
(Senator Gile, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Preserve Telehealth Access Act of 2023 
 
   
This bill extends, through June 30, 2025, provisions of law that specify that (1) “telehealth” 
includes specified audio-only telephone conversations between a health care provider and 
a patient and (2) reimbursement for a telehealth service must be made on the same basis 
and at the same rate as if the service were delivered in person. These provisions apply to 
both Medicaid and commercial health insurance. The Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC) must study and make recommendations regarding the delivery of health care 
services through telehealth, as specified, and report to the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures (and federal fund revenues) for specified telehealth 
services continue through FY 2025. Any impact on overall Medicaid expenditures from 
continuing coverage as specified under the bill is indeterminate. Minimal special fund 
revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) in FY 2024 only from 
the $125 rate and form filing fee; any additional workload for MIA can be absorbed with 
existing budgeted resources. No impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and 
Welfare Benefits Program. MHCC can complete the study and submit the report using 
existing budgeted resources.    
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for some local governments to continue 
to reimburse for certain telehealth services. Revenues are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 534/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Medicaid  
 
Under current law, the definition of “telehealth” includes (1) synchronous and 
asynchronous interactions; (2) from July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2023, an audio-only 
telephone conversation between a health care provider and a patient that results in the 
delivery of a billable, covered health care service; and (3) remote patient monitoring 
services. “Telehealth” does not include the provision of health care services solely through 
an audio-only telephone conversation (with the exception of the temporary provision for 
fiscal 2022 and 2023), an email message, or a facsimile transmission.  
 
From July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2023, Medicaid must provide reimbursement for 
services appropriately provided through telehealth on the same basis and at the same rate 
as if the health care service were delivered in person. Reimbursement does not include 
(1) clinic facility fees, except as specified or (2) any room and board fees. 
 
The bill specifies that telehealth includes an audio-only telephone conversation between a 
health care provider and a patient that results in the delivery of a billable, covered health 
care service for two additional years (through June 30, 2025) and requires Medicaid to 
continue to reimburse for services appropriately provided through telehealth, as specified, 
for two additional years (through June 30, 2025). 
 
Health Insurance  
 
The definition of “telehealth” includes, from July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2023, an 
audio-only telephone conversation between a health care provider and a patient that results 
in the delivery of a billable, covered health care service.  
 
From July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2023, a carrier must provide reimbursement for a 
health care service appropriately provided through telehealth on the same basis and at the 
same rate as if the health care service were delivered in person. Reimbursement does not 
include (1) clinic facility fees, except as specified or (2) any room and board fees. 
 
The bill specifies that telehealth includes an audio-only telephone conversation between a 
health care provider and a patient that results in the delivery of a billable, covered health 
care service for two additional years (through June 30, 2025) and requires a carrier to 
continue to reimburse for a health care service appropriately provided through telehealth, 
as specified, for two additional years (through June 30, 2025). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 534/ Page 3 
Mandated Reports 
 
Chapters 70 and 71 of 2021 (the Preserve Telehealth Access Act of 2021) required MHCC 
to submit a report on the impact of providing telehealth services by December 1, 2022.  
MHCC contracted with the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago 
to develop a technical report issued in October 2022. The report’s findings were used by 
MHCC to develop telehealth coverage recommendations presented in a final report issued 
in December 2022.  
 
MHCC recommended maintaining provisions in the Acts to ensure coverage flexibilities 
for somatic and behavioral health, noting that audio-only care should continue for 
behavioral health treatment, but some use guidelines in coverage of telehealth for somatic 
care are warranted. Specifically, the State should allow: 
 
 
a health care provider capable of providing telehealth services using audio-visual 
technology to deliver services using audio-only technology;  
 
use of audio-only for somatic care in the event of an audio-visual technology failure, 
a request by the patient, or at the clinical discretion of a treating health care provider 
without requiring documentation in the clinical record; and 
 
unrestricted use of audio-only for behavioral health based on patient consent to 
receive care via audio-only technology. 
 
Regarding payment parity (reimbursing for a telehealth service on the same basis and at 
the same rate as if the service were delivered in person), MHCC proposed continuing 
payment levels for telehealth services relative to in-person care for 24 months. MHCC 
recommended studying payment parity for audio-visual and audio-only technologies and 
proposed that it submit a report to the General Assembly by December 1, 2024, that 
addresses:  
 
 
whether it costs more or less for providers to deliver telehealth;  
 
whether telehealth requires more or less clinical effort for a provider;  
 
whether there are aspects of telehealth that yield lower value, overuse, or conversely 
greater value that inform the debate on payment parity; and  
 
the adequacy of reimbursement for behavioral health services delivered in person 
and by telehealth. 
 
The bill requires that MHCC submit the report proposed above by December 1, 2024. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Health care providers can continue to receive reimbursement for 
telehealth services provided through audio-only conversations through fiscal 2025. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 534/ Page 4 
Medicaid and carriers must reimburse health care providers for telehealth services on the 
same basis and at the same rate as if the service were delivered in person.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4