START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 383

Chapter 383

(Senate Bill 584)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Parkinson’s Disease ~~Registry~~ – ~~Established~~ Advisory Committee
and Website

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~a~~ ~~Parkinson’s~~ ~~Disease~~ ~~Registry~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~collect~~ ~~certain~~ ~~data~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~Registry;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~share~~ ~~certain~~ ~~information~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Registry~~
~~with~~ ~~certain~~ ~~entities~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~conditions;~~ ~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~confidentiality~~ ~~of~~
~~information~~ ~~collected~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~a~~ ~~record~~
~~of~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~granted~~ ~~access~~ ~~to~~ ~~confidential~~ ~~information~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Registry;~~ altering the
duties of the Parkinson’s Disease Registry Advisory Committee; requiring the
Committee to meet on a certain basis beginning on a certain date, rather than with
the frequency established by the Secretary of Health; requiring the Maryland
Department of Health, in collaboration with the State–designated health
information exchange, to establish and maintain a certain website that has certain
information related to Parkinson’s Disease; and generally relating to ~~the~~
~~establishment~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~Parkinson’s~~ ~~Disease~~ ~~Registry~~ Parkinson’s Disease.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 18–1202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section ~~18–1201~~ ~~and~~ 18–1203
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~18–1202~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section ~~18–1202~~ ~~and~~ 18–1204 ~~through~~ ~~18–1210~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 383 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

~~18–1201.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~“Advisory~~ ~~Committee”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Parkinson’s~~ ~~Disease~~ ~~Registry~~ ~~Advisory~~
~~Committee.~~

(c) (1) “PARKINSONISMS” MEANS CONDITIONS RELATED TO
PARKINSON’S DISEASE THAT CAUSE A COMBINATION OF THE MOVEMENT
ABNORMALITIES SEEN IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE.

(2) “PARKINSONISMS” INCLUDES MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY,
DEMENTIA WITH LEWY BODIES, CORTICOBASAL DEGENERATION, AND PROGRESSIVE
SUPRANUCLEAR PALSY.

(D) “Parkinson’s disease” means a chronic and progressive disorder resulting from
~~deficiency~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~neurotransmitter~~ ~~dopamine~~ ~~as~~ ~~the~~ ~~consequence~~ ~~of~~ ~~specific~~ ~~degenerative~~
~~changes~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~area~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~brain~~ ~~called~~ ~~the~~ ~~basal~~ ~~ganglia,~~ ~~characterized~~ ~~by~~ ~~tremors~~ ~~at~~ ~~rest,~~
~~slow~~ ~~movements,~~ ~~muscle~~ ~~rigidity,~~ ~~stooped~~ ~~posture,~~ ~~and~~ ~~unsteady~~ ~~or~~ ~~shuffling~~ ~~gait.~~

(E) “REGISTRY” MEANS THE PARKINSON’S DISEASE REGISTRY.

~~[18–1202.~~

There is a Parkinson’s Disease Registry Advisory Committee in the Department.]

~~18–1202.~~

THERE IS A PARKINSON’S DISEASE REGISTRY IN THE DEPARTMENT.

18–1203.

(A) THERE IS A PARKINSON’S DISEASE REGISTRY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
IN THE DEPARTMENT.

[(a)] (B) The Advisory Committee shall:

(1) Assist in the development and implementation of a STATE Parkinson’s
Disease Registry;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 383

(2) Determine what data shall be collected and be stored in a STATE
Parkinson’s Disease Registry and the methods to ensure the privacy and confidentiality of
data collected and stored in the registry; ~~and~~

(3) Advise the Department on Parkinson’s disease and maintaining a
STATE Parkinson’s Disease Registry; AND

(4) CONSULT WITH ENTITIES THAT MAY BE ABLE TO COLLECT DATA
AND WORK IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE FEDERAL CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION TO AID THE FEDERAL CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION IN CREATING A NATIONAL PARKINSON’S DISEASE REGISTRY.

(B) ENTITIES THAT MAY BE CONSULTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(4) OF THIS
SECTION INCLUDE:

(1) THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE;

(2) NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS; AND

(3) COLLEGES OR UNIVERSITIES.

[(b)] (C) (1) The Secretary shall appoint individuals to serve on the Advisory
Committee, including:

(i) A neurologist;

(ii) A movement disorder specialist;

(iii) A primary care provider;

(iv) A physician informaticist;

(v) A patient with Parkinson’s disease;

(vi) A public health professional;

(vii) A population health researcher familiar with disease registries;

(viii) A Parkinson’s disease researcher; and

(ix) Any other individuals the Secretary determines are necessary.

(2) The Secretary shall establish:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 383 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) The duration of term limits for members of the Advisory
Committee;

(ii) ~~The~~ ~~frequency~~ ~~of~~ ~~meetings~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Advisory~~ ~~Committee;~~

~~(iii)~~ Rules and procedures for conducting business of the Advisory
Committee; and

(iv) (III) Any other rules necessary for the Advisory Committee to
function effectively.

(D) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2023, THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE SHALL MEET
MONTHLY AT LEAST QUARTERLY.

~~18–1204.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLECT DATA FOR THE REGISTRY,
INCLUDING DATA ON THE INCIDENCE OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE IN THE STATE AND
RELATED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL DATA.

(B) THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
~~DEPARTMENT,~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) IDENTIFY CATEGORIES OF DATA TO BE COLLECTED FOR THE
REGISTRY RELATED TO:

(I) PATIENT DEMOGRAPHICS, INCLUDING GEOGRAPHY; AND

(II) DIAGNOSES; AND

(2) PERIODICALLY REVIEW THE DATA COLLECTED FOR THE
REGISTRY TO ASSESS WHETHER THE:

(I) DATA INCLUDES SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO ENSURE
THERE ARE NO DUPLICATED PATIENT RECORDS IN THE REGISTRY; AND

(II) CATEGORIES OF DATA COLLECTED SHOULD BE ALTERED.

~~18–1205.~~

(A) (1) UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, ALL
INFORMATION COLLECTED FOR THE REGISTRY UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE
~~CONFIDENTIAL.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 383

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL IMPLEMENT A CODING SYSTEM THAT
~~REMOVES~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~PERSONALLY~~ ~~IDENTIFIABLE~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~FROM~~
COLLECTED DATA.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ADVISORY
COMMITTEE, SHALL ESTABLISH A SYSTEM FOR THE COLLECTION OF DATA FOR THE
REGISTRY AND DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION DETERMINING THE INCIDENCE
AND PREVALENCE OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND RELATED PARKINSONISMS.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ADVISORY
~~COMMITTEE,~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(I) NOTIFY, IN WRITING AND ORALLY, ALL INDIVIDUALS IN THE
STATE DIAGNOSED WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE OR RELATED PARKINSONISMS
ABOUT THE CREATION OF THE REGISTRY, DATA COLLECTION ASSOCIATED WITH
THE REGISTRY, AND THE RIGHT TO OPT OUT OF PARTICIPATION IN THE REGISTRY;
~~AND~~

(II) PROVIDE AN OPPORTUNITY TO OPT OUT OF PARTICIPATION
IN THE REGISTRY.

(2) (I) AN INDIVIDUAL WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE OR RELATED
PARKINSONISMS MAY OPT OUT OF PARTICIPATING IN THE REGISTRY BY
SUBMITTING WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE DEPARTMENT.

(II) IF AN INDIVIDUAL OPTS OUT OF PARTICIPATION IN THE
REGISTRY, THE DEPARTMENT:

1. SHALL RECORD AN INCIDENCE OF A PATIENT WITH
PARKINSON’S DISEASE; AND

2. MAY NOT RECORD ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
ABOUT THE INDIVIDUAL.

~~(D)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~MAY:~~

(1) CREATE, REVIEW, AND REVISE A LIST OF DATA POINTS REQUIRED
AS PART OF MANDATED PARKINSON’S DISEASE REPORTING UNDER THIS SECTION,
~~INCLUDING~~ ~~NECESSARY~~ ~~TRIGGERING~~ ~~DIAGNOSTIC~~ ~~CONDITIONS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~ARE~~
CONSISTENT WITH THE LATEST INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFICATION OF
DISEASES AND RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS; AND

(2) IMPLEMENT THE COLLECTION OF DATA POINTS ON THE LIST
CREATED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION THROUGH A BULLETIN, OR SIMILAR
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 383 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

INSTRUCTION, TO NURSE PRACTITIONERS, PHYSICIANS, AND PHYSICIAN
~~ASSISTANTS.~~

(E) AT LEAST 180 DAYS BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT ADOPTS MANDATORY
REPORTING OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND RELATED PARKINSONISMS, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE NOTIFICATION OF THE MANDATORY REPORTING OF
PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND RELATED PARKINSONISMS:

(1) ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE;

(2) DIRECTLY TO ASSOCIATIONS REPRESENTING HOSPITALS,
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS, AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS IN THE
STATE; AND

(3) DIRECTLY TO THE STATE BOARD OF NURSING AND THE STATE
BOARD OF PHYSICIANS.

(F) (1) A NURSE PRACTITIONER, PHYSICIAN, OR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
WHO DIAGNOSES PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND RELATED
PARKINSONISMS SHALL REPORT EACH CASE OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND
RELATED PARKINSONISMS TO THE REGISTRY IN A FORMAT DETERMINED BY THE
~~DEPARTMENT.~~

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY USE EXISTING REPORTING PROCEDURES
TO IMPLEMENT THE REQUIREMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
FOR DIAGNOSIS REPORTING AND DATA SUBMISSION BY A NURSE PRACTITIONER,
PHYSICIAN, OR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

~~18–1206.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS TO PROVIDE DATA
COLLECTED IN THE REGISTRY WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE REGISTRIES IN OTHER
STATES, FEDERAL PARKINSON’S DISEASE CONTROL AGENCIES, LOCAL HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS, OR HEALTH RESEARCHERS FOR THE STUDY OF PARKINSON’S
DISEASE AND RELATED PARKINSONISMS.

(B) (1) BEFORE CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION IS DISCLOSED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL RECEIVE A WRITTEN
~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PARTNERING~~ ~~ENTITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAINTAIN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONFIDENTIALITY~~
OF THE INFORMATION.

(2) IF THE ENTITY RECEIVING CONFIDENTIAL DATA FROM THE
REGISTRY IS A RESEARCH ENTITY, THE RESEARCH ENTITY SHALL:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 383

(I) OBTAIN APPROVAL FROM THE COMMITTEE AT THE
~~RESEARCH~~ ~~ENTITY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~NORMALLY~~ ~~REVIEWS~~ ~~RESEARCH~~ ~~PROJECTS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 45
OF THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS; AND

(II) PROVIDE DOCUMENTATION TO THE DEPARTMENT THAT
DEMONSTRATES, TO THE DEPARTMENT’S SATISFACTION, THAT THE RESEARCH
~~ENTITY~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~PROCEDURES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ABILITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAINTAIN~~ ~~THE~~
CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE DISCLOSED INFORMATION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH PROCEDURES TO REVIEW AND
APPROVE REQUESTS TO USE REGISTRY DATA FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.

~~18–1207.~~

(A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW OR RULE OF
PROCEDURE OR EVIDENCE IN THE MARYLAND RULES:

(1) A DATA DISCLOSURE AUTHORIZED BY THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT:

(I) INCLUDE INFORMATION OTHER THAN THE INFORMATION
NECESSARY FOR THE PURPOSE OF THE DISCLOSURE;

(II) BE USED FOR A PURPOSE OTHER THAN THE PURPOSE FOR
THE DISCLOSURE; OR

(III) BE FURTHER DISCLOSED;

(2) THE CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION COLLECTED FOR THE
REGISTRY MAY NOT BE MADE AVAILABLE FOR SUBPOENA, DISCLOSED,
DISCOVERABLE, OR COMPELLED TO BE PRODUCED IN ANY CIVIL, CRIMINAL,
ADMINISTRATIVE, OR OTHER PROCEEDING; AND

(3) THE CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION COLLECTED FOR THE
REGISTRY MAY NOT BE DEEMED ADMISSIBLE AS EVIDENCE IN ANY CIVIL, CRIMINAL,
ADMINISTRATIVE, TRIBUNAL, OR OTHER PROCEEDING.

(B) (1) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PREEMPT THE AUTHORITY OF A HEALTH
CARE PROVIDER, AS DEFINED IN § 19–132 OF THIS ARTICLE, PROVIDING
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES OR TREATMENT TO PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE
OR RELATED PARKINSONISMS TO MAINTAIN A PARKINSON’S DISEASE REGISTRY.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 383 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT THE PUBLICATION OF
~~REPORTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~STATISTICAL~~ ~~COMPILATIONS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~DO~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~IDENTIFY~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~
WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE OR RELATED PARKINSONISMS OR INDIVIDUAL
SOURCES OF INFORMATION.

~~18–1208.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAINTAIN A RECORD OF INDIVIDUALS
GRANTED ACCESS TO CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION FROM THE REGISTRY.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT DENY A REQUEST FOR INSPECTION OF THE
RECORD MAINTAINED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION UNDER TITLE 4 OF
THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE.

(C) THE RECORD MAINTAINED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL INCLUDE THE ACCESSING INDIVIDUAL’S:

~~(1)~~ ~~NAME;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~TITLE;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~ADDRESS;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~ORGANIZATIONAL~~ ~~AFFILIATION;~~

(5) DATES OF ACCESS; AND

(6) PURPOSE FOR ACCESSING THE INFORMATION.

~~18–1209.~~

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT
THIS SUBTITLE.

~~18–1210.~~

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2023, THE
ADVISORY COMMITTEE SHALL REPORT TO THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE SENATE
FINANCE COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
COMMITTEE ON THE REGISTRY AND THE PREVALENCE OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE IN
THE STATE.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 383

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL POST THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION ON A DEDICATED WEBSITE ACCESSIBLE TO THE
~~PUBLIC.~~

18–1204.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE STATE–DESIGNATED
HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE, SHALL ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN A PUBLICLY
ACCESSIBLE WEBSITE THAT HAS THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IN A
DOWNLOADABLE FORMAT:

(1) THE INCIDENCE OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE IN THE STATE; AND

(2) TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE INCIDENCE OF PARKINSON’S
DISEASE DISAGGREGATED BASED ON:

(I) AGE, INCLUDING AGE OF DIAGNOSIS;

(II) GENDER;

(III) SEX;

(IV) RACE;

(V) ETHNICITY; AND

(VI) CASES BY COUNTY.

(B) THE WEBSITE REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL:

(1) INCLUDE THE DATA AVAILABLE FOR THE 5–YEAR PERIOD ENDING
ON SEPTEMBER 30, 2023; AND

(2) BE UPDATED ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, TO INCLUDE
ANY NEWLY AVAILABLE DATA.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before ~~December~~ July
1, ~~2023~~ 2024, the Parkinson’s Disease Registry Advisory Committee shall report to the
Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee,
in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on recommendations for a
path forward toward the establishment of a fully functional State Parkinson’s Disease
Registry.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 383 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Maryland Department of
Health shall establish the website required under § 18–1204 of the Health – General
Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, on or before October 1, 2023.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10