START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 592 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 592 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Surplus Military Equipment Reporting - Extension 
 
 
This bill reinstitutes the provisions of Chapter 321 of 2019, which terminated 
September 30, 2022. Specifically, the bill requires the Department of State Police (DSP), 
by February 1 each year, to report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
acquisition of equipment by law enforcement agencies through “surplus programs” within 
the preceding calendar year. DSP must include in a prominent location on its public website 
a link to the Defense Logistics Agency’s report listing excess Department of 
Defense (DOD) property transfers to law enforcement agencies through the Law 
Enforcement Support Office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DSP can post and report the required information with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Surplus program” means a program operated by the federal government 
for the transfer of surplus military equipment to a law enforcement agency. 
 
Current Law:  There are no statutory provisions governing the reporting of information 
relating to the acquisition of equipment by law enforcement agencies through “surplus 
programs.” The requirement established by Chapter 321 terminated September 30, 2022. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 592/ Page 2 
Additional Comments:  State and local law enforcement agencies can obtain excess 
federal property at little or no cost through the 1033 Program, the 1122 Program, and the 
Surplus Property Donation Program. The programs allow for the transfer of surplus DOD 
property and DOD property that might otherwise be destroyed, including vehicles (land, 
air, and sea), weapons, computer equipment, fingerprint equipment, night-vision 
equipment, radios and televisions, first-aid equipment, tents and sleeping bags, and 
photographic equipment. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2