START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 514 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 514 
(Senator Lam, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Local Procurements - Minority Business Enterprise Utilization Programs - 
Certification 
 
 
This bill requires a county or municipality that operates a minority business enterprise 
(MBE) program for county or municipal procurements and that has a process for certifying 
MBEs for the program to accept as certified for the county or municipal program any 
person that has been certified by the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) for 
the State’s MBE program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential increase in certification requests for MDOT, but any such increase 
is expected to be minimal and absorbable with existing budgeted resources. To the extent 
the volume of certification requests increases significantly, special fund expenditures 
increase accordingly for more staff to handle the volume. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  No material effect on local government finances or operations. Local 
governments already have the ability to recognize MDOT certification for their programs 
and some do. To the extent that the bill prompts local governments to stop operating their 
own certification programs, they may realize savings and administrative efficiencies. Any 
such effect cannot be reliably predicted or estimated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDOT is designated in State regulations as the State’s MBE certification 
agency. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 514/ Page 2 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) is aware of local MBE programs in 
Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties. The Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission also operates an MBE program. 
Montgomery and Charles counties accept MDOT certification for their programs, and 
Baltimore County does not require certification. Although DLS is not aware of any 
municipal MBE programs, some may exist. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent the bill requires a county, municipality, or 
Baltimore City to expand the scope of their program by accepting as certified a person that 
would not otherwise be certified for the local program, that entity benefits and other entities 
may be disadvantaged. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, Washington, and 
Worcester counties; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2