START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 558 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 558 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Finance 
 
 
Recovery Residence Grant Program – Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Recovery Residence Grant Program in the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) to award competitive grants to recovery residences to support operations, 
services, and programs. In fiscal 2024 through 2027, the annual budget bill must include 
an appropriation of $500,000 for the program. By December 1, 2024, and annually 
thereafter, MDH must submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly that 
includes (1) the number of grants distributed and (2) information about the grant recipients 
and programs and services provided. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2024 to fund the grant program, including administrative costs. The FY 2024 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $500,000 in general funds for the grant 
program, contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file. This analysis assumes 
discretionary funding in FY 2028 and beyond. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2025 through 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
Net Effect 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 558/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDH must establish, in consultation with the credentialing entity, 
(1) application procedures; (2) criteria for prioritizing applications; (3) procedures for 
awarding grants; and (4) any other necessary procedures or criteria. 
 
To qualify for a grant, a recovery residence must, among other things, (1) be a nonprofit 
organization; (2) submit a current copy of its form 990; (3) be certified by the credentialing 
entity as a level I, II, or III recovery residence in accordance with the National Alliance for 
Recovery Residences standards; (4) not accept or receive reimbursement from Medicaid 
or private insurance; and (5) meet any other requirements established by MDH in 
regulation. 
 
Current Law:  A recovery residence is a service that provides alcohol-free and 
illicit-drug-free housing to individuals with substance-related disorders or addictive 
disorders (including those that co-occur with mental disorders) and does not include 
clinical treatment services. 
 
Chapters 710 and 711 of 2016 required MDH to approve a credentialing entity to develop 
and administer a certification process for recovery residences. The credentialing entity 
must (1) establish certification requirements; (2) establish processes to administer the 
application, certification, and recertification process; (3) establish processes to monitor and 
inspect recovery residences; (4) conduct an on-site inspection of a recovery residence 
before issuing a certificate of compliance and at least once during each certification 
renewal period; and (5) issue a certificate of compliance on approval of the application 
process and the inspection. 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 710 and 711, MDH designated the Behavioral Health Administration 
(BHA) as the approved credentialing entity. BHA subsequently established the Maryland 
Certification of Recovery Residences process and adopted the National Alliance for 
Recovery Residences 2015 Quality Standards for the certification of recovery residences 
as levels I through IV in Maryland. For example, a level II recovery residence includes, at 
a minimum, peer recovery support (both one-on-one and group supports) and a peer house 
manager. Pursuant to statute, BHA must publish a list of all certified recovery residences 
on its website. As of January 26, 2023, there were 186 certified recovery residences 
operating across Maryland. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in fiscal 2024 
as the bill effectuates a contingent appropriation in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly. MDH advises it requires three new staff to implement the grant 
program established by the bill, including one program administrator and two coordinators 
of special programs specializing in addiction at a cost of approximately $250,000 in the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 558/ Page 3 
first fiscal year. The Department of Legislative Services agrees that additional staff is 
necessary to implement the grant program but advises that the program, particularly given 
its size, can likely be implemented with just one position. Existing staff within MDH can 
be consulted as necessary in establishing eligibility and prioritization criteria and 
formulating standard policies and procedures. 
 
The $500,000 in funding is assumed to be used to hire one program administrator on 
October 1, 2023, concurrent with the effective date of the bill, to plan, design, develop, 
implement, and issue the report for the grant program. Accordingly, the funding covers a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses in addition 
to monies for grant awards.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Grant Awards  
$410,582 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
82,009 
Operating Expenses 
7,409 
Total FY 2024 MDH Expenditures 
$500,000 
 
This analysis assumes that mandated funding for the grant program may likewise be used 
to cover the costs of administering the program. Thus, future year expenditures reflect a 
full salary with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in 
ongoing operating expenses and provision of the $500,000 mandated appropriation in 
fiscal 2025 through 2027. The amount available for grant awards varies each year, ranging 
from about $392,400 in fiscal 2025 to $322,919 in fiscal 2027.  
 
This analysis also assumes that funding for the grant program, which becomes 
discretionary beginning in fiscal 2028, is maintained. To the extent discretionary funding 
is not provided or is provided at an amount less than $500,000, general fund expenditures 
are reduced beginning in fiscal 2028 and beyond; however, MDH will still incur personnel 
costs as the grant program is permanent. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 681 (Delegate Ebersole, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; National Alliance for Recovery Residences; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 558/ Page 4 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 8, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4