START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 559 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 559 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Education - Maryland Meals for Achievement In-Classroom Breakfast Program 
- Annual Appropriation 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill $12,050,000 for the 
Maryland Meals for Achievement (MMFA) In-Classroom Breakfast Program. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $4.5 million in FY 2024 due to 
contingent funding in the FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly. Beginning 
in FY 2025, general fund expenditures increase by $4.5 million annually. This bill 
increases a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
4.50 
4.50 
4.50 
4.50 
4.50 
Net Effect 
($4.50) 
($4.50) 
($4.50) 
($4.50) 
($4.50)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Statewide, beginning in FY 2024, local school systems receive the great 
majority of $4.5 million annually in increased State funding and expend the equivalent 
amount on school meals. Federal matching funding, and related expenditures, increase by 
as much as $10.0 million annually.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 559/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MMFA is a joint effort of the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE) and local boards of education or sponsoring agencies for eligible nonpublic 
schools. MMFA provides funding for schools that make an in-class breakfast available to 
all students enrolled in schools in which 40% or more of the students qualify for free and 
reduced-price meals (FRPMs). A school that for one year falls below the 40% FRPM 
student population eligibility threshold is eligible for MMFA funding in that year. 
However, the school is no longer eligible for MMFA funding if its percentage of students 
remains below 40% in a second consecutive year. 
 
Schools are selected to participate in the program and must serve breakfasts that meet 
MSDE guidelines and the nutritional standards of the U.S. Department of Agriculture for 
schools that participate in the federal school breakfast program. Participating schools must 
serve breakfasts in the classroom after arrival of students to the school. However, 
secondary schools (middle schools and high schools) that participate in MMFA may serve 
breakfast in any part of the school, including from “Grab and Go” carts, after arrival of 
students to the school.  
 
The Governor must include in the annual budget bill $7,550,000 for MMFA. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  According to MSDE data, the $4.5 million in additional State funding 
beginning in fiscal 2024, would enable MMFA to serve approximately 179,400 more 
Maryland students in approximately 266 additional schools. Local school systems receive 
nearly all of the $4.5 million increase in annual MMFA State aid to public schools (with 
nonpublic schools receiving a modest portion). MSDE advises that serving these additional 
students will result in an additional $10.0 million in federal funds received by these 
schools, nearly all of which will go to public schools. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 514 (Delegate Solomon, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 559/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - July 5, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3