START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 803

Chapter 803

(Senate Bill 545)

AN ACT concerning

Towing or Removal of Vehicles – Reclamation Hours

FOR the purpose of limiting the hours during which a certain person in possession of a
vehicle that has been towed or removed from a parking lot is required to provide an
opportunity for the vehicle owner or the owner’s agent to retake possession of the
vehicle; altering a certain signage requirement imposed on the owner or operator of
a parking lot relating to hours during which a towed vehicle may be reclaimed; and
generally relating to retaking possession of towed vehicles.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–10A–02(b)(4) and 21–10A–05(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–10A–02.

(b) The owner or operator of a parking lot or the owner’s or operator’s agent may
not have a vehicle towed or otherwise removed from the parking lot unless the owner,
operator, or agent has placed in conspicuous locations, as described in subsection (c) of this
section, signs that:

(4) State that State law requires that the vehicle be available for
reclamation [24 hours per day] AT A MINIMUM FROM 6 A.M. TO MIDNIGHT, 7 days per
week;

21–10A–05.

(a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, if a vehicle is towed or otherwise
removed from a parking lot, the person in possession of the vehicle:

(1) Shall immediately deliver the vehicle directly to the storage facility
stated on the signs posted in accordance with § 21–10A–02 of this subtitle;

(2) May not move the towed vehicle from that storage facility to another
storage facility for at least 72 hours; and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 803 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Shall provide the owner of the vehicle or the owner’s agent immediate
and continuous opportunity, [24 hours per day] AT A MINIMUM FROM 6 A.M. TO
MIDNIGHT, 7 days per week, from the time the vehicle was received at the storage facility,
to retake possession of the vehicle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Enacted under Article II, § 17(c) of the Maryland Constitution, May 28, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2