START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 628

Chapter 628

(Senate Bill 559)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Maryland Meals for Achievement In–Classroom Breakfast Program
– Annual Appropriation

FOR the purpose of increasing a certain appropriation required by the Governor for the
Maryland Meals for Achievement In–Classroom Breakfast Program; and generally
relating to the Maryland Meals for Achievement In–Classroom Breakfast Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–704(a) through (c), (e), and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–704(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–704.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Program” means the Maryland Meals for Achievement In–Classroom
Breakfast Program.

(3) “Secondary schools” includes middle schools and high schools.

(b) (1) There is a school breakfast program in the State, known as the
Maryland Meals for Achievement In–Classroom Breakfast Program.

(2) The Program is a joint effort of the Department and the county boards
or sponsoring agencies for eligible nonpublic schools.

(c) (1) The purpose of the Program is to provide funding for a school that
makes an in–classroom breakfast available to all students in the school.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 628 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The funding is intended to complement the funding received by a school
from the federal government for a school breakfast program.

(e) (1) If a school that participates in the Program has less than 40% of the
registered students eligible for the federal free or reduced price meal plan, the school shall
remain eligible to participate in the Program for 1 year.

(2) If, after 1 year, the school’s percent of registered students eligible for
the federal free or reduced price meal plan is less than 40%, the school is no longer eligible
to participate in the Program.

(f) A county board or a sponsoring agency for an eligible nonpublic school shall:

(1) Apply to the Department for funds for schools within the jurisdiction of
the board or for schools that are under the sponsoring agency that:

(i) Are eligible to participate in the Program; and

(ii) Apply to the board or to the sponsoring agency to participate in
the Program; and

(2) Submit an annual report to the Department on the Program, including
the manner in which the funds have been expended.

(j) The Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of
[$7,550,000] $12,050,000 to the Program.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2