START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 633

Chapter 633

(Senate Bill 592)

AN ACT concerning

Surplus Military Equipment Reporting – Extension

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of State Police to submit a certain report to
the Governor and the General Assembly on or before a certain date each year relating
to the acquisition of equipment by law enforcement agencies through surplus
programs; requiring the Department of State Police to include on its public website
in a certain location a link to a certain report; and generally relating to local law
enforcement agencies and the acquisition of equipment from a federal military
surplus program.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–521
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

3–521.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
§ 3–201 OF THIS TITLE.

(3) “SURPLUS PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM OPERATED BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FOR THE TRANSFER OF SURPLUS MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO
A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

(B) ON OR BEFORE FEBRUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE
POLICE SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT ON THE ACQUISITION OF EQUIPMENT BY LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES THROUGH SURPLUS PROGRAMS WITHIN THE PRECEDING
CALENDAR YEAR TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 633 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE SHALL INCLUDE IN A PROMINENT
LOCATION ON ITS PUBLIC WEBSITE A LINK TO THE DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY’S
REPORT LISTING EXCESS DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROPERTY TRANSFERS TO
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES THROUGH THE LAW ENFORCEMENT SUPPORT
OFFICE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2