START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 591 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 591 
(Senator Smith) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Labor and Employment - Noncompete and Conflict of Interest Provisions - 
Application of Prohibition 
 
 
This bill increases the amount that an employee must earn in order for a noncompete or 
conflict of interest provision in an employment contract to be permissible under State law. 
The current earnings threshold is more than $15.00 per hour or $31,200 annually. Under 
the bill, the threshold is more than 150% of the State minimum wage rate. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. More employees at small businesses cannot be subject 
to noncompete or conflict of interest provisions; effects on small businesses overall are 
largely operational to ensure compliance with the higher threshold. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For an employee who earns equal to or less than $15.00 per hour or 
$31,200 annually, a noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment contract 
or a similar document or agreement that restricts the ability of an employee to enter into 
employment with a new employer or to become self-employed in the same or similar 
business or trade is null and void as being against the public policy of the State. The 
provision is null and void whether or not the employer and employee entered into the 
employment contract or similar document or agreement in the State. The provision does 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 591/ Page 2 
not apply to an employment contract or a similar document or agreement with respect to 
the taking or use of a client list or other proprietary client-related information. 
 
Chapters 10 and 11 of 2019 increase the State minimum wage rate for employers with 15 or 
more employees in increments until the full phase-in of $15.00 per hour on 
January 1, 2025. For employers with 14 or fewer employees, the wage rate reaches full 
phase-in on July 1, 2026. In 2023 when the bill becomes effective, the minimum wage rate 
is $13.25 for employers with 15 or more employees and $12.80 for employers with 14 or 
fewer employees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2