START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

Chapter 99

(Senate Bill 551)

AN ACT concerning

~~Education~~ ~~–~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Year~~ ~~Option~~ ~~Program~~ ~~–~~ ~~Establishment~~
Department of Service and Civic Innovation and Maryland Corps Program
Service Year Option Pathways – Established
(Serving Every Region Through Vocational Exploration Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of establishing the ~~Service~~ ~~Year~~ ~~Option~~ ~~Program;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Service~~ ~~and~~ ~~Civic~~ ~~Innovation~~ ~~to~~ ~~administer~~ ~~and~~ ~~provide~~ ~~staff~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~Program;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~Program~~ ~~participant~~ ~~to~~ ~~work~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~hours~~
~~per~~ ~~week~~ ~~and~~ ~~partner~~ ~~with~~ ~~an~~ ~~on–site~~ ~~mentor~~ ~~while~~ ~~working~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~service~~ ~~placement;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~participating~~ ~~employer~~ ~~to~~ ~~pay~~ ~~a~~ ~~Program~~ ~~participant~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~wage;~~
~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~disburse~~ ~~a~~ ~~stipend~~ ~~of~~ ~~up~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~amount~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~
~~Program~~ ~~participant~~ ~~who~~ ~~completes~~ ~~a~~ ~~service~~ ~~placement;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~Program~~
~~participant~~ ~~to~~ ~~perform~~ ~~certain~~ ~~duties~~ ~~and~~ ~~participate~~ ~~in~~ ~~certain~~ ~~training~~ ~~and~~
~~activities~~ ~~as~~ ~~part~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~service~~ ~~placement;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Year~~ ~~Option~~
~~Program~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~special,~~ ~~nonlapsing~~ ~~fund;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~
~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~credited~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~procure~~ ~~the~~ ~~services~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~
~~third–party~~ ~~entity~~ ~~to~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~an~~ ~~independent~~ ~~study~~ ~~and~~ ~~assessment~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~
~~and~~ ~~submit~~ ~~a~~ ~~report~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~date;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~ ~~to~~ ~~publish~~ ~~an~~ ~~online~~
~~dashboard~~ ~~of~~ ~~key~~ ~~performance~~ ~~indicators~~ ~~shown~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~report;~~ Department of Service
and Civic Innovation; providing for the purpose, duties, administration, and staffing
of the Department; establishing the Secretary of Service and Civic Innovation and
the duties and responsibilities of the Secretary; altering the provisions of the
Maryland Corps Program, including requiring the Department to administer the
Program, renaming the Board of Directors of the Maryland Corps Program to be the
Maryland Corps Program Advisory Board, establishing the Maryland Service Year
Option Pathway and the Young Adult Service Year Option Pathway as two pathways
under the Program, renaming the Maryland Corps Program Fund to be the
Maryland Service Year Option Pathway Fund, and specifying the purposes, use,
administration, and contents of the Maryland Service Year Option Pathway Fund;
establishing the Young Adult Service Year Option Pathway Fund; providing for the
purposes, use, administration, and contents of the Young Adult Service Year Option
Pathway Fund; providing for the expiration of the terms of the initial members of
the Maryland Corps Program Advisory Board; and generally relating to the
establishment of the Department of Service and Civic Innovation and the Maryland
Corps Program Service Year Option ~~Program~~ Pathways.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Education~~
~~Section~~ ~~24–11A–01~~ ~~through~~ ~~24–11A–07~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~11A.~~
~~Service~~ ~~Year~~ ~~Option~~ ~~Program”~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 15–106.9
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Chapter 1 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

BY repealing
Article – State Government
Section 9–2801 through 9–2808, the part “Part I. General Provisions”, and the
subtitle “Subtitle 28. Department of Service and Civic Innovation”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 1 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

BY renumbering
Article – State Government
Section 9–2811 through 9–2820 and the part “Part II. Maryland Corps Program” and
9–2823 through 9–2828 and the part “Part III. Governor’s Office on Service
and Volunteerism”
to be Section 21–201 through 21–210 and the new subtitle “Subtitle 2. Maryland
Corps Program” and 21–301 through 21–306 and the new subtitle “Subtitle 3.
Governor’s Office on Service and Volunteerism”, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 1 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

BY repealing
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)92.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)93. through 171.
to be Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)92. through 170., respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 8–201

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 1 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 21–101 through 21–107 to be under the new title “Title 21. Department of
Service and Civic Innovation” and the new subtitle “Subtitle 1. General
Provisions”; and 21–206 through 21–210
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 21–201 through 21–203, 21–205, and 21–207 through 21–210
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 2 of this Act)

BY repealing
Article – State Government
Section 21–204 and 21–206
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 2 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)170.~~ ~~and~~ ~~171.~~ 6–226(a)(2)(ii)169. and 170.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 5 of this Act)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.~~ ~~and~~ ~~173.~~ 6–226(a)(2)(ii)171. and 172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 9–2801 through 9–2808, the part “Part I. General Provisions”, and the
subtitle “Subtitle 28. Department of Service and Civic Innovation” of Article – State
Government of the Annotated Code of Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 9–2811 through
9–2820 and the part “Part II. Maryland Corps Program” of Article – State Government of
the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 21–201 through 21–210,
respectively, and the subtitle “Subtitle 2. Maryland Corps Program”.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 9–2823 through
9–2828 and the part “Part III. Governor’s Office on Service and Volunteerism” of Article –
State Government of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s)
21–301 through 21–306, respectively, and the subtitle “Subtitle 3. Governor’s Office on
Service and Volunteerism”.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 6–226(a)(2)(ii)92 of
Article – State Finance and Procurement of the Annotated Code of Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 6–226(a)(2)(ii)93
through 171 of Article – State Finance and Procurement of the Annotated Code of Maryland
be renumbered to be Section(s) 6–226(a)(2)(ii)92 through 170, respectively.

SECTION ~~1.~~ ~~4.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~
~~ASSEMBLY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND,~~ That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

15–106.9.

(a) In this section, “residency requirement” means the requirement of a public
senior higher education institution that a student has resided in the State for 12
consecutive months to be considered a resident and receive in–State tuition status.

(b) For in–State tuition purposes, a public senior higher education institution
shall waive the in–State residency requirement for an individual who has completed:

(1) All service hours for an AmeriCorps Program in the State; or

(2) A service program under the Maryland Corps Program under [Title 9,
Subtitle 28] TITLE 21, SUBTITLE 2 of the State Government Article.

(c) A student is responsible for the difference between in–State and out–of–state
tuition if the student does not retain residence in the State for the remainder of the school
year for which in–State tuition was received.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

Article – State Government

8–201.

(a) The Executive Branch of the State government shall have not more than 21
principal departments, each of which shall embrace a broad, functional area of that Branch.

(b) The principal departments of the Executive Branch of the State government
are:

(1) Aging;

(2) Agriculture;

(3) Budget and Management;

(4) Commerce;

(5) Disabilities;

(6) Emergency Management;

(7) the Environment;

(8) General Services;

(9) Health;

(10) Housing and Community Development;

(11) Human Services;

(12) Information Technology;

(13) Juvenile Services;

(14) Labor;

(15) Natural Resources;

(16) Planning;

(17) Public Safety and Correctional Services;

(18) SERVICE AND CIVIC INNOVATION;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(18)] (19) State Police;

[(19)] (20) Transportation; and

[(20)] (21) Veterans Affairs.

TITLE 21. DEPARTMENT OF SERVICE AND CIVIC INNOVATION.

SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

21–101.

(A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF SERVICE AND CIVIC
INNOVATION.

(C) “SECRETARY” MEANS THE SECRETARY OF SERVICE AND CIVIC
INNOVATION.

21–102.

(A) THERE IS A DEPARTMENT OF SERVICE AND CIVIC INNOVATION,
ESTABLISHED AS A PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE DEPARTMENT IS TO PROMOTE SERVICE AND
VOLUNTEERISM IN THE STATE.

21–103.

(A) (1) THE HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT IS THE SECRETARY OF SERVICE
AND CIVIC INNOVATION, WHO SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH THE
ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE.

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL TAKE THE OATH OF OFFICE REQUIRED
UNDER ARTICLE I, § 9 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

(B) THE SECRETARY IS A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNOR’S EXECUTIVE
COUNCIL.

(C) (1) THE SECRETARY SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE GOVERNOR
AND IS RESPONSIBLE DIRECTLY TO THE GOVERNOR.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADVISE THE GOVERNOR ON ALL
MATTERS ASSIGNED TO THE DEPARTMENT AND IS RESPONSIBLE FOR CARRYING
OUT THE GOVERNOR’S POLICIES ON THESE MATTERS.

(D) (1) THE SECRETARY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE OPERATION OF THE
DEPARTMENT AND SHALL ESTABLISH GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES TO PROMOTE
THE ORDERLY AND EFFICIENT ADMINISTRATION OF THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE SECRETARY MAY ESTABLISH, REORGANIZE, OR ABOLISH
AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE DEPARTMENT AS NECESSARY TO FULFILL THE
DUTIES ASSIGNED TO THE SECRETARY.

(E) THE SECRETARY IS ENTITLED TO THE SALARY PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

21–104.

(A) THE SECRETARY MAY EMPLOY A STAFF IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
STATE BUDGET.

(B) THE SECRETARY MAY APPOINT A DEPUTY SECRETARY AND OTHER
PROFESSIONAL STAFF AND CONTRACT WITH CONSULTANTS AS AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVES.

(C) THE SECRETARY SHALL APPOINT AND REMOVE ALL STAFF IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE.

21–105.

(A) THE SECRETARY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE BUDGET OF THE OFFICE OF
THE SECRETARY AND THE BUDGET FOR EACH UNIT IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE SECRETARY MAY ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS IN CARRYING
OUT THE PROVISIONS OF LAW THAT ARE WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE
DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE SECRETARY MAY CREATE ANY ADVISORY COUNCIL THAT THE
SECRETARY CONSIDERS NECESSARY AND ASSIGN APPROPRIATE FUNCTIONS TO IT.

(D) THE SECRETARY SHALL HAVE A SEAL.

(E) (1) THE SECRETARY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COORDINATION AND
DIRECTION OF ALL PLANNING THAT THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY INITIATES.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL KEEP FULLY APPRISED OF PLANS,
PROPOSALS, AND PROJECTS OF EACH UNIT IN THE DEPARTMENT AND, EXCEPT AS
EXPRESSLY PROVIDED OTHERWISE, MAY APPROVE, DISAPPROVE, OR MODIFY ANY
OF THEM.

(F) EACH UNIT IN THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE SECRETARY
AS PROVIDED IN THE RULES, REGULATIONS, OR WRITTEN DIRECTIVES THAT THE
SECRETARY ADOPTS.

(G) THE SECRETARY MAY APPLY FOR, RECEIVE, AND SPEND
GRANTS–IN–AID BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR ANY OF ITS AGENCIES OR ANY
OTHER FEDERAL FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR USE IN
CARRYING OUT THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY OR THE
DEPARTMENT.

(H) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW AND §§ 21–205(G) AND
21–206(E) OF THIS TITLE, THE SECRETARY SHALL PAY ALL MONEY COLLECTED BY
THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS TITLE INTO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(I) THE SECRETARY SHALL CARRY OUT AND ENFORCE THE PROVISIONS OF
THIS TITLE, THE RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT, AND ANY OTHER
PROVISIONS OF LAW THAT RELATE TO THE SECRETARY OR THE DEPARTMENT.

21–106.

(A) THE SECRETARY SHALL:

(1) PROMOTE SERVICE AND VOLUNTEERISM IN THE STATE BY
PARTNERING WITH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, AND
NONGOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES TO FULFILL THE PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE; AND

(2) IDENTIFY, DEVELOP, AND IMPLEMENT INITIATIVES TO INCREASE
SERVICE AND VOLUNTEERISM IN THE STATE TO CREATE OPPORTUNITIES AND
STRENGTHEN COMMUNITIES.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) PROMOTE THE USE OF VOLUNTEERS IN STATE AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENT, EMPLOYERS, AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS;

(2) COORDINATE AND OVERSEE THE ACTIVITIES OF:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(I) THE MARYLAND CORPS PROGRAM UNDER SUBTITLE 2 OF
THIS TITLE; AND

(II) THE GOVERNOR’S COMMISSION ON SERVICE AND
VOLUNTEERISM;

(3) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT MODEL PROGRAMS FOR A STATEWIDE
CLEARINGHOUSE, SKILL BANKS, OR INFORMATION CENTERS FOR VOLUNTEERS AND
PROJECTS IN THE STATE;

(4) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT VOLUNTEER RECOGNITION EVENTS
FOR VOLUNTEERS IN STATE PROGRAMS AND PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND
SUPPORT FOR RECOGNITION EVENTS IN NONPUBLIC PROGRAMS TO INCREASE THE
VISIBILITY AND STATUS OF VOLUNTEERS AND THEIR ACCOMPLISHMENTS;

(5) ADMINISTER:

(I) THE MARYLAND CORPS PROGRAM UNDER SUBTITLE 2 OF
THIS TITLE;

(II) THE EXECUTIVE FELLOWS PROGRAM UNDER § 21–306 OF
THIS TITLE; AND

(III) ANY OTHER VOLUNTEER PROGRAM RECOMMENDED OR
DESIGNATED BY THE GOVERNOR OR OTHERWISE ESTABLISHED BY LAW;

(6) LIAISE WITH NATIONAL, STATE, AND LOCAL VOLUNTEERISM
GROUPS TO OBTAIN INFORMATION ON FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL, AND PRIVATE
RESOURCES THAT MAY ENHANCE VOLUNTEER PROJECTS WITHIN THE STATE;

(7) CONDUCT STUDIES AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE
VOLUNTEER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING, VOLUNTEER RETENTION, AND
ACCOUNTABILITY OF VOLUNTEER PROGRAMS; AND

(8) PROVIDE STAFF SUPPORT FOR THE GOVERNOR’S VOLUNTEER
COUNCIL.

21–107.

(A) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL IS LEGAL ADVISER TO THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL ASSIGN TO THE DEPARTMENT THE
NUMBER OF ASSISTANT ATTORNEYS GENERAL AUTHORIZED BY LAW TO BE ASSIGNED

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

TO THE DEPARTMENT AND ANY ADDITIONAL ASSISTANT ATTORNEYS GENERAL
NECESSARY TO GIVE EFFECTIVE LEGAL ADVICE AND COUNSEL.

(C) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ALSO SHALL DESIGNATE AN ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL AS COUNSEL TO THE DEPARTMENT.

Subtitle 2. Maryland Corps Program.

21–201.

(a) In this [part] SUBTITLE the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “ADVISORY Board” means the MARYLAND CORPS PROGRAM ADVISORY
Board [of Directors of the Program].

(c) “Corps participant” means an individual who participates in the Program.

(D) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF SERVICE AND CIVIC
INNOVATION.

(E) “MSY PATHWAY” MEANS THE MARYLAND SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PATHWAY.

[(d)] (F) “MSY PATHWAY Fund” means the Maryland [Corps Program]
SERVICE YEAR OPTION PATHWAY Fund.

[(e)] (G) “Participating organization” means a BUSINESS, nonprofit
organization, or government agency that:

(1) has a focus on community or other service, service learning,
volunteerism, or other activities or experiences with a similar mission;

(2) hosts a program participant in a service role; and

(3) complies with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and
Title 20, Subtitle 6 of this article.

[(f)] (H) “Program” means the Maryland Corps Program.

[(g)] (I) “Wraparound services” includes:

(1) child care;

(2) transportation;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(3) housing;

(4) [mental] BEHAVIORAL health;

(5) crisis intervention;

(6) substance abuse prevention or treatment;

(7) legal aid;

(8) financial literacy programming;

(9) job search and application support; and

(10) college application support.

(J) “YA PATHWAY” MEANS THE YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PATHWAY.

(K) “YA PATHWAY FUND” MEANS THE YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR
OPTION PATHWAY FUND.

21–202.

(a) (1) There is a Maryland Corps Program in the State administered and
managed by the [Board] DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE PROGRAM HAS TWO PATHWAYS:

(I) THE YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR OPTION PATHWAY; AND

(II) THE MARYLAND SERVICE YEAR OPTION PATHWAY.

(b) [(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Program is
exempt from Division II of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2)] The Program is subject to Title 14, Subtitle 3 of the State Finance and
Procurement Article.

(c) The purpose of the Program is to:

(1) provide meaningful service opportunities to CORPS participants that
will address the social needs of the community;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) equip corps participants with the skills that will enable them to
successfully make the transition from high school to an institution of higher education or
to the workforce; and

(3) provide [scholarships] PROGRAM COMPLETION AWARDS to corps
participants who have completed the Program [to be used at institutions of higher
education toward vocational certificates, associate’s degrees, or bachelor’s degrees].

(d) The Program is subject to review under § 2–1220 of this article.

21–203.

(a) [(1) A Board of Directors shall administer and manage the Program.

(2) The Board is a body politic and corporate and is an instrumentality of
the State.

(b)] (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND CORPS PROGRAM ADVISORY BOARD.

(2) The ADVISORY Board consists of the following members:

[(1)] (I) a Board Chair, [jointly] appointed by the [President of the
Senate and the Speaker of the House] GOVERNOR;

[(2)] (II) two members jointly appointed by the President of the Senate
and the Speaker of the House:

[(i)] 1. one of whom must represent a service organization in the
State; and

[(ii)] 2. one of whom shall be:

[1.] A. a current participant in a public service program; or

[2.] B. a former participant in a public service program
whose participation ended during the preceding 3 years;

[(3)] (III) one member appointed by the President of the Senate;

[(4)] (IV) one member appointed by the Speaker of the House; and

[(5)] (V) [two] FOUR members appointed by the Governor, one of whom
shall be a representative from the [Governor’s Office of Service and Volunteerism]
MARYLAND STATE SERVICE COMMISSION.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

[(c)] (B) In making appointments to the ADVISORY Board, the President,
Speaker, and Governor shall consider:

(1) the professional or personal experience of the individual in community
or other service, nonprofit management, civic engagement, or volunteerism; [and]

(2) the cultural, geographic, racial, ethnic, and gender diversity of the
State; AND

(3) AN INDIVIDUAL’S EXPERIENCE AND KNOWLEDGE IN WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING REGIONAL WORKFORCE NEEDS, TRAINING, CAREER
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMING, AND WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARDS.

[(d)] (C) A member of the ADVISORY Board:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the ADVISORY Board;
but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

[(e)] (D) (1) The term of a member of the ADVISORY Board is 4 years.

(2) The terms of the members are staggered as required by the terms
provided for members on June 1, [2022] 2023.

(3) A MEMBER MAY BE REAPPOINTED BUT MAY NOT SERVE MORE
THAN TWO CONSECUTIVE FULL TERMS.

[(3)] (4) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.

[(f)] (E) (1) A member appointed by the President may be removed by the
President for the reasons stated in paragraph (5) of this subsection.

(2) A member appointed by the Speaker may be removed by the Speaker
for the reasons stated in paragraph (5) of this subsection.

(3) A member appointed by the Governor may be removed by the Governor
for the reasons stated in paragraph (5) of this subsection.

(4) The ADVISORY Board Chair may be removed [jointly by the President
and the Speaker] BY THE GOVERNOR for the reasons stated in paragraph (5) of this
subsection.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) A member of the ADVISORY Board may be removed for:

(i) incompetence;

(ii) misconduct;

(iii) immorality; or

(iv) failure to perform the duties of the position.

[(g)] (F) ADVISORY Board members are subject to the requirements of Title 5
of the General Provisions Article.

[(h)] (G) (1) The ADVISORY Board shall meet at least [once every 2 months]
THREE TIMES EACH YEAR.

(2) ADVISORY Board meetings are subject to the requirements of Title 3 of
the General Provisions Article.

(H) THE ADVISORY BOARD HAS THE FOLLOWING DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES:

(1) BE A LIAISON WITH THE DEPARTMENT IN:

(I) SEEKING COMMUNITY SERVICE OPPORTUNITIES AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR PROGRAM EXPANSION;

(II) RECRUITING CORPS PARTICIPANTS;

(III) SEEKING GIFTS OR GRANTS AND OTHER FINANCIAL
RESOURCES FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PROGRAM; AND

(IV) MAINTAINING RELATIONSHIPS WITH CURRENT AND
FORMER CORPS PARTICIPANTS;

(2) ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT ON BEST PRACTICES FOR SERVICE AND
VOLUNTEERISM;

(3) PROVIDE OVERSIGHT OF THE DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT,
IMPLEMENTATION, OPERATION, AND EXPANSION OF THE PROGRAM;

(4) PARTICIPATE IN PROGRAM–SPONSORED EVENTS; AND

(5) ANY OTHER DUTIES AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

[21–204.

(a) (1) The Board shall appoint an Executive Director.

(2) The Executive Director serves at the pleasure of the Board.

(3) The Board shall determine the salary of the Executive Director.

(b) (1) The Executive Director is the chief administrative officer of the
Program.

(2) The Executive Director shall manage the administrative affairs and
technical activities of the Program in accordance with the policies and procedures that the
Board establishes.

(c) (1) The Board may employ a staff in accordance with its budget.

(2) Staff employed under this section are State employees who:

(i) are subject to the requirements of Title 5 of the General
Provisions Article; and

(ii) may participate in the State Retirement and Pension System
under Division II of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.]

[21–205.] 21–204.

(a) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER AND MANAGE THE PROGRAM.

(B) The [Board] DEPARTMENT is responsible for expanding service opportunities
in the State THROUGH THE PROGRAM with the following goals:

(1) creating a strong annual cohort bond of unity for [Program] CORPS
participants from urban, rural, and suburban areas of the State;

(2) [subject to subsection (d) of this section,] ensuring all [Marylanders]
INDIVIDUALS have equitable access to participate in the Program regardless of gender,
race, religion, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, disability,
geography, NATIVE LANGUAGE, or protected veteran status;

(3) helping [Program] CORPS participants develop the critical job skills
necessary for creating a more equitable society as they serve their communities across the
State, using the lens of environmental, social, racial, and economic justice; and

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) ensuring each district of the State can communicate its unique
community needs and choose the appropriate solutions.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ACT AS AN INTERMEDIARY WITH THE
AMERICORPS PROGRAM TO SECURE FEDERAL FUNDING AND ALLEVIATE THE
ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN ON STATE ORGANIZATIONS SEEKING TO PARTICIPATE IN
AMERICORPS PROGRAMMING.

(2) IN WORKING WITH THE AMERICORPS PROGRAM UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL FOCUS ON
EXPANDING THE SERVICE OPPORTUNITIES IN:

(I) STATE AND LOCAL PARKS;

(II) PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY HEALTH SECTORS; AND

(III) THE CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR.

[(b)] (D) The [Board] DEPARTMENT shall adopt regulations regarding:

(1) selection criteria for regional operating partners with a global view of
the needs of the communities in which the regional operating partner works, who will
identify and implement placement priorities FOR EACH PROGRAM PATHWAY in
consultation with local community partners to expand capacity and create new service
programs as needed;

(2) eligibility requirements for participating organizations, classified by
the [Board] DEPARTMENT based on the number of service [members] PLACEMENTS the
organization’s grant will support, as:

(i) community employers; or

(ii) large–scale employers;

(3) prioritizing the placement of [Program] CORPS participants with
[large–scale employers] ORGANIZATIONS based on the organization’s demonstrated [need
for Program] ABILITY TO TRANSITION participants [who will transition] to full–time
employment, POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION, OR REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS
following completion of the [Program] SERVICE PLACEMENT;

(4) a centralized process to facilitate efficient screening and placement of
[Program] CORPS participants INTO THE APPROPRIATE SERVICE PLACEMENT OF A
PROGRAM PATHWAY as well as effective measurement and evaluation of the CORPS
participant’s service experience;

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(5) REASONABLE WORKPLACE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR CORPS
PARTICIPANTS WITH DISABILITIES;

[(5)] (6) stipends for CORPS participants, including:

(i) monetary payment of at least $15 per hour OR THE STATE
MINIMUM WAGE, WHICHEVER IS GREATER;

(II) health insurance [benefits,] BENEFITS and the potential for
wraparound services; and

[(ii)] (III) requirements for large–scale employers to provide
matching funds;

[(6)] (7) [an education] A PROGRAM COMPLETION award of $6,000 for
participants that complete at least 9 months of [service,] SERVICE THAT MAY BE
AWARDED AS FOLLOWS:

(I) [which shall be deposited] BY DEPOSIT into a tax–exempt
Maryland 529 account established under Title 18, Subtitle 19 of the Education Article and
may only be used for qualified higher education expenses, as defined in § 18–1901 of the
Education Article; OR

(II) PAYMENT OF A CASH STIPEND;

[(7)] (8) workforce development training and wraparound services
provided to [Program] CORPS participants by participating organizations OR STATE
AGENCIES;

[(8)] (9) additional training and support services provided to [Program]
CORPS participants after the completion of the CORPS participant’s service;

[(9)] (10) ongoing evaluation of opportunities to expand service in the
State to address the State’s workforce development needs, including opportunities within
State agencies for the creation and expansion of service opportunities within the agencies;
and

[(10)] (11) ongoing evaluation of the Program to ensure access and
effectiveness, including:

(i) demographics of corps participants, including race, ethnicity,
age, SEX, GENDER, education, and geography;

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) WHETHER PROGRAM PATHWAYS ARE FACILITATING ENTRY
INTO PUBLIC SECTOR WORKFORCE POSITIONS;

[(ii)] (III) post–Program trajectories of corps participants; and

[(iii)] (IV) an evaluation of the needs served in the community by the
Program.

[(c) The Board may:

(1) Sue and be sued;

(2) Adopt a seal;

(3) Acquire, hold, and dispose of property for its corporate purposes;

(4) Sell, lease, or otherwise convey, in any manner that the Board considers
appropriate, any property it owns to accomplish the purposes of this subtitle;

(5) Enter into contracts and leases and execute any instrument necessary
or convenient, on the terms and for any corporate purpose that the Board considers
advisable;

(6) Use any other money available under this subtitle or any grant or
money from the State or federal government or any of their units or instrumentalities to
accomplish the purposes of this subtitle;

(7) Borrow money for a corporate purpose and mortgage or otherwise
encumber its property as security for the loan;

(8) Accept gifts, contributions, or loans of money, supplies, goods, and
services, and accept appropriations, allotments, and loans of money from the State or
federal government, a federal corporation, a unit or instrumentality of the federal
government, or a political subdivision or instrumentality of the State;

(9) Exercise a power usually possessed by a private corporation in
performing similar functions unless to do so would conflict with State law; and

(10) Do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly
granted by this subtitle.]

21–205.

(A) (1) THERE IS A YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR OPTION PATHWAY IN
THE PROGRAM.

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PATHWAY IS TO:

(I) PROVIDE SERVICE PLACEMENTS TO ELIGIBLE YOUNG
ADULTS AS AN ADDITIONAL OPTION TO IMMEDIATELY PURSUING POSTSECONDARY
EDUCATION OR CAREER AND TECHNICAL TRAINING;

(II) EQUIP CORPS PARTICIPANTS WITH PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT, MENTORING, JOB TRAINING, FINANCIAL LITERACY SKILLS, AND
OTHER SUPPORTS WHILE WORKING IN HIGH–IMPACT SERVICE PLACEMENTS;

(III) ASSIST IN ADDRESSING THE STATE’S GREATEST
CHALLENGES BY CHANNELING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MARYLAND CITIZENS
INTO IMPACTFUL PUBLIC SERVICE; AND

(IV) STRENGTHEN A PIPELINE OF TALENT INTO STATE AND
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO FILL PRESENT AND FUTURE STAFFING NEEDS.

(B) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A SERVICE
PLACEMENT IN THE YA PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS:

(1) A MARYLAND RESIDENT ON SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION; AND

(2) WITHIN 3 YEARS OF GRADUATION FROM HIGH SCHOOL OR HAVING
OBTAINED A SIMILAR LEVEL OF EDUCATION COMPLETION, INCLUDING AN
INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS OBTAINED A:

(I) MARYLAND HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA;

(II) MARYLAND HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA BY EXAMINATION; OR

(III) MARYLAND HIGH SCHOOL CERTIFICATE OF PROGRAM
COMPLETION.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET TARGETS FOR PARTICIPATION IN
THE YA PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION, INCLUDING:

(I) 200 CORPS PARTICIPANTS IN THE FIRST YEAR OF
IMPLEMENTATION; AND

(II) 2,000 CORPS PARTICIPANTS IN THE FOURTH YEAR OF
IMPLEMENTATION.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(d)] (2) The [Board] DEPARTMENT shall prioritize for participation in the
[Program] YA PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION:

(I) individuals historically underrepresented in:

[(1)] 1. higher education enrollment or completion; or

[(2)] 2. employment [by]:

[(i)] A. BY large–scale and community employers; [or]

[(ii)] B. BY participating organizations; OR

C. IN PROFESSIONS AND OCCUPATIONS THAT REQUIRE
LICENSURE OR CERTIFICATION; AND

(II) ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE WRAPAROUND SERVICES
TO CORPS PARTICIPANTS.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP FOCUS AREAS FOR THE YA
PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADDRESSING PRIORITY
STATE AND COMMUNITY ISSUES, INCLUDING:

(1) CLIMATE;

(2) EDUCATION; AND

(3) HEALTH.

(E) A CORPS PARTICIPANT WHO RECEIVES A SERVICE PLACEMENT IN THE
YA PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) PARTICIPATE IN ALL TRAINING RELATED TO THE SERVICE
PLACEMENT;

(2) WORK AT LEAST 30 HOURS PER WEEK;

(3) BE PARTNERED WITH AN ON–SITE MENTOR;

(4) PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE SERVICE PLACEMENT TO THE
SATISFACTION OF THE PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION AND THE DEPARTMENT;

(5) PARTICIPATE IN PROGRAM–WIDE EVENTS;

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(6) BE PAID $15 PER HOUR OR THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE,
WHICHEVER IS GREATER, FOR MANDATORY WORK HOURS OR MANDATORY
PROGRAM ACTIVITIES; AND

(7) ON COMPLETION OF THE PROGRAM, BE NOTIFIED OF ALL
AVAILABLE POST–PROGRAM OPPORTUNITIES, INCLUDING REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIPS.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMOTE AND PUBLICIZE THE AVAILABILITY
OF OPPORTUNITIES IN THE YA PATHWAY TO:

(1) HIGH SCHOOLS AND ADULT HIGH SCHOOLS IN THE STATE;

(2) COMMUNITY AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS;

(3) FAITH–BASED INSTITUTIONS; AND

(4) EMPLOYERS THAT ARE POTENTIAL SERVICE PLACEMENT
PROVIDERS.

(G) (1) THERE IS A YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR OPTION PATHWAY
FUND.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE YA PATHWAY FUND IS TO:

(I) PROVIDE STIPENDS TO CORPS PARTICIPANTS WITH A
SERVICE PLACEMENT IN THE YA PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION;

(II) PAY THE COSTS TO ADMINISTER AND PROMOTE THE YA
PATHWAY UNDER THE PROGRAM; AND

(III) ASSIST IN THE CREATION OF ADDITIONAL CORPS
PROGRAMS UNDER § 21–207 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE YA PATHWAY FUND.

(4) THE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (9) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE YA PATHWAY FUND IS A CONTINUING, NONLAPSING FUND THAT
IS NOT SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(5) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE YA PATHWAY
FUND SEPARATELY AND SHALL INVEST THE MONEY IN THE YA PATHWAY FUND IN
THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) ANY INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE YA PATHWAY FUND
SHALL BE CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(6) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL SEPARATELY ACCOUNT FOR EACH
SOURCE FOR THE YA PATHWAY FUND.

(7) THE DEPARTMENT:

(I) MAY ACCEPT ANY GIFT OR GRANT FROM ANY PERSON FOR
THE YA PATHWAY FUND;

(II) SHALL USE ANY GIFT OR GRANT THAT IT RECEIVES FOR THE
PURPOSES LISTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(III) SHALL DEPOSIT WITH THE STATE TREASURER ANY GIFT OR
GRANT THAT IT RECEIVES FOR THE YA PATHWAY FUND.

(8) THE YA PATHWAY FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED TO THE YA PATHWAY FUND UNDER
THE PROGRAM IN THE STATE BUDGET;

(II) GIFTS OR GRANTS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR
THE YA PATHWAY FUND;

(III) INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE YA PATHWAY FUND; AND

(IV) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE YA PATHWAY FUND.

(9) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, ANY UNSPENT STATE APPROPRIATION OF THE YA PATHWAY FUND
SHALL REVERT TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE AT THE END OF THE FISCAL
YEAR.

(II) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2024 THROUGH 2026, ANY ANY
UNSPENT PORTION OF THE YA PATHWAY FUND MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED OR
REVERT TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE BUT SHALL REMAIN IN THE YA
PATHWAY FUND TO BE USED FOR THE PURPOSES SPECIFIED IN THIS SUBTITLE.

(10) BEGINNING WITH FISCAL YEAR 2024, AT THE END OF EACH FISCAL
YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PREPARE AN ANNUAL REPORT OF THE YA
PATHWAY FUND THAT INCLUDES:

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(I) AN ACCOUNTING OF ALL FINANCIAL RECEIPTS AND
EXPENDITURES TO AND FROM THE YA PATHWAY FUND; AND

(II) THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

1. THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CORPS PARTICIPANTS
DISAGGREGATED BY DEMOGRAPHIC CATEGORIES;

2. THE TOTAL ANNUAL COST OF THE YA PATHWAY
DISAGGREGATED BY THE SOURCE OF THE FUNDS;

3. CORPS PARTICIPANT TRANSITION AFTER PROGRAM
COMPLETION INTO HIGHER EDUCATION, POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION, FULL–TIME
EMPLOYMENT, REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS, AND ANY OTHER POST–PROGRAM
OPPORTUNITY;

4. THE NUMBER OF CORPS PARTICIPANTS EMPLOYED BY
STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PROGRAM;
AND

5. TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, WHAT FORMER CORPS
PARTICIPANTS ARE DOING 1 YEAR, 2 YEARS, AND 5 YEARS AFTER COMPLETING THE
PROGRAM.

(11) THE YA PATHWAY FUND IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF
LEGISLATIVE AUDITS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1220 OF THIS ARTICLE.

21–206.

(A) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND SERVICE YEAR OPTION PATHWAY IN THE
PROGRAM.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE MARYLAND SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PATHWAY IS TO:

(I) EQUIP CORPS PARTICIPANTS WITH PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT, MENTORING, JOB TRAINING, FINANCIAL LITERACY SKILLS, AND
OTHER SUPPORTS WHILE WORKING IN HIGH–IMPACT SERVICE PLACEMENTS;

(II) ASSIST IN ADDRESSING THE STATE’S GREATEST
CHALLENGES BY CHANNELING THE TALENTS OF INDIVIDUALS INTO IMPACTFUL
PUBLIC SERVICE; AND

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) STRENGTHEN A PIPELINE OF TALENT INTO STATE AND
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO FILL PRESENT AND FUTURE STAFFING NEEDS.

(B) (1) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A
PLACEMENT IN THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS
INTERESTED IN PERFORMING PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY SERVICE IN THE STATE.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PRIORITIZE FOR PARTICIPATION IN
THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE:

(I) MARYLAND RESIDENTS; AND

(II) HISTORICALLY UNDERREPRESENTED IN:

1. HIGHER EDUCATION ENROLLMENT OR COMPLETION;
OR

2. EMPLOYMENT BY:

A. LARGE–SCALE AND COMMUNITY EMPLOYERS; OR

B. PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PRIORITIZE FOR PARTICIPATION IN
THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
WRAPAROUND SERVICES TO CORPS PARTICIPANTS.

(C) A CORPS PARTICIPANT WHO RECEIVES A SERVICE PLACEMENT IN THE
MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) PARTICIPATE IN ALL TRAINING RELATED TO THE SERVICE
PLACEMENT;

(2) PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE SERVICE PLACEMENT TO THE
SATISFACTION OF THE PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION AND THE DEPARTMENT;

(3) PARTICIPATE IN PROGRAM–WIDE EVENTS AS DETERMINED BY
THE DEPARTMENT;

(4) BE PAID $15 PER HOUR OR THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE,
WHICHEVER IS GREATER, FOR WORK HOURS OR MANDATORY PROGRAM ACTIVITIES;
AND

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(5) ON COMPLETION OF THE PROGRAM, BE NOTIFIED OF ALL
AVAILABLE POST–PROGRAM OPPORTUNITIES, INCLUDING REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIPS.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMOTE AND PUBLICIZE THE AVAILABILITY
OF THE MSY PATHWAY OPPORTUNITIES TO:

(1) HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES, AS DEFINED
IN § 3–207 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE;

(2) COMMUNITY COLLEGES;

(3) TRADE SCHOOLS;

(4) FAITH–BASED INSTITUTIONS;

(5) YOUTH WHO ARE DISCONNECTED FROM SCHOOL OR WORK; AND

(6) EMPLOYERS AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS WITH POTENTIAL
SERVICE PLACEMENTS FOR THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION.

[21–206.

(a) The Board shall act as an intermediary with the AmeriCorps Program to
secure federal funding and alleviate the administrative burden on State organizations
seeking to participate in AmeriCorps programming.

(b) In working with the AmeriCorps Program under subsection (a) of this section,
the Board shall focus on expanding the service opportunities in State and local parks and
in the public health sector.]

[21–207.]

[(a)] (E) (1) There is a Maryland [Corps Program] SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PATHWAY Fund.

[(b)] (2) The purpose of the MSY PATHWAY Fund is to:

[(1)] (I) provide stipends to corps participants WITH A SERVICE
PLACEMENT IN THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION;

[(2)] (II) provide PROGRAM COMPLETION [scholarships] AWARDS to
corps participants who have completed the Program [to be used at institutions of higher

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

education in the State toward vocational certificates, associate’s degrees, and bachelor’s
degrees];

[(3)] (III) cover expenses incurred by the [Board] DEPARTMENT,
including expenses incurred to study the potential use of the Program as a workforce
development tool in the State;

[(4)] (IV) cover expenses incurred to study how alumni of the Program
could be better positioned to meet the current and future needs of employers in the State;
[and]

[(5)] (V) provide funding for the [Program] MSY PATHWAY UNDER
THIS SECTION to match gifts or grants received by the [Board] DEPARTMENT for the
MSY PATHWAY Fund; AND

(VI) ASSIST IN THE CREATION OF ADDITIONAL CORPS
PROGRAMS UNDER § 21–207 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

[(c)] (3) The [Board] DEPARTMENT shall administer the MSY PATHWAY
Fund.

[(d)] (4) The EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (10) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE MSY PATHWAY Fund is a continuing, nonlapsing fund that is not
subject to § 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

[(e) (1)] (5) (I) The State Treasurer shall hold the MSY PATHWAY Fund
separately and shall invest the money in the MSY PATHWAY Fund in the same manner
as other State money may be invested.

[(2)] (II) Any investment earnings of the MSY PATHWAY Fund shall be
credited to the Fund.

[(f)] (6) The Comptroller shall SEPARATELY account FOR EACH SOURCE for
the MSY PATHWAY Fund.

[(g)] (7) The [Board] DEPARTMENT:

[(1)] (I) may accept any gift or grant from any person for the MSY
PATHWAY Fund;

[(2)] (II) shall use any gift or grant that it receives for the reasons stated
under [subsection (b) of this section] PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION; and

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

[(3)] (III) shall deposit any gift or grant that it receives for the MSY
PATHWAY Fund with the State Treasurer.

[(h)] (8) The MSY PATHWAY Fund consists of:

[(1)] (I) money appropriated under [§ 9–2818 of this subtitle]
SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION;

[(2)] (II) gifts or grants received by the [Board] DEPARTMENT for the
MSY PATHWAY Fund;

[(3)] (III) investment earnings of the MSY PATHWAY Fund; and

[(4)] (IV) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the MSY PATHWAY Fund.

[(i)] (9) The MSY PATHWAY Fund may be used only [for:

(1) providing stipends to corps participants;

(2) providing scholarships to corps participants who have completed the
Program to be used at institutions of higher education in the State toward vocational
certificates, associate’s degrees, and bachelor’s degrees;

(3) covering expenses incurred by the Board, including expenses incurred
to study the potential use of the Program as a workforce development tool in the State;

(4) covering expenses incurred to study how alumni of the Program could
be better positioned to meet the current and future needs of employers in the State; and

(5) Providing funding for the Program to match gifts or grants received by
the Board for the Fund] FOR THE PURPOSES DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

[(j)] (10) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, ANY UNSPENT STATE APPROPRIATION OF THE MSY PATHWAY FUND
SHALL REVERT TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE AT THE END OF THE FISCAL
YEAR.

(II) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2024 THROUGH 2026, Any ANY unspent
portion of the MSY PATHWAY Fund may not be transferred or revert to the General Fund
of the State but shall remain in the MSY PATHWAY Fund to be used for the purposes
specified in this subtitle.

– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(k) (1)] (11) (I) Beginning with fiscal year [2018] 2024, at the end of [the]
EACH fiscal year, the [Board] DEPARTMENT shall prepare an annual report of the MSY
PATHWAY Fund that includes:

1. an accounting of all financial receipts and expenditures to
and from the MSY PATHWAY Fund; AND

2. THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

A. THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CORPS PARTICIPANTS
DISAGGREGATED BY DEMOGRAPHIC CATEGORIES;

B. THE TOTAL ANNUAL COST OF THE MSY PATHWAY
DISAGGREGATED BY THE SOURCE OF THE FUNDS;

C. CORPS PARTICIPANT TRANSITION AFTER PROGRAM
COMPLETION INTO HIGHER EDUCATION, POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION, FULL–TIME
EMPLOYMENT, REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS, AND ANY OTHER POST–PROGRAM
OPPORTUNITY;

D. THE NUMBER OF CORPS PARTICIPANTS EMPLOYED BY
STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PROGRAM;
AND

E. TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, WHAT FORMER CORPS
PARTICIPANTS ARE DOING 1 YEAR, 2 YEARS, AND 5 YEARS AFTER COMPLETING THE
PROGRAM.

[(2)] (II) The [Board] DEPARTMENT shall submit a copy of the report to
the General Assembly in accordance with § 2–1257 of this article.

[(l)] (12) The MSY PATHWAY Fund may be subject to an audit by the
Legislative Auditor.

[21–208.]

[(a)] (F) (1) The Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an
appropriation to the MSY PATHWAY Fund of:

[(1)] (I) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2024;

[(2)] (II) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2025;

[(3)] (III) $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2026; and

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

[(4)] (IV) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2027 and each fiscal year thereafter.

[(b)] (2) It is the intent of the General Assembly that[:

(1)] appropriations made under [subsection (a) of this section]
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION are in addition to any federal funding received for
State service or volunteer programming[; and

(2) Any federal funding received by the State for service or volunteer
programming shall be deposited into the Fund for use by the Program].

[(c)] (3) Appropriations made under [subsection (a) of this section]
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION and other funding received by the [Board]
DEPARTMENT FOR THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION shall be used to:

[(1)] (I) provide stipends to corps participants WITH A SERVICE
PLACEMENT IN THE MSY PATHWAY UNDER THIS SECTION;

[(2)] (II) provide [scholarships] PROGRAM COMPLETION AWARDS to
corps participants who have completed the Program [to be used at institutions of higher
education in the State toward vocational certificates, associate’s degrees, and bachelor’s
degrees];

[(3)] (III) cover expenses incurred by the [Board] DEPARTMENT,
including expenses incurred in marketing and recruitment; and

[(4)] (IV) cover programmatic expenses to expand service opportunities
throughout the State, including[:

(i) In partnership with regional operating partners, creating and
maintaining an online platform through which individuals and corps participants can
search and apply for service opportunities throughout the State;

(ii) Expanding] EXPANDING the Chesapeake Conservation Corps
Program, as provided under §§ 8–1913 through 8–1924 of the Natural Resources Article[;

(iii) creating a Maryland Civilian Climate Corps to conserve and
restore State and local parks and engage in other climate or environmental projects;

(iv) creating a Maryland Historic Trades Corps to place young adults
and young veterans in regionally based work crews tasked with rehabilitation of State
historic resources;

– 29 –
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v) expanding the Maryland Conservation Corps to engage in
projects that manage natural resources and conserve parks; and

(vi) Providing staff for the Program].

[(d) Marketing and recruitment conducted by the Program under subsection (c)(3)
of this section shall prioritize:

(1) Historically black colleges and universities, as defined in § 3–207 of the
State Finance and Procurement Article;

(2) Community colleges;

(3) High schools with low rates of matriculation to 2– and 4–year
institutions of higher education;

(4) Trade schools; and

(5) Youth who are disconnected from school or work.]

[21–209.] 21–207.

(A) (1) The [Board] DEPARTMENT shall explore the possibility of:

[(1)] (I) accessing federal or other grant funding for the Program; and

[(2)] (II) awarding corps participants with:

1. academic credit for their service; OR

2. CREDIT FOR PRIOR LEARNING EXPERIENCE TOWARD
TRADE OR VOCATIONAL CERTIFICATION.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT WITH THE MARYLAND
HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION, INSTITUTIONS OF POSTSECONDARY
EDUCATION, THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, AND ANY OTHER ENTITY
THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES RELEVANT IN DETERMINING THE FEASIBILITY OF
IMPLEMENTING THE PROVISIONS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT MAY USE MONEY FROM THE YA PATHWAY FUND
UNDER § 21–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND THE MSY PATHWAY FUND UNDER § 21–206
OF THIS SUBTITLE TO:

– 30 –
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(1) CREATE A MARYLAND CIVILIAN CLIMATE CORPS TO CONSERVE
AND RESTORE STATE AND LOCAL PARKS AND ENGAGE IN OTHER CLIMATE OR
ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECTS;

(2) CREATE A MARYLAND HISTORIC TRADES CORPS TO PLACE
YOUNG ADULTS AND YOUNG VETERANS IN REGIONALLY BASED WORK CREWS
TASKED WITH REHABILITATION OF STATE HISTORIC RESOURCES; AND

(3) EXPAND THE MARYLAND CONSERVATION CORPS TO ENGAGE IN
PROJECTS THAT MANAGE NATURAL RESOURCES AND CONSERVE PARKS.

21–208.

(A) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONTRACT
WITH A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ENTITY TO CONDUCT AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATION OF
THE PROGRAM.

(B) THE INDEPENDENT EVALUATION SHALL EVALUATE:

(1) THE BENEFITS TO THE COMMUNITIES BEING SERVED BY THE
PROGRAM;

(2) THE BENEFITS TO CORPS PARTICIPANTS WHO COMPLETED THE
PROGRAM, INCLUDING EFFICACY IN TRANSITIONING CORPS PARTICIPANTS TO
POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION, THE WORKFORCE, OR REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIPS;

(3) THE EFFICACY OF THE PROGRAM’S PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMING, TRAINING, AND MENTORING IN SUPPORTING THE
STATE’S WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT NEEDS;

(4) THE PROGRAM DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND OVERALL
EFFICIENCY IN DELIVERING INTENDED OUTCOMES; AND

(5) ANY ADDITIONAL PROGRAM METRICS DEVELOPED BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

(C) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A
REPORT ON ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE
RESULTS OF THE INDEPENDENT EVALUATION CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SECTION.

– 31 –
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) BEGINNING ON OCTOBER 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH
AN ONLINE DASHBOARD OF KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AS DETERMINED IN
THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

[21–210.] 21–209.

On or before December 1 each year, the [Board] DEPARTMENT shall report to the
Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of this article, the General Assembly regarding:

(1) the number and amount of stipends awarded under the Program;

(2) the BUSINESSES, nonprofit ORGANIZATIONS, or government agencies
with which corps participants are placed;

(3) the institutions, if any, that award academic credit for a corps
participant’s service;

(4) the number and amount of [scholarships] PROGRAM COMPLETION
AWARDS awarded under the Program; and

(5) [at which] THE POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL institutions AT
WHICH corps participants use their [scholarships] PROGRAM COMPLETION AWARDS.

~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~11A.~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~OPTION~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

~~24–11A–01.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF SERVICE AND CIVIC
~~INNOVATION.~~

(C) “FUND” MEANS THE SERVICE YEAR OPTION PROGRAM FUND.

(D) “PARTICIPATING EMPLOYER” MEANS A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ENTITY
PARTICIPATING AS AN EMPLOYER UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE SERVICE YEAR OPTION PROGRAM.

(F) “PROGRAM PARTICIPANT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

– 32 –
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(1) HAS RECEIVED A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA, GED, OR COMPARABLE
PROOF OF EQUIVALENT EDUCATIONAL LEVEL WITHIN 2 YEARS BEFORE APPLYING
FOR A SERVICE PLACEMENT UNDER THE PROGRAM; OR

(2) QUALIFIES FOR A SERVICE PLACEMENT UNDER ALTERNATIVE
CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY THE SECRETARY.

(G) “SECRETARY” MEANS THE SECRETARY OF SERVICE AND CIVIC
~~INNOVATION.~~

(H) “SERVICE PLACEMENT” MEANS THE JOB ASSIGNMENT DESIGNATED TO
AN INDIVIDUAL PARTICIPATING IN THE PROGRAM UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

~~24–11A–02.~~

(A) THERE IS A SERVICE YEAR OPTION PROGRAM IN THE STATE.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO:

(1) PROVIDE SERVICE PLACEMENTS TO RECENT HIGH SCHOOL
~~GRADUATES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~SIMILAR~~ ~~LEVELS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~AS~~ ~~AN~~
~~ADDITIONAL~~ ~~OPTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PURSUING~~ ~~CAREER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~TECHNICAL~~ ~~TRAINING~~ ~~OR~~
POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION;

(2) EQUIP PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS WITH PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT, MENTORING, JOB TRAINING, AND OTHER SUPPORT WHILE WORKING
IN HIGH–IMPACT SERVICE PLACEMENTS;

(3) HELP ADDRESS THE STATE’S GREATEST CHALLENGES BY
CHANNELING THE NEXT GENERATION INTO PUBLIC IMPACT WORK; AND

(4) STRENGTHEN A PIPELINE OF TALENT INTO STATE AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS TO FILL PRESENT AND FUTURE STAFFING NEEDS.

~~(C)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE PROGRAM AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
~~BUDGET.~~

~~24–11A–03.~~

~~(A)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~SHALL:~~

– 33 –
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) DESIGN THE PROGRAM;

(2) IDENTIFY AND WORK WITH NONPROFIT ENTITIES WHO MAY
RECEIVE GRANTS TO SERVE AS REGIONAL PROGRAM LEADERS ACROSS THE STATE;

(3) CREATE A STATEWIDE NETWORK FOR ALL PROGRAM
PARTICIPANTS ACROSS THE STATE;

(4) PROMOTE AND COMMUNICATE PROGRAM OPPORTUNITIES TO
HIGH SCHOOLS, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS, COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS, AND
POTENTIAL PARTICIPATING EMPLOYERS ACROSS THE STATE;

(5) (I) DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A CENTRAL APPLICATION
PROCESS; AND

(II) ASSIST APPLICANTS WITH THE APPLICATION PROCESS;

(6) BUILD AND MAINTAIN AN ACCURATE AND UP–TO–DATE ONLINE
PORTAL TO MANAGE OPENINGS FOR SERVICE PLACEMENTS;

(7) IDENTIFY PARTICIPATING EMPLOYERS WHO CAN PROVIDE A WIDE
ARRAY OF BENEFITS, INCLUDING MENTORING AND CAREER AND COLLEGE
~~COACHING;~~

(8) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, SELECT PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS
THAT REFLECT THE GENDER, RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY OF THE
STATE; AND

(9) EVALUATE THE OVERALL OPERATIONS OF THE PROGRAM IN
COLLABORATION WITH AN INDEPENDENT ENTITY.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET TARGETS FOR PROGRAM
~~PARTICIPATION,~~ ~~INCLUDING:~~

(1) 200 PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS IN THE FIRST YEAR OF
IMPLEMENTATION; AND

(2) 2000 PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS IN THE FOURTH YEAR OF
~~IMPLEMENTATION.~~

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP PROGRAM FOCUS AREAS TO
ADDRESS PRIORITY ISSUES, INCLUDING:

– 34 –
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

~~(1)~~ ~~CLIMATE;~~

(2) EDUCATION; AND

~~(3)~~ ~~HEALTH.~~

~~24–11A–04.~~

(A) (1) WHILE WORKING IN A SERVICE PLACEMENT, A PROGRAM
PARTICIPANT SHALL:

(I) WORK AT LEAST 30 HOURS PER WEEK; AND

(II) PARTNER WITH AN ON–SITE MENTOR WHO PROVIDES:

~~1.~~ ~~JOB~~ ~~TRAINING;~~

2. CAREER AND POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
~~COUNSELING;~~

3. FINANCIAL LITERACY SKILLS; AND

4. ANY OTHER SUPPORT NEEDED.

(2) A PARTICIPATING EMPLOYER SHALL PAY A PROGRAM
PARTICIPANT $15 PER HOUR.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT MAY DISBURSE A STIPEND OF UP TO $3,000 TO A PROGRAM
PARTICIPANT WHO COMPLETES A SERVICE PLACEMENT.

(C) A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT SHALL:

(1) PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE SERVICE PLACEMENT TO THE
SATISFACTION OF THE PARTICIPATING EMPLOYER AND THE DEPARTMENT;

(2) PARTICIPATE IN ALL TRAINING RELATED TO THE SERVICE
PLACEMENT AND FUTURE CAREERS OR EDUCATIONAL PATHWAYS; AND

(3) PARTICIPATE IN PROGRAM–WIDE EVENTS TO:

(I) EXPAND THE PARTICIPANT’S PROFESSIONAL NETWORK;

(II) MAKE CONNECTIONS WITHIN THE PROGRAM; AND

– 35 –
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) TAKE ADVANTAGE OF STATE RESOURCES.

(D) AS NEEDED, THE DEPARTMENT MAY DISBURSE A PRORATED STIPEND
AMOUNT ON A CASE–BY–CASE BASIS.

~~24–11A–05.~~

(A) THERE IS A SERVICE YEAR OPTION PROGRAM FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO:

(1) PROVIDE STIPENDS TO PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS; AND

(2) PAY THE COSTS TO ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) THE FUND IS A CONTINUING, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT SUBJECT
TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(E) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY
AND SHALL INVEST THE MONEY IN THE FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER
STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED
TO THE FUND.

(F) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

~~(G)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT:~~

(1) MAY ACCEPT ANY GIFT OR GRANT FROM ANY PERSON FOR THE
~~FUND;~~

(2) SHALL USE ANY GIFT OR GRANT THAT IT RECEIVES FOR THE
PURPOSES LISTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(3) SHALL DEPOSIT WITH THE STATE TREASURER ANY GIFT OR
GRANT THAT IT RECEIVES FOR THE FUND.

(H) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

– 36 –
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED TO THE PROGRAM IN THE STATE
~~BUDGET;~~

(2) GIFTS OR GRANTS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR THE
~~FUND;~~

(3) INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(I) ANY UNSPENT PORTION OF THE FUND MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED OR
REVERT TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE BUT SHALL REMAIN IN THE FUND
TO BE USED FOR THE PURPOSES SPECIFIED IN THIS SUBTITLE.

(J) THE FUND IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE
AUDITS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1220 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

~~24–11A–06.~~

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROCURE THE SERVICES OF A
THIRD–PARTY ENTITY TO CONDUCT AN INDEPENDENT STUDY AND ASSESSMENT OF
THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE STUDY SHALL EMPLOY:

(I) RANDOM ASSIGNMENT, IF FEASIBLE AND ETHICAL; OR

(II) OTHER RESEARCH METHODS THAT ALLOW FOR THE
STRONGEST POSSIBLE CAUSAL INFERENCES, IF RANDOM ASSIGNMENT IS NOT
FEASIBLE AND ETHICAL IN THIS INSTANCE.

(B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, THE THIRD–PARTY ENTITY SHALL SUBMIT
A REPORT ON ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL
~~ASSEMBLY.~~

(C) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH
~~AN~~ ~~ONLINE~~ ~~DASHBOARD~~ ~~OF~~ ~~KEY~~ ~~PERFORMANCE~~ ~~INDICATORS~~ ~~SHOWN~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REPORT~~
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

~~24–11A–07.~~

– 37 –
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
Ch. 99 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT
THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING REGULATIONS ON:

(1) THE APPLICATION PROCESS;

~~(2)~~ ~~ELIGIBILITY~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS;~~

(3) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS; AND

(4) THE DISBURSEMENT OF STIPENDS.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. 169. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. 170. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund;
~~AND~~

172. 171. THE YOUNG ADULT SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PROGRAM PATHWAY FUND; AND

173. 172. THE MARYLAND SERVICE YEAR OPTION
PATHWAY FUND.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~July~~
~~1,~~ ~~2023.~~

SECTION ~~5.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the initial
members of the Maryland Corps Program Advisory Board under § 21–203 of the State
Government Article, as enacted by Section 4 of this Act, shall expire as follows:

– 38 –
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(1) the terms of the one member appointed by the President of the Senate,
the one member appointed by the Speaker of the House, and two members appointed by
the Governor shall expire on June 30, 2025; and

(2) the terms of the chair of the Advisory Board, the two members jointly
appointed by the President and the Speaker, and two members appointed by the Governor
shall expire on June 30, 2026.

SECTION ~~6.~~ 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 39 –
END OF PAGE 39