START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 540 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 540 
(The President)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Human Relations - Civil Rights Enforcement - Powers of the Attorney General 
 
 
This bill generally (1) grants the Attorney General the power to investigate, prosecute, and 
remediate any conduct that constitutes a civil rights violation; (2) establishes related 
procedures and specified remedies for violations; (3) requires coordination with the 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR); and (4) establishes the Civil Rights 
Enforcement Fund. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million in FY 2024; future years 
reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing operating costs. The FY 2024 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly includes $1.0 million in available funding for the bill or its 
cross file, as discussed below. Special fund revenues increase from civil penalties (and to 
the extent additional general fund support is provided); special fund expenditures increase 
correspondingly. General fund revenues increase minimally from interest. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$1.0 
$1.2 
$1.3 
$1.3 
$1.4 
SF Expenditure 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($1.0) 
($1.2) 
($1.3) 
($1.3) 
($1.4)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances and operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 540/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Attorney General may investigate, prosecute, and remediate, on 
behalf of the residents of the State, any conduct that constitutes a civil rights violation. The 
Attorney General may not bring a civil rights action (1) on behalf of an individual; 
(2) against a political subdivision; (3) against any unit of State or local government; or 
(4) against any employee or agent of a political subdivision or unit of State or local 
government who is acting under the color of law. If the Attorney General has reasonable 
cause to believe that a person is engaged in discrimination prohibited by the 
U.S. Constitution, the Maryland Constitution, or State or federal law, the Attorney General 
may commence a civil action. The civil action must be instituted in the circuit court for the 
county where (1) the alleged violator resides or has a principal place of business or (2) the 
alleged violation has occurred. 
 
Prior to initiating a civil action, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) must conduct a 
preliminary investigation to determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe that any 
person committed a civil rights violation. During any examination, investigation, or 
hearing, OAG may (1) subpoena witnesses; (2) administer oaths; (3) examine individuals 
under oath; and (4) compel production of records, books, papers, contracts, and other 
documents. Unless obtained by a method independent of a subpoena, information obtained 
through subpoena is not admissible in a later criminal proceeding against the person who 
provided the evidence. The Attorney General may intervene in a civil action concerning an 
alleged civil rights violation if (1) the Attorney General certifies that the case is of general 
importance and (2) timely application is made. 
 
To obtain relief with respect to an alleged civil rights violation, an action must be 
commenced no later than three years after the discovery, occurrence, or termination – 
whichever occurs last – of the alleged civil rights violation. 
 
Conciliation or Settlement Agreements 
 
If the Attorney General obtains a conciliation or settlement agreement, no action may be 
filed with respect to the alleged conduct that forms the basis for the complaint covered by 
the agreement, except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of the agreement. To obtain 
relief with respect to an alleged breach of a conciliation or settlement agreement, an action 
must be commenced no later than three years after the discovery, occurrence, or 
termination of the alleged breach. 
 
Remedies 
 
The Attorney General may seek an injunction to prohibit a person that has engaged or is 
engaging in a civil rights violation from continuing or engaging in the violation. In a request 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 540/ Page 3 
for injunctive relief, the Attorney General is not required to (1) post bond; (2) allege or 
prove that an adequate remedy at law does not exist; or (3) allege or prove that substantial 
or irreparable damage would result from any conduct alleged. OAG must serve notice of 
the general relief sought at least seven days before the action for an injunction is filed. The 
court may enter any order of judgement necessary to (1) prevent the use by a person of any 
prohibited practice; (2) restore to a person any money, real property, or personal property 
acquired by means of any prohibited practice; or (3) appoint a receiver to prevent willful 
violations. 
 
The Attorney General may obtain equitable relief, including a permanent or preliminary 
injunction, a temporary restraining order, or any other order, including an order enjoining 
the defendant from engaging in civil rights violations or an order requiring any appropriate 
action. 
 
The Attorney General may also obtain a civil penalty to vindicate the public interest. Civil 
penalties must not exceed (1) $10,000 for the first violation or (2) $25,000 for a second or 
subsequent violation. These civil penalties are recoverable by the State in a civil action and 
must be deposited in the Civil Rights Enforcement Fund (as established by the bill). 
 
The Attorney General may obtain restitution, including a requirement that the violator or 
alleged violator (1) reimburse the costs of the investigation and litigation to the 
Attorney General and MCCR; (2) make restitution to any aggrieved person of money, 
property, or any other thing received from the aggrieved person in connection with a 
violation or an alleged violation; (3) pay economic damages to an aggrieved person; or 
(4) post a performance bond or other security. 
 
Jurisdiction with the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 
 
The bill’s provisions may not be interpreted to impair the rights and powers of MCCR. In 
areas of overlapping jurisdiction, the Attorney General and MCCR must coordinate and 
make referrals to minimize and eliminate duplication of effort and promote collaboration. 
The Attorney General, in coordination with MCCR, must adopt regulations to implement 
the requirements of the bill. 
 
The Attorney General must publish proposed regulations for notice and comment by 
July 1, 2024. 
 
The Civil Rights Enforcement Fund 
 
The purpose of the fund is to provide funding for civil rights enforcement activities of the 
Attorney General and MCCR, as well as education and outreach in the community relating 
to civil rights violations. The fund consists of (1) civil penalties deposited into the fund; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 540/ Page 4 
(2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; and (3) any other money from any 
other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only (1) to 
reimburse the Attorney General and MCCR for costs associated with investigating and 
prosecuting civil rights violations and (2) education and outreach in the community relating 
to civil rights violations. 
 
Interest earnings from the fund must be credited to the general fund. 
 
Money expended from the fund for the enforcement activities of the Attorney General and 
MCCR is supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that would 
otherwise by appropriated for the Attorney General or MCCR. 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Attorney General is an elected official who serves a 
four-year term of office. Pursuant to the State Constitution, the Attorney General has 
enumerated responsibilities, including investigating, commencing, and prosecuting or 
defending any civil or criminal suit or action, as specified, which the General Assembly, 
by law or joint resolution, or the Governor, directs to be investigated, commenced, and 
prosecuted or defended. The Attorney General does not, however, have general authority 
to prosecute matters in the absence of specific statutory authority or an executive order. 
The Attorney General also has and must perform any other duties and possess any other 
powers as the General Assembly prescribes by law. OAG advises that more than 20 other 
states’ Attorneys General have some form of authority to enforce civil rights laws. 
 
MCCR is the independent State agency charged with the enforcement of laws prohibiting 
discrimination in employment, housing, public accommodations, and State contracting. 
According to its annual report, MCCR received 632 reports of discrimination in 
fiscal 2022. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Office of the Attorney General – Staffing Costs 
 
OAG estimates that the bill necessitates 12 staff, including attorneys, investigators, and 
other administrative positions. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $1,048,706 in funding (for 12 new positions) that, contingent on the enactment of 
House Bill 772 or Senate Bill 540, is to be transferred from the Criminal Investigations 
Division to the Civil Litigation Division to be used to implement the bill’s provisions. 
 
For purposes of this fiscal and policy note, it is therefore assumed that OAG annually 
engages in civil rights enforcement activities that support the need for 12 dedicated staff, 
consistent with what is available in the fiscal 2024 budget for this purpose, and incurs 
associated expenditures in fiscal 2024 reflective of the amount included in the budget. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 540/ Page 5 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $1,048,706 in fiscal 2024. Assuming 
a start date of October 1, 2023, consistent with the bill’s effective date, the funding is 
sufficient to support salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, costs for 
consultants/experts, and ongoing operating expenses, as shown below. 
 
Positions 
12.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$901,529 
Standard Operating Expenses 
$88,908 
Consultant costs/Expert fees 
37,500 
Additional Budgeted Funding 
       20,769 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$1,048,706 
 
Future year expenditures assume continuation of these positions for the purposes of the 
bill, and reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Civil Rights Enforcement Fund 
 
Special fund revenues increase to the extent that civil penalties are collected and deposited 
into the Civil Rights Enforcement Fund created by the bill (and to the extent that any 
general funds are appropriated to the fund). Special fund expenditures increase as the fund 
is used for authorized purposes, including relevant education and outreach. Although the 
fund may also be used to reimburse OAG and MCCR for costs associated with 
investigating/prosecuting civil rights violations, because the amount of any funding that 
may be provided to the new special fund is speculative, this analysis assumes that general 
funds are used to support the expenditures associated with OAG as shown above. Any 
potential impact on OAG and MCCR due to potential reimbursements from the special 
fund has not specifically been accounted for in this analysis. General fund revenues 
increase minimally from investment earnings of the fund. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses engaged in discriminatory practices are subject 
to enhanced enforcement under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that 
although the transfer of the positions (with the associated funding) is contingent on 
enactment of the bill or its cross file, the budgeted expenditures for OAG occur even 
without the enactment of House Bill 772 or Senate Bill 540, only for a different purpose. 
DLS further advises that the bill’s enactment (or that of its cross file) effectuates the 
transfer of significant resources originally included for criminal investigations within OAG 
to the Civil Litigation Division to be used instead for the bill’s purposes. This fiscal and 
policy note does not account for any potential associated impact on the Criminal 
Investigations Division within OAG. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 540/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 772 (The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Office of the Attorney 
General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 8, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6