START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 545 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 545 
(Senators Muse and Jackson) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Towing or Removal of Vehicles - Reclamation Hours 
 
 
This bill limits the hours during which a person in possession of a vehicle that has been 
towed or removed from a parking lot is required to provide an opportunity for the vehicle 
owner (or the owner’s agent) to retake possession of the vehicle. Under the bill, the vehicle 
must be available for reclamation from, at a minimum, 6:00 a.m. to midnight (rather than 
24 hours per day). The bill also makes a conforming change to associated signage 
requirements.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general and special fund expenditures in FY 2024 to the 
extent signage changes are necessary as a result of the bill’s changes. Revenues are not 
affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in local government expenditures in FY 2024 to the extent 
signage changes are necessary as a result of the bill’s changes. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The owner or operator of a parking lot (or the owner’s or operator’s agent) 
may not have a vehicle towed or otherwise removed from the parking lot unless the owner, 
operator, or agent has conspicuously placed signs that indicate, among other things, that 
State law requires the vehicle be available for reclamation 24 hours per day, 7 days 
per week. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 545/ Page 2 
Generally, if a vehicle is towed or otherwise removed from a parking lot, the person in 
possession of the vehicle (1) must immediately deliver the vehicle directly to the storage 
facility stated on the required signage; (2) may not move the towed vehicle from that 
storage facility to another storage facility for at least 72 hours; and (3) must provide the 
owner of the vehicle or the owner’s agent with immediate and continuous opportunity 
(24 hours per day, 7 days per week) to retake possession. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill significantly reduces the required hours of operation for 
any companies involved in the towing of vehicles. Therefore, to the extent any such 
businesses modify their hours of operation as a result of the bill, the bill has a meaningful 
impact. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 483 of 2021 and HB 1384 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Montgomery counties; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2