START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 579 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
Senate Bill 579 
(Senator Hayes) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Residential Property - Service Agreements - Prohibitions 
 
  
This bill prohibits, with specified exceptions, a service agreement (or any part of a service 
agreement) from (1) being effective for more than one year; (2) purporting to run with the 
land or bind subsequent bona fide purchasers; (3) purporting to create a lien, encumbrance, 
or security interest on the residential property of a party to the service agreement; or 
(4) allowing the service provider to assign or transfer the right to provide services under 
the service agreement to another person without notice or the consent of a party to the 
service agreement. A violation of these prohibitions by a service provider is an unfair, 
abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), 
subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal provisions. Among other provisions, the bill also 
prohibits the submission for recording of such service agreements and establishes criminal 
penalties for a violation. The bill’s prohibitions only apply to service agreements entered 
into on or after the bill’s June 1, 2023 effective date. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions under MCPA (and the 
new criminal penalty established by the bill) does not have a material impact on State 
finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer Protection Division, 
can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of new and existing penalty provisions does not 
materially affect local government operations or resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 579/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Service agreement” means an agreement where a service provider agrees to provide an 
individual services for (1) the maintenance of residential property that the individual owns 
or (2) the purchase or sale of residential property. A service agreement includes any 
memorandum, notice, agreement, or similar document that is used by a service provider to 
cause a service agreement to be recorded.  
 
“Service provider” means a person that provides services to an individual through a service 
agreement for (1) the maintenance of residential property that the individual owns or (2) the 
purchase or sale of residential property. Service provider includes any person acting as an 
agent or designee of a service provider. 
 
Prohibition on Service Agreements  
 
Any service agreement that violates the bill’s provisions is void and unenforceable; use of 
such a service agreement by a service provider is also an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade 
practice and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions within MCPA. However, 
an individual is not prevented from pursuing any other remedy provided by law.  
 
The bill specifies numerous limitations on applicability, including that it does not apply to, 
among other things:  
 
 
a home warranty or similar product that covers the cost of maintenance of a major 
home system such as plumbing, electrical, or heating, ventilating, and 
air-conditioning; 
 
an insurance contract; 
 
an option or right of refusal to purchase residential property;  
 
a mortgage loan or a commitment to make or receive a mortgage loan; 
 
an agreement relating to the sale or rental of personal property; or 
 
water, sewer, electrical, telephone, cable, or other regulated utility providers. 
 
Restrictions on Recording and Related Provisions 
 
A service provider may not submit a service agreement that is in violation of prohibitions 
established under the bill to the clerk of a circuit court or a State or local agency for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 579/ Page 3 
recording. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to 
imprisonment of up to six months and/or a fine of up to $1,000.  
 
The clerk of a circuit court or a State or local agency may deny a request to record a service 
agreement if it is in violation of the bill’s provisions. A recorded service agreement that is 
in violation of the bill may not provide actual or constructive notice of a lien arising from 
the service agreement to a subsequent bona fide purchaser of the residential property. 
 
If a service agreement that is in violation of the bill is recorded, any person with an interest 
in the residential property that is subject to a lien arising from the service agreement may 
bring an action against the service provider in the appropriate circuit court to request a 
determination that the service agreement is void and unenforceable. If the service 
agreement is determined to be void and unenforceable under the bill, the person who 
brought the action may seek (1) compensatory damages and (2) reasonable attorney’s fees 
and costs.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act  
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer.  
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s prohibition likely negatively impacts any small business 
that routinely uses service agreements that would be in violation of the bill’s provisions.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 579/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 728 (Delegate Amprey) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
Enrolled - May 2, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4