START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 612

Chapter 612

(Senate Bill 554)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland National Guard – Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program –
Establishment
(Health Care for Heroes Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program in the
Military Department for the Department to award grants to reimburse certain
members of the National Guard for the cost of premiums for certain health care and
dental care plans; requiring the Department to adopt regulations to administer and
implement the Program; and generally relating to the Tricare Premium
Reimbursement Program.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 13–411
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

13–411.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
IS:

(1) ELIGIBLE FOR TRICARE RESERVE SELECT COVERAGE; AND

(2) A MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL GUARD.

(B) THERE IS A TRICARE PREMIUM REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT
MAY AWARD GRANTS TO AN ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT WHO MEETS THE REIMBURSEMENT
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ANY OF THE FOLLOWING:

(1) A PREMIUM PAID FOR INDIVIDUAL COVERAGE THROUGH THE
TRICARE RESERVE SELECT PROGRAM;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 612 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A PREMIUM PAID FOR ANY MEMBER OF THE IMMEDIATE FAMILY
OF AN ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT COVERED UNDER THE TRICARE RESERVE SELECT
PROGRAM;

(3) A PREMIUM PAID FOR INDIVIDUAL COVERAGE UNDER THE
TRICARE DENTAL PROGRAM; OR

(4) A PREMIUM PAID FOR ANY MEMBER OF THE IMMEDIATE FAMILY
OF AN ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT RECEIVING DENTAL BENEFITS UNDER THE TRICARE
DENTAL PROGRAM.

(D) A GRANT AWARD TO AN ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT MAY REIMBURSE THE
ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT FOR UP TO $60 OF THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF PREMIUMS PAID
EACH MONTH BY THE ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT FOR THE COVERAGES LISTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) (E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT
AND ADMINISTER THE TRICARE PREMIUM REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 12, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2