START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 276

Chapter 276

(Senate Bill 558)

AN ACT concerning

Recovery Residence Grant Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Recovery Residence Grant Program within the
Maryland Department of Health to provide grants to recovery residences in the
State; and generally relating to the Recovery Residence Grant Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–101(a), (n), and (o) and 19–2501
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 19–2505
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

7.5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(n) “Peer support services” means a set of nonclinical activities provided by
individuals in recovery from mental disorders, substance–related disorders, or addictive
disorders who use their personal, lived experiences and training to support other
individuals with mental disorders, substance–related disorders, or addictive disorders.

(o) “Recovery residence” means a service that:

(1) Provides alcohol–free and illicit–drug–free housing to individuals with
substance–related disorders or addictive disorders or co–occurring mental disorders and
substance–related disorders or addictive disorders; and

(2) Does not include clinical treatment services.

19–2501.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 276 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Certificate of compliance” means a certificate that is issued to a recovery
residence by a credentialing entity.

(c) “Certified recovery residence” means a recovery residence that holds a
certificate of compliance.

(d) “Credentialing entity” means a nonprofit organization that develops and
administers professional certification programs according to nationally recognized
certification standards.

(e) “Recovery residence” has the meaning stated in § 7.5–101 of this article.

19–2505.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE RECOVERY RESIDENCE
GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) (1) THERE IS A RECOVERY RESIDENCE GRANT PROGRAM IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO
RECOVERY RESIDENCES IN THE STATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(D) THE PROGRAM SHALL AWARD COMPETITIVE GRANTS TO RECOVERY
RESIDENCES TO SUPPORT OPERATIONS, SERVICES, AND PROGRAMS.

(E) TO QUALIFY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM, A RECOVERY
RESIDENCE MUST:

(1) BE A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE;

(2) SUBMIT A CURRENT COPY OF THE FORM 990 THAT THE
ORGANIZATION FILES WITH THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE;

(3) BE CERTIFIED AS A LEVEL II RECOVERY RESIDENCE BY THE
CREDENTIALING ENTITY BY THE CREDENTIALING ENTITY AS A LEVEL I, LEVEL II,
OR LEVEL III RECOVERY RESIDENCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE NATIONAL
ALLIANCE FOR RECOVERY RESIDENCES STANDARDS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 276

(4) DEMONSTRATE THAT THE RECOVERY RESIDENCE HAS BEEN
~~OPERATING~~ ~~AS~~ ~~A~~ ~~CERTIFIED~~ ~~RECOVERY~~ ~~RESIDENCE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~
PRECEDING 5 YEARS;

(5) MAINTAIN RULES REGARDING SOBRIETY AND CONDUCT THAT
ARE APPROVED BY THE CREDENTIALING ENTITY;

(6) MAINTAIN A ZERO–TOLERANCE POLICY REGARDING SUBSTANCE
AND ALCOHOL ABUSE WHILE LIVING AT THE RECOVERY RESIDENCE;

(7) SERVE AS A RESIDENCE FOR A MINIMUM OF:

(I) 10 INDIVIDUALS PER DAY; AND

(II) 30 INDIVIDUALS PER YEAR;

(8) OFFER PEER SUPPORT SERVICES, AS DEFINED IN § 7.5–101 OF
THIS ARTICLE;

(9) REGULARLY CONDUCT MEETINGS WITH RESIDENTS ABOUT
ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE;

(10) CONDUCT REGULAR AND RANDOM DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
OF RESIDENTS;

(11) DEMONSTRATE THAT AT LEAST 50% OF RESIDENTS REMAINED
~~SOBER~~ ~~WHILE~~ ~~LIVING~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RECOVERY~~ ~~RESIDENCE~~ ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~
PRECEDING 2 YEARS; AND

(12) (4) NOT ACCEPT OR RECEIVE REIMBURSEMENT FROM PRIVATE
INSURANCE OR THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM; AND

(5) MEET ANY OTHER REQUIREMENT ESTABLISHED BY THE
DEPARTMENT IN REGULATION.

(F) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH:

(I) APPLICATION PROCEDURES;

(II) CRITERIA FOR PRIORITIZING APPLICATIONS UNDER THE
PROGRAM;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 276 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) PROCEDURES FOR AWARDING GRANTS UNDER THE
PROGRAM; AND

(IV) ANY OTHER PROCEDURES OR CRITERIA NECESSARY TO
CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(2) IN ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT THE CREDENTIALING ENTITY.

(G) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEAR YEARS 2024 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER THROUGH 2027, THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL SHALL INCLUDE AN
APPROPRIATION OF $500,000 FOR THE PROGRAM.

(H) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A REPORT
THAT INCLUDES, FOR THE MOST RECENT CLOSED FISCAL YEAR:

(1) THE NUMBER OF GRANTS DISTRIBUTED; AND

(2) INFORMATION ABOUT GRANT RECIPIENTS AND PROGRAMS AND
SERVICES PROVIDED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4