START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 551 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 551 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation and Maryland Corps Program 
Service Year Option Pathways - Established (Serving Every Region Through 
Vocational Exploration Act of 2023) 
 
 
This emergency Administration bill repeals and reestablishes the Department of Service 
and Civic Innovation (DSCI) and statutorily transfers both the Governor’s Office on 
Service and Volunteerism and the Maryland Corps Program to DSCI. Within the Maryland 
Corps Program, two pathways and related special funds are created for service placements 
for eligible youth and young adults. Technical and conforming changes reflect DSCI’s 
governance of the Maryland Corps Program and establishment of the two pathways. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $3.6 million and $11.35 million in 
FY 2023 and 2024, reflecting contingent appropriations, and further increase beginning in 
FY 2025. Future mandated funding does not change and is not reflected below. DSCI can 
implement the bill with budgeted resources in FY 2023 and 2024. General fund revenues 
increase by $2.5 million in FY 2023, $1.0 million in FY 2024, and annually beginning in 
FY 2027 due to reversions. Dedicated Purpose Account (DPA) expenditures are assumed 
to increase by $5.15 million in FY 2024 to support the program. Most nonpersonnel 
funding, including the DPA monies, is assumed to be transferred to the new special funds 
in FY 2024; special fund revenues increase correspondingly. Special fund expenditures 
increase for awards beginning in FY 2025, and special fund revenues increase beginning 
in FY 2028 when further capitalization is needed. Maryland 529 nonbudgeted revenues 
and expenditures may decrease (not shown). 
  
($ in thousands) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
GF Revenue 
$2,500 
$1,000 
$0 
$0 
$38,300 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$16,150 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$3,600 
$11,353 
$50 
$50 
$550 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$5,150 
$2,400 
$6,000 
$14,400 
Net Effect 
($1,100) 
$647 
($2,450) 
($6,050) 
$23,350  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 551/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase to the extent they accept, at 
their discretion, placements of Maryland Corps Program participants and have to pay 
wages and benefits. However, they may benefit to the extent the program enhances the 
pipeline of potential local government employees. Local revenues are unaffected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Corps Governance 
 
DSCI must administer the Maryland Corps Program. The Maryland Corps Board of 
Directors is replaced by an advisory board with a chair appointed by the Governor. 
Members of the advisory board serve staggered terms, as specified. In making 
appointments to the advisory board, the President, Speaker, and Governor must consider 
an individual’s experience and knowledge in workforce development, among other factors 
in current law. A member of the advisory board may be reappointed but may not serve 
more than two consecutive full terms. 
 
The advisory board must (1) be a liaison with DSCI, as specified; (2) advise DSCI on best 
practices for service and volunteerism; (3) provide oversight of the design, development, 
implementation, operation, and expansion of the Maryland Corps Program; (4) participate 
in program-sponsored events; and (5) perform any duties as determined by DSCI. 
 
DSCI must act as an intermediary with the AmeriCorps program to secure federal funding 
and alleviate the administrative burden on State organizations seeking to participate in 
AmeriCorps programming. In working with AmeriCorps, DSCI must focus on expanding 
service opportunities in (1) State and local parks; (2) public and community health sectors; 
and (3) the clean and renewable energy sector. 
 
The bill makes several changes to the goals of the program. DSCI must adopt regulations 
as specified.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 551/ Page 3 
Young Adult Pathway and Fund 
 
The purposes of the Young Adult (YA) Service Year Option Pathway are to:   
 
 
provide service placements to eligible young adults as an additional option to 
immediately pursuing postsecondary education or career and technical training; 
 
equip program participants with professional development, mentoring, job training, 
financial literacy skills, and other supports; 
 
assist in addressing the State’s greatest challenges by channeling the next generation 
into impactful public service; and 
 
strengthen a pipeline of talent into State and local governments to fill present and 
future staffing needs. 
 
Applicants for the YA pathway must be Maryland residents and within three years of 
graduation from high school or having obtained a similar level of education completion, as 
specified. DSCI must set targets for participation in the YA pathway, including 
200 participants in the first year and 2,000 participants in the fourth year. The bill 
establishes responsibilities and benefits for YA pathway participants, including that they 
must work at least 30 hours per week and be paid $15 per hour or the State minimum wage, 
whichever is higher. 
 
DSCI must develop focus areas for YA pathway participants for the purpose of addressing 
priority State and community issues, including climate, education, and health. It must also 
promote and publicize the availability of the YA pathway to high schools, community and 
nonprofit organizations, faith-based institutions, and employers that are potential service 
placement providers. 
 
The YA Pathway Fund is a nonlapsing fund, and, except for fiscal 2024 through 2026, any 
unspent monies at the end of each fiscal year revert to the general fund. The fund consists 
of money appropriated to it in the State budget, gifts or grants, investment earnings, and 
any other money from any other source. The Comptroller must account separately for each 
source of revenue for the fund. The fund may be used to (1) provide stipends to 
YA pathway participants; (2) pay the costs of administering the pathway; and (3) assist in 
the creation of additional Maryland Corps programs. 
 
Maryland Service Year Option Pathway and Fund 
 
The purposes of the Maryland Service Year (MSY) Option Pathway are to: 
 
 
equip Maryland Corps participants with professional development, mentoring, 
job training, financial literacy skills, and other supports; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 551/ Page 4 
 
assist in addressing the State’s greatest challenges by channeling the next generation 
into impactful public service; and 
 
strengthen a pipeline of talent into State and local governments to fill present and 
future staffing needs. 
 
Applicants to the MSY pathway must be interested in performing public and community 
service in the State. DSCI must prioritize for participation in the MSY pathway applicants 
who are Maryland residents and historically underrepresented in higher education and 
employment, as specified. Pathway participants are subject to most of the same 
responsibilities and benefits as YA pathway participants; however, they do not have a 
requirement to work at least 30 hours per week, nor are they required to be partnered with 
an on-site mentor. DSCI must also promote and publicize the availability of the MSY 
pathway to historically Black colleges and universities, community colleges, trade schools, 
faith-based institutions, youth who are disconnected from school or work, and employers 
and nonprofit organizations that are potential service placement providers. 
 
The MSY Pathway Fund is a nonlapsing fund, and, except for fiscal 2024 through 2026, 
any unspent monies at the end of each fiscal year revert to the general fund. The fund 
consists of money appropriated to it in accordance with a mandated appropriation, gifts or 
grants, investment earnings, and any other money from any other source. The Comptroller 
must account separately for each source of revenue for the fund. The fund may be used 
only to (1) provide stipends to MSY pathway participants; (2) provide program completion 
awards to participants who complete the program; (3) cover expenses for the pathway; 
(4) cover expenses incurred to study how program alumni could be better positioned to 
meet the current and future needs of employers in the State; (5) provide matching funds for 
grants received; and (6) assist in the creation of additional Maryland Corps programs. 
 
A mandated appropriation for the Maryland Corps Program in current law is directed to 
the MSY Fund. 
 
Additional Provisions Applicable to Each Pathway and Fund 
 
The YA and MSY pathways and funds are each subject to specified annual reporting and 
audit requirements. In addition, either or both funds may be used to: 
 
 
create a Maryland Civilian Climate Corps to conserve and restore State and local 
parks and engage in other climate or environmental projects;  
 
create a Maryland Historic Trades Corps to place young adults and young veterans in 
regionally based work crews tasked with rehabilitation of State historic resources; and 
 
expand the Maryland Conservation Corps to engage in projects that manage natural 
resources and conserve parks. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 551/ Page 5 
Maryland Corps Completion Awards 
 
The bill replaces the $6,000 education award that may be awarded to individuals who 
complete at least nine months of a Maryland Corps service placement under current law 
with a program completion award of the same amount for the same duration of service, 
which can be awarded either as a deposit to a Maryland 529 account, as required under 
current law, or instead as a cash stipend. 
 
Program Evaluation 
 
By June 1, 2027, DSCI must procure the services of a public or private entity to conduct 
an independent evaluation of the program. The evaluation must evaluate: 
 
 
the benefits to communities being served by the program; 
 
the benefits to corps participants who complete the program; 
 
the efficacy of the program’s professional development programming, training, and 
mentoring in supporting the State’s workforce development needs; 
 
the program design, implementation, and overall efficiency in delivering intended 
outcomes; and 
 
any additional program metrics developed by DSCI. 
 
DSCI must report its findings and recommendations by July 1, 2028, to the Governor and 
General Assembly. Beginning October 1, 2028, DSCI must publish an online dashboard of 
key performance indicators included in the report. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation 
 
In accordance with the Governor’s constitutional authority to reorganize State government 
by executive order, the Governor established DSCI as a principal department in 
January 2023 by Executive Order 01.01.2023.02. The executive order established the 
purpose of the department to be promoting service and volunteerism in the State and 
assigned the department eight responsibilities, including promoting the use of volunteers 
in State and local government, businesses, and nonprofit entities. It also transferred all 
employees of the Maryland Corps Program and the Governor’s Office of Service and 
Volunteerism to the new department. The executive order does not specifically address the 
department’s role in administering the program, but it does assign the Secretary of Service 
and Civic Innovation the responsibility to “identify and expand initiatives to increase 
service and volunteerism in the State to create opportunities and strengthen communities.” 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 551/ Page 6 
Maryland Corps Program 
 
The Maryland Corps Program was established by Chapter 654 of 2016 and substantially 
restructured by Chapter 37 of 2022, but it received no funding and, thus, was not 
operational through fiscal 2022. In fiscal 2023, the program received $5.3 million 
($150,000 as general funds and the balance as special funds) for operations, stipends, and 
scholarships; however, none of the funding has been spent yet. The fiscal 2024 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly transfers the $5.3 million to DSCI for Maryland Corps. 
In addition, five of the six positions on the Maryland Corps governing board remain vacant, 
and no executive director has been named. 
 
As currently established in statute, the purpose of the Maryland Corps Program is to 
(1) provide meaningful service opportunities to participants that will address the social 
needs of the community; (2) equip participants with the skills that will enable them to 
successfully make the transition from high school to postsecondary education or the 
workforce; and (3) provide scholarships to participants who have completed the program 
to be used at institutions of higher education. It is administered by a board of directors 
appointed by the Governor, Speaker of the House, and President of the Senate. 
 
The purpose of the Maryland Corps Program Fund is to provide stipends and scholarships 
to program participants, cover expenses incurred by the board, and provide funding for the 
program to match gifts or grants received by the board. As noted above, the program and 
fund did not receive funding until fiscal 2023; even then, the funding provided was 
discretionary. However, beginning in fiscal 2024, the Governor is required to include 
$5.0 million in the budget for the fund, with the mandated appropriation increasing by 
$5.0 million each year through fiscal 2027 when it reaches $20.0 million. The mandated 
appropriation remains at $20.0 million each year thereafter. The fiscal 2024 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly reduces the appropriation by $2.0 million for that year. 
 
Background:  On April 3, 2023, the Governor nominated Mr. Paul Monteiro to be the first 
Secretary of the Department of Service and Civic Innovation. Prior to his nomination, 
Mr. Monteiro served as the director of the Community Relations Service in the 
U.S. Department of Justice. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As shown in Exhibit 1, the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $13.7 million for DSCI in fiscal 2024, of which $11.4 million 
is specifically to support the Service Year Option Program and is contingent on the 
enactment of the bill or House Bill 546 establishing the program. Another $4.5 million for 
DSCI is included as a deficiency appropriation in fiscal 2023, $3.6 million of that amount 
is likewise contingent. The total contingent funding for the program is approximately 
$15.0 million and is specifically designated for certain purposes:  $9.8 million for grants 
($1.5 million as a deficiency in fiscal 2023 and $8.3 million in fiscal 2024); $2.0 million 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 551/ Page 7 
for a program evaluation ($1.0 million in each year); $1.6 million combined for the 
development of an online portal to allow individuals to apply for a service placement and 
possibly get matched with a potential employer; and $1.5 million combined for program 
outreach (specifically advertising and legal publication). 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Funding in the Fiscal 2024 Budget Bill for the  
Department of Service and Civic Innovation and the Maryland Corps Program 
 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Funding Transferred to DSCI in FY 2023 
Maryland Corps  
$5,300,000 
General Funds 
150,000 
Special Funds (from the Dedicated Purpose Account) 
5,150,000 
Deficiency Appropriation for DSCI in FY 2023 
$4,456,405 
Amount Contingent on the Bill 
3,600,000 
Funding Transferred to DSCI in FY 2024 
Maryland Corps (Mandated for fiscal 2024, with reduction) 
$3,000,000 
Office of Community Initiatives  
7,625,924 
General Funds 
290,613 
Special Funds 
269,600 
Federal Funds  
7,065,711 
New Funding for DSCI in FY 2024 
$13,657,296 
Amount Contingent on the Bill 
11,353,000 
Subtotal for DSCI 
$9,756,405 $24,283,220 
Total for DSCI in FY 2024 Budget Bill 
34,039,625 
Subtotal for Maryland Corps 
$8,900,000 $14,353,000 
Total for Maryland Corps in FY 2024 Budget Bill 
$23,253,000 
 
DSCI:  Department of Service and Civic Innovation 
 
Notes:  The amount contingent on the bill is dedicated entirely to Maryland Corps. Of the $3.0 million in 
general funds for Maryland Corps transferred to DSCI in fiscal 2024, $350,000 is maintained as general 
funds for staffing rather than distributed to the new special funds for other purposes. This analysis assumes 
those positions would have been funded absent the bill and that, in the absence of an active program, the 
other $2.65 million, although mandated to be included by the Governor for Maryland Corps under current 
law, would not necessarily have been retained in the budget as passed by the General Assembly or would 
have reverted at year-end. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 551/ Page 8 
Further, the total funding includes funding for 18 new positions in DSCI (in addition to any 
positions that transfer from other programs or offices). Of those, 14 are funded as 
deficiencies in fiscal 2023 and 4 are newly funded in fiscal 2024. In addition, the 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $3.0 million for Maryland 
Corps (reflecting the $2.0 million reduction to the $5.0 million mandated appropriation), 
which is transferred to DSCI. (Another $7.6 million, mostly federal funding for 
AmeriCorps, is also transferred to DSCI.) 
 
This analysis assumes that most of the funds are designated primarily to operate the 
Maryland Corps Program as modified by the bill (which acts as a service year option 
program and satisfies the contingencies in the budget bill). Thus, although the program 
incurs significant costs beginning as early as fiscal 2023, initial implementation costs are 
already budgeted. 
 
Fiscal 2023 Effects 
 
Only funds budgeted for fiscal 2024 through 2026 are exempt from the bill’s reversion 
provision for the YA and MSY funds; however, as an emergency bill, the bill takes effect 
during fiscal 2023. (Although not specifically established as such, this analysis assumes 
that the new funds are special funds rather than nonbudgeted funds.) Unspent funds from 
DPA can revert back to DPA for up to three years; other unspent and unencumbered funds 
budgeted in fiscal 2023, whether transferred to the two new funds or retained as general 
funds, revert to the general fund at year-end. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows that, of the $9.8 million appropriated to DSCI in fiscal 2023, $8.9 million 
is designated for Maryland Corps, including $3.6 million contingent on the enactment of 
the bill or its cross file and another $5.3 million appropriated in the fiscal 2023 budget bill 
and being transferred in the fiscal 2024 budget bill. As the bill effectuates the contingent 
appropriation, general fund expenditures increase by $3.6 million in fiscal 2023, which 
consists of $1.5 million for program completion awards, $1.0 million for a program 
evaluation, $1.0 million for outreach, and $100,000 for an online portal. 
 
Although the other $5.3 million in funding is appropriated regardless of the bill, most of it 
was originally appropriated to DPA in the fiscal 2023 budget. Of that total amount, 
$5.15 million is reserved for unspecified contractual costs (presumably program 
completion awards) and $150,000 is for staffing. As noted above, any unspent amount of 
a DPA appropriation can revert back to DPA for up to three years and is assumed to do so, 
with the Department of Budget and Management retaining control over it. 
 
This analysis assumes that $7.65 million designated for Maryland Corps in fiscal 2023 is 
not expended that year, with $5.15 million reverting back to DPA (which is not accounted 
for as new special fund revenues in fiscal 2023) and the remaining $2.5 million reverting 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 551/ Page 9 
to the general fund at year-end. Based on information provided by the Governor’s Office, 
this analysis reflects the first cohort of Maryland Corp participants being selected in 
fiscal 2024, with the first round of program completion awards paid in fiscal 2025 when 
they complete their service commitment. Thus, funds reserved or designated for program 
completion awards in fiscal 2023, totaling $6.65 million, revert either to DPA 
($5.15 million) or to the general fund ($1.5 million). Furthermore, the bill requires DSCI 
to contract with a third party to conduct an independent evaluation by June 1, 2027; this 
analysis assumes that DSCI does not enter into a contract for an evaluation until then. 
Therefore, the $1.0 million budgeted in fiscal 2023 for the evaluation also reverts to the 
general fund (even if DSCI opts to procure a third-party evaluation earlier than that, it is 
unlikely that it can do so in the two months leading up to the end of the fiscal year, so 
encumbering the funds is not an option). However, this analysis assumes that additional 
funding for staffing, outreach, and the online portal are spent or encumbered before the end 
of the fiscal year and do not revert. Overall, general fund expenditures for DSCI increase 
by $3.6 million in fiscal 2023 due to the contingent appropriation, and general fund 
revenues increase by $2.5 million due to the reversions required under the bill, for a net 
negative effect on the general fund (-$1.1 million) in fiscal 2023. 
 
Fiscal Effects Beginning in Fiscal 2024 
 
Exhibit 1 also shows that $14.35 million is budgeted for the Maryland Corps Program in 
fiscal 2024. Of the total appropriated in fiscal 2024, $11.35 million is contingent on the bill 
and $3.0 million reflects the mandated appropriation beginning that year, with a 
$2.0 million budgeted reduction. The bill requires that the mandated appropriations for 
Maryland Corps in current law be allocated to the MSY Fund. Therefore, with the 
exception of $350,000 reserved for staffing, $2.65 million is assumed to be allocated to the 
MSY Fund for stipends and/or program completion awards. As balances in the MSY Fund 
are not subject to reversion for fiscal 2024 through 2026, these funds remain available for 
MSY Pathway-related expenses until fiscal 2027, as needed. 
 
Of the $11.35 million in contingent funding, $8.3 million is reserved for stipends and/or 
program completion awards and is assumed to be allocated to the YA Fund for that purpose 
(and remains available until fiscal 2027, as needed). The balance is designated for certain 
purposes, including program evaluation, outreach, and the development of an online portal. 
As these activities benefit both pathways, it is assumed that these funds are not transferred 
to the special funds but are instead retained as general funds for the designated purposes 
and either expended, encumbered, or reverted to the general fund in the year for which they 
have been appropriated. These activities are discussed further below. 
 
This analysis also assumes that the $5.15 million that reverted to DPA at the end of 
fiscal 2023 is transferred to the YA Fund in fiscal 2024 and remains available for the 
payment of program completion awards. As noted elsewhere, the MSY Fund has a 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 551/ Page 10 
dedicated funding source as it continues to receive a mandated appropriation each year. 
That mandated appropriation escalates to $20.0 million in fiscal 2027 and beyond (and is 
subject to reversion beginning in fiscal 2027). Although funding in the out-years for the 
YA Fund is discretionary, sufficient monies are assumed to be appropriated beginning in 
fiscal 2028 to cover program completion awards each year. 
 
Program Completion Awards 
 
The bill specifies that the two funds may be used to pay stipends and/or program 
completion awards to program participants. As program participants are required to be 
paid at least $15 per hour during their service, this analysis assumes that the intent is to 
use the funds to pay the program completion awards rather than stipends. To the extent 
that the intent is to also pay participants stipends while they are still working in their 
service assignments, additional special fund expenditures are made for that purpose (with 
a corresponding impact on the need to capitalize the YA Fund). 
 
The Governor’s Office advises that it expects the first cohort of program participants to 
be selected for fall 2023; program completion awards are not payable until successful 
completion of a service placement, which will, therefore, occur in fiscal 2025. This 
analysis assumes that awards, which are at the discretion of DSCI, are paid to all 
participants.  
 
For the YA pathway, the bill establishes a goal of 200 participants in the first year 
(anticipated to be fiscal 2024) and 2,000 participants by the fourth year, and it sets the 
program completion award at $6,000 per participant. Similar goals are not set for the 
MSY pathway, but this analysis assumes similar participation patterns for that pathway as 
well; participants are also eligible for program completion awards, and this analysis 
assumes that they, too, are paid. 
 
Exhibits 2 and 3 summarize the costs of awards for the program’s first five full years for 
each of the two pathways, reflecting that awards for each cohort are paid in the following 
fiscal year (when participants complete their service). The exhibits also reflect that all 
future mandated appropriations for the Maryland Corps Program are deposited into the 
MSY Fund, as required by the bill, and are used exclusively for program completion 
awards (subject to reversion beginning in fiscal 2027). Special fund expenditures for 
awards may be different than those shown to the extent that (1) the program’s first cohort 
is delayed; (2) fewer participants are selected each year; (3) the pace of program growth 
is different than that shown; (4) attrition reduces the number of completed placements; or 
(5) discretionary funding is not provided to the YA Fund in the out-years. To the extent 
that a portion of future mandated appropriations is used for program administration each 
year (e.g., staffing) instead of program completion awards, expenditures and the balance 
in the MSY Fund may also vary. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 551/ Page 11 
Based on this analysis, the YA Fund runs a deficit beginning in fiscal 2028 unless 
additional discretionary general fund expenditures capitalize it each year – specifically, 
$12.0 million in fiscal 2028 and annually thereafter (assuming the number of YA pathway 
participants remains at 2,000 each year). By contrast, given its mandated appropriations 
in the out-years, the MSY Fund runs a substantial surplus in all years. As both funds’ 
balances are subject to reversion beginning in fiscal 2027, this analysis assumes that 
general fund revenues increase by $38.3 million in fiscal 2027 ($2.05 million from the 
YA Fund and $36.25 million from the MSY Fund) and $8.0 million each year thereafter 
(exclusively from the excess mandated appropriation directed to the MSY Fund, assuming 
the number of participants in the MSY pathway remains at 2,000 each year). However, to 
the extent the MSY Fund balance is used for the other purposes authorized by the bill, 
including creating the Maryland Civilian Climate Corps and Maryland Historic Trades 
Corps and expanding the Maryland Conservation Corps, general fund revenues are less. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Young Adult Service Year Option Pathway Completion Awards 
Paid from the Young Adult Service Year Option Pathway Fund 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Number of Participants 
200 
500 
1,200 
2,000 
2,000 
Opening Fund Balance* 
$8.30 
$13.45 
$12.25 
$9.25 
$0.00 
Transfer from DPA 
5.15 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Discretionary Appropriation 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
12.00 
Annual Awards Paid 
0.00 
1.20 
3.00 
7.20 
12.00 
Cumulative Awards Paid 
0.00 
1.20 
4.20 
11.40 
23.40 
Closing Fund Balance* 
$13.45 
$12.25 
$9.25 
$2.05 
$0.00 
General Fund Reversion 
NA 
NA 
NA 
$2.05 
$0.00 
 
DPA:  Dedicated Purpose Account 
NA:  Not applicable for that year 
 
* For fiscal 2024, the opening fund balance reflects the $8.3 million appropriation for grants that year, and 
the closing fund balance reflects the addition of the assumed transfer of $5.15 million from the Dedicated 
Purpose Account back to Maryland Corps – presumably for this pathway and no expenditures from the fund 
until fiscal 2025 when the first awards are paid. The closing fund balance for fiscal 2028 assumes sufficient 
capitalization with a discretionary general fund appropriation to cover awards paid in that year. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 551/ Page 12 
 
Exhibit 3 
Maryland Service Year Option Pathway Completion Awards 
Paid from the Maryland Service Year Option Pathway Fund 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Number of Participants 
200 
500 
1,200 
2,000 
2,000 
 
 
 
 
 
Opening Fund Balance* 
$2.65 
$2.65 
$11.45 
$23.45 
$0.00 
Mandated Appropriation 
- 
10.00 
15.00 
20.00 
20.00 
Annual Awards Paid 
0.00 
1.20 
3.00 
7.20 
12.00 
Cumulative Awards Paid 
0.00 
1.20 
4.20 
11.40 
23.40 
Closing Fund Balance* 
$2.65 
$11.45 
$23.45 
$36.25 
$8.00 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund Reversion 
NA 
NA 
NA 
$36.25 
$8.00 
 
NA:  not applicable for that year 
 
* The opening fund and closing fund balances for fiscal 2024 reflect the mandated appropriation for 
fiscal 2024 already having been directed to the fund (specifically $2.65 million, reflecting the budgeted 
reduction from the $5.0 million mandate and $350,000 reserved for staffing) and no expenditures from the 
fund until fiscal 2025 when the first awards are paid. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
DLS notes that substantial savings could be realized by either combining the two funds or 
dividing future mandated appropriations equally between the two funds. 
 
To the extent that the Maryland Corps programs secure funding from private donors or 
from the AmeriCorps program, as envisioned and allowed by the bill, general fund 
expenditures for the YA Fund may be less. 
 
Program Staffing 
 
The Governor’s Office advises that many or all of the 18 positions in the budget are 
dedicated to operating the Maryland Corps Program and that no additional positions are 
needed. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 551/ Page 13 
Evaluation and Other Activities 
 
As noted, the budget as passed by the General Assembly includes contingent funding for 
the evaluation in fiscal 2024, but the bill does not require the third-party evaluator to be 
selected until much later – specifically in fiscal 2027, with the bulk of the evaluation 
conducted in fiscal 2028. Therefore, this analysis assumes that $1.0 million budgeted in 
fiscal 2024 reverts to the general fund, and that $500,000 is needed in fiscal 2027 to 
conduct the evaluation (with any unexpended funds encumbered for fiscal 2028). 
 
Contingent funding is also provided in fiscal 2024 for program outreach and development 
of an online portal. This analysis assumes that the funding dedicated to outreach is used as 
provided (since the program is expected to be implemented by fall 2023 and outreach is a 
requirement under the bill), and that additional funding is needed in the out-years for 
further outreach. 
 
However, the bill does not require a portal, but to the extent one is developed with the 
contingent funding already available, the portal will need to be maintained in the out-years, 
at a reduced funding level. This analysis assumes a portal is developed and that funds are 
expended as anticipated in the budget. However, any funding for the portal not expended 
or encumbered in 2024 reverts to the general fund; further, any maintenance costs for the 
online portal in the out-years are not due to this bill. Accordingly, any such maintenance 
impacts are not reflected in this analysis. 
 
Exhibit 4 summarizes the impact on general fund expenditures for the program over the 
five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note. This analysis assumes that 
additional out-year costs, specifically for the evaluation and ongoing outreach, are funded 
directly with general funds. As discussed above, the YA Fund needs to be further 
capitalized beginning in fiscal 2028 in order to make awards as projected. Accordingly, 
special fund revenues increase in that year as well.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 551/ Page 14 
 
Exhibit 4 
Projected Additional General Fund Effects 
Beyond Funding in the Fiscal 2024 Budget and Current Mandated Appropriations 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Thousands) 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Expenditures 
 
 
 
 
 
Awards 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$12,000 
Evaluation* 
0 
NA 
NA 
500 
NA 
Outreach 
- 
50 
50 
50 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
Revenues from Reversion 
$1,000 
$0 
$0 
$38,300 
$8,000 
 
 
 
 
 
Net General Fund Effect 
$1,000 
-$50 
-$50 
$37,750 
-$4,050 
 
NA:  not applicable in that year 
 
* The $1.0 million in contingent funding appropriated for an evaluation is not expended in fiscal 2024; 
instead, a lower level of funding for an evaluation is needed in fiscal 2027. The $1.0 million is reflected as 
reverting to the general fund at year-end in fiscal 2024. 
 
Notes:  Other impacts are based on funding available from appropriations for fiscal 2024 and the assumed 
transfer of monies back from the Dedicated Purpose Account in fiscal 2024, with most nonpersonnel 
funding directed to one of the two new funds in fiscal 2024 so that it may be maintained as fund balance 
through fiscal 2026 rather than revert to the general fund. However, a portion of the contingent general fund 
appropriation is not used as anticipated and reverts to the general fund (specifically the evaluation monies 
noted above). Contingent funding for outreach in fiscal 2024 is assumed to be used in that year (as well as 
in fiscal 2023) for that purpose; accordingly, that funding has already been accounted for, and there is no 
further general fund impact except for ongoing funding in the out-years. Funding for awards reflects 
amounts needed for both Young Adult (YA) Service Year Option Pathway completion awards and 
Maryland Service Year (MSY) Option Pathway completion awards. The general fund impact for awards is 
only from YA pathway completion awards. The MSY pathway does not require additional general fund 
expenditures because it receives a mandated appropriation directed to the Maryland Corps Program under 
current law. Beginning in fiscal 2027, surplus balances in the MSY Fund and YA Fund are assumed to 
revert to the general fund at year-end instead of being used for other authorized purposes. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 551/ Page 15 
Audits 
 
The YA and MSY funds are subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA). 
OLA advises that it will need to add DSCI to its audit rotation and that an audit of the funds 
will be incorporated into its larger audit of the department. Therefore, the audit requirement 
has no fiscal effect. 
 
Maryland 529 
 
Current law requires education awards totaling up to $6,000 to be paid to Maryland Corps 
completers in the form of contributions to Maryland 529 plans on their behalf. To the extent 
that program completion awards are paid as cash stipends instead of contributions to 
Maryland 529, nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for Maryland 529 are lower than 
they would have been under an active current law program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 546 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services – Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 10, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 10, 2023 
Enrolled - May 11, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 11, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - May 11, 2023 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
SB 551/ Page 16 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation and Maryland Corps 
Program Service Year Option Pathways – Established (Serving 
Every Region Through Vocational Exploration Act of 2023) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB551/HB546 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 16