START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 581 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 581 
(Senators Klausmeier and Mautz) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value-Based Purchasing Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes a Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value-Based Purchasing Pilot 
Program in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The purpose of the pilot program 
is to establish and implement an intensive care coordination model using value-based 
purchasing (VBP) in the specialty behavioral health system. MDH must administer the 
pilot program, which must be operational for a three-year period. For fiscal 2025 through 
2027, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $600,000 for 
the pilot program. The bill terminates November 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $276,600 in FY 2024 for 
contractual staff and one-time only contractual costs for a consultant. General fund 
expenditures in FY 2025 through 2027 reflect the mandated appropriation for the pilot 
program, which includes ongoing contractual staff costs; however, contractual staff costs 
continue in FY 2028 as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes 
a mandated appropriation for FY 2025 through 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
276,600 
600,000 
600,000 
600,000 
59,400 
Net Effect 
($276,600) 
($600,000) 
($600,000) 
($600,000) 
($59,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 581/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Behavioral health care coordination” means a person-centered, 
team-based activity designed to (1) assess and meet the needs of an individual with a 
behavioral health condition and (2) help the individual navigate the health care system 
effectively and efficiently. 
 
MDH must identify at least 500 adults whose behavioral health condition or functioning 
places them at risk of hospital emergency department utilization or inpatient psychiatric 
hospital admission. 
 
A provider or network of providers selected to participate must (1) be licensed and in good 
standing with Medicaid; (2) have experience in providing community-based care 
coordination to specialty behavioral health program recipients; (3) use an electronic 
medical record for documenting care coordination activities and outcomes collection; and 
(4) have an automated data exchange with the State-designated health information 
exchange. 
 
MDH must (1) provide reimbursement on a per member per month basis for the behavioral 
health care coordination activities that are not otherwise covered by Medicaid; (2) collect 
outcomes data on recipients of health care services under the pilot program; and 
(3) evaluate the effectiveness of the VBP purchasing model by analyzing outcome 
measures, as specified. If necessary to implement the pilot program, MDH must apply for 
an amendment to the State’s § 1115 HealthChoice Demonstration. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2026, MDH must allocate a percentage of the mandated appropriation 
for the pilot program to reimbursement paid based on the achievement of specified outcome 
measures. In fiscal 2027, MDH must increase this percentage over the percentage allocated 
in fiscal 2026. 
 
By November 1, 2027, MDH must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on its 
findings and recommendations from the pilot program. 
 
Current Law:  MDH must establish a delivery system for specialty mental health services 
for Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) enrollees. The Behavioral Health 
Administration must design and monitor the delivery system, establish performance 
standards for providers, and establish procedures to ensure appropriate and timely referrals 
from MCOs to the delivery system. MDH must collaborate with MCOs to develop 
standards and guidelines for the provision of specialty mental health services. MDH may 
contract with an MCO for delivery of specialty mental health services if the MCO meets 
performance standards adopted by MDH in regulations. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 581/ Page 3 
The delivery system must (1) provide all specialty mental health services needed by 
enrollees; (2) for enrollees who are dually diagnosed, coordinate the provision of substance 
abuse services provided by MCOs; (3) consist of a network of qualified mental health 
professionals from all core disciplines; (4) include linkages with other public service 
systems; and (5) comply with quality assurance, enrollee input, data collection, and other 
requirements specified by MDH in regulation. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH must establish the VBP Pilot Program, which takes effect 
October 1, 2023, and operate the pilot program for a three-year period (fiscal 2025 through 
2027). The pilot program terminates November 30, 2027, at which time MDH must submit 
a final report on its findings and recommendations. MDH advises that it will require 
additional personnel and a one-time consultant to implement the pilot program. 
 
Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $276,610 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. MDH has determined that two regular 
full-time positions are needed. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises 
that the added responsibilities of the pilot program are not permanent and, thus, may be 
performed by contractual employees. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program 
administrator and one coordinator of special programs to evaluate VBP models, review 
consultant proposals, and implement and evaluate the pilot program. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, one-time contractual costs for a consultant to assist 
in the development of the pilot program (including developing rates and providing 
training), and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
New Contractual Positions 
2.0 
- 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$96,792 
$122,326 
One-time Consultant  
165,000 
0 
Pilot Program Provider Reimbursement  
0 
475,533 
Operating Expenses 
    14,818 
      2,141 
Total Pilot Program Expenditures in FY 2024 and 2025 
$276,610 
$600,000 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
In fiscal 2025 through 2027, an annual mandated appropriation of $600,000 is provided for 
the pilot program. This analysis assumes that this appropriation covers ongoing personnel 
costs as well as provider reimbursement. The contractual positions terminate 
November 30, 2027, the date on which the pilot program terminates and the same month 
that the final report on the pilot program must be submitted. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 581/ Page 4 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business behavioral health providers may benefit from 
additional reimbursement under the pilot program in fiscal 2025 through 2027. 
 
Additional Comments:  To the extent that expenditures on the pilot program improve 
individuals’ behavioral health and reduce the need for other behavioral health services 
(including emergency room visits and hospitalizations), overall expenditures are offset, 
potentially significantly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4