START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 369

Chapter 369

(Senate Bill 581)

AN ACT concerning

Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value–Based Purchasing Pilot Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value–Based
Purchasing Pilot Program in the Maryland Department of Health to establish and
implement an intensive care coordination model using value–based purchasing in
the specialty behavioral health system; and generally relating to the Behavioral
Health Care Coordination Value–Based Purchasing Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 13–4801 through 13–4807 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 48.
Behavioral Health Care Coordination Value–Based Purchasing Pilot
Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 48. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE COORDINATION VALUE–BASED
PURCHASING PILOT PROGRAM.

13–4801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE COORDINATION” MEANS A
PERSON–CENTERED, TEAM–BASED ACTIVITY DESIGNED TO:

(1) ASSESS AND MEET THE NEEDS OF AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CONDITION; AND

(2) HELP THE INDIVIDUAL NAVIGATE THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
EFFECTIVELY AND EFFICIENTLY.

(C) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 369 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

COORDINATION VALUE–BASED PURCHASING PILOT PROGRAM.

(D) “VALUE–BASED PURCHASING” MEANS FINANCIALLY INCENTIVIZING
PROVIDERS TO MEET SPECIFIED OUTCOME MEASURES.

13–4802.

THERE IS A BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE COORDINATION VALUE–BASED
PURCHASING PILOT PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

13–4803.

THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO ESTABLISH AND IMPLEMENT AN
INTENSIVE CARE COORDINATION MODEL USING VALUE–BASED PURCHASING IN THE
SPECIALTY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SYSTEM.

13–4804.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL IDENTIFY AT LEAST 500 ADULTS WHOSE
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CONDITION OR FUNCTIONING PLACES THEM AT RISK OF
HOSPITAL EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT UTILIZATION OR INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC
HOSPITAL ADMISSION.

(C) THE PILOT PROGRAM SHALL BE OPERATIONAL FOR A 3–YEAR PERIOD.

(D) A PROVIDER, OR NETWORK OF PROVIDERS, SELECTED TO PARTICIPATE
IN THE PILOT PROGRAM SHALL:

(1) BE LICENSED AND IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE MARYLAND
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM;

(2) HAVE EXPERIENCE IN PROVIDING COMMUNITY–BASED CARE
COORDINATION TO SPECIALTY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROGRAM RECIPIENTS;

(3) USE AN ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORD FOR DOCUMENTING CARE
COORDINATION ACTIVITIES AND OUTCOMES COLLECTION; AND

(4) HAVE AN AUTOMATED DATA EXCHANGE WITH THE
STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 369

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) PROVIDE REIMBURSEMENT ON A PER MEMBER PER MONTH BASIS
FOR THE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE COORDINATION ACTIVITIES THAT ARE NOT
OTHERWISE COVERED BY THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM;

(2) COLLECT OUTCOMES DATA ON RECIPIENTS OF HEALTH CARE
SERVICES UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(3) EVALUATE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE VALUE–BASED
PURCHASING MODEL BY ANALYZING THE FOLLOWING OUTCOME MEASURES:

(I) A COMPARISON OF THE FOLLOWING DATA ELEMENTS
BEFORE AND AFTER ENROLLMENT OF RECIPIENTS OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES
UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM:

1. EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT UTILIZATION FOR BOTH
BEHAVIORAL AND SOMATIC HEALTH PURPOSES;

2. INPATIENT HOSPITALIZATION FOR BOTH
BEHAVIORAL AND SOMATIC HEALTH PURPOSES; AND

3. TOTAL HEALTH CARE EXPENDITURES;

(II) OUTCOMES FOR RECIPIENTS WITH AND WITHOUT PRIMARY
CARE SERVICES COORDINATED BY A BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDER; AND

(III) RECOGNIZED CLINICAL QUALITY METRICS WHICH MAY
INCLUDE PATIENT EXPERIENCE MEASURES.

13–4805.

IF NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE PILOT PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL APPLY TO THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES FOR AN
AMENDMENT TO THE STATE’S § 1115 HEALTHCHOICE DEMONSTRATION.

13–4806.

(A) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2025 THROUGH 2027, THE GOVERNOR
SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $600,000 FOR
THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ALLOCATE
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 369 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

A PERCENTAGE OF THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION TO REIMBURSEMENT PAID BASED ON THE ACHIEVEMENT OF
THE OUTCOME MEASURES DESCRIBED IN § 13–4804(E)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) IN FISCAL YEAR 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL INCREASE THE
PERCENTAGE OF THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION ALLOCATED TO REIMBURSEMENT PAID IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION OVER THE PERCENTAGE ALLOCATED IN FISCAL
YEAR 2026.

13–4807.

ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO
THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE DEPARTMENT’S FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE PILOT PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and 2 months and, at the
end of November 30, 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4