START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 555 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 555 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
Economic Matters 
 
Fair Wage Act of 2023 
 
This Administration bill accelerates the increase in the State minimum wage rate for all 
employers to $15.00 per hour beginning January 1, 2024. The bill also repeals specified 
provider rate increases in fiscal 2025 and 2026, but the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $206.7 million for such purposes, contingent on legislation 
accelerating the implementation of the State minimum wage law. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $109.1 million in both FY 2024 and 
2025 for provider reimbursements; federal expenditures and revenues likewise increase to 
reflect the federal share of the reimbursements. Amounts for FY 2024 are budgeted, 
contingent on enactment of the bill. State expenditures (all funds) increase, likely modestly, 
from FY 2024 through 2026 due to acceleration of the minimum wage rate, as discussed 
below. Any increase in State tax revenues from FY 2024 through 2026 cannot be reliably 
projected but is expected to be minimal. The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) can 
implement and enforce the bill with existing resources. This bill eliminates mandated 
appropriations in FY 2025 and 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
FF Revenue 
$97.6 
$97.6 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$109.1 
$109.1 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Expenditure 
$97.6 
$97.6 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/SF/FF/HE/NB Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($109.1) 
($109.1) 
$(-)/- 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, potentially significantly in some 
jurisdictions, in FY 2024 and 2025 to pay additional wages to employees. Any increase in 
local government tax revenues cannot be reliably projected but is expected to be minimal. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 555/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Minimum Wage Rate Accelerated to $15.00 Per Hour 
 
Effective January 1, 2024, the State minimum wage rate is set at $15.00 per hour for all 
employers, as shown in Exhibit 1. The bill also repeals the Board of Public Works’ 
authority to temporarily suspend a scheduled increase in the State minimum wage rate, as 
the bill repeals future scheduled increases due to the acceleration. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
State Minimum Wages – Current Law and Under the Bill 
 
 
The Bill 
Current Law 
Employers of  
Any Size 
Employers with 15 or 
More Employees 
Employers with Fewer 
Than 15 Employees 
1/1/2023 
N/A 
$13.25 
$12.80 
1/1/2024 
$15.00 
14.00 
13.40 
1/1/2025 
15.00 
15.00 
14.00 
1/1/2026 
15.00 
15.00 
14.60 
7/1/2026+ 
15.00 
15.00 
15.00 
 
N/A:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Repeal of Specified Mandated Appropriations for Provider Rate Increases 
 
Chapters 10 and 11 of 2019, which established the current trajectory toward a $15.00 
per hour minimum wage rate in the State, also established various mandated appropriations 
for certain service providers from fiscal 2021 through 2026. The bill repeals the mandates 
for fiscal 2025 and 2026, which were 4.0% rate increases over the prior year’s legislative 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 555/ Page 3 
appropriations each year; however, the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $206.7 million ($109.1 million general funds, $97.6 million 
federal funds), contingent on legislation accelerating the implementation of the State 
minimum wage law. The additional contingent funding is an 8.0% increase, annualized to 
align with the January 1, 2024 acceleration of the minimum wage increase, which equates 
to 4.0% year-over-year. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Minimum Wage Requirements 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal Fair Labor 
Standards Act, which specifies minimum wage and overtime requirements for employers 
and employees in the State. Chapters 10 and 11 increase the State minimum wage rate for 
employers with 15 or more employees in increments until the full phase-in of $15.00 per 
hour on January 1, 2025. For employers with 14 or fewer employees, the wage rate reaches 
full phase-in on July 1, 2026. For additional information, please see the 
Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law. 
 
Provider Rate Increases  
 
Under Chapters 10 and 11, the Governor must include additional funding amounts for 
specified service providers in annual budget bills from fiscal 2021 through 2026. Funds are 
provided in the budgets of the Development Disabilities Administration, Behavioral Health 
Administration, and Medicaid. The amounts initially varied by year and service provider 
type; however, funding must increase by 4.0% in fiscal 2025 and by 4.0% in fiscal 2026 
across the various remaining appropriations. 
 
Living Wage 
 
Chapter 284 of 2007 made Maryland the first state to require State service contractors to 
pay their employees a “living wage.” Tier 1 areas are Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Howard, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties. Tier 2 areas are all 
counties not in Tier 1. The living wage rates are adjusted annually for inflation by the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry within MDL. Effective September 2022, the Tier 1 
living wage is $15.13, and the Tier 2 wage is $11.36. Montgomery and Prince George’s 
counties and Baltimore City have local living wage ordinances that apply to their 
procurement of services. The living wage law does not apply to State contracts with 
nonprofit organizations. 
 
Background:  According to the Economic Policy Institute (EPI), 30 states plus the 
District of Columbia have adopted minimum wages higher than the federal minimum 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 555/ Page 4 
wage. Of those, 20 index their minimum wage rates to inflation, meaning that their 
minimum wage rates increase automatically based on some measure of inflation. 
Additional state-level information can be found on the minimum wage tracker on the 
EPI website. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund tax revenues may increase minimally due to accelerating 
the increase in the State’s minimum wage beginning in the second half of fiscal 2024 and 
extending through fiscal 2026. Individuals earning at or near the minimum wage rate likely 
have low, if any, State income tax liability, so raising the minimum wage only has a 
minimal effect on State income tax revenues. Any increase in personal income tax revenue 
is likely offset from diminished revenues from businesses with higher payroll expenses and 
potentially from a decrease in demand for labor. However, given that raising the minimum 
wage boosts the purchasing power of minimum wage workers and generates new consumer 
spending, general fund sales tax revenues may increase minimally. 
 
Federal fund revenues increase in fiscal 2024 and 2025 for the federal share of provider 
reimbursements. Federal fund revenues are not otherwise materially affected. 
 
State Expenditures:  Generally, most State entities already pay at least $15.00 per hour. 
The Department of Budget and Management reports that all State regular and temporary 
employees within the State Personnel Management System are paid $15.00 per hour or 
more. Likewise, the Judiciary and DLS report their employees are paid $15.00 per hour or 
more. The University System of Maryland (USM) Board of Regents increased the 
minimum wage for nonexempt hourly workers to $15.00 effective January 1, 2022, but 
some other exempt employees, mostly undergraduate student workers, are paid less than 
$15.00 per hour at some institutions. 
 
Therefore, higher education expenditures increase by an unknown but relatively modest 
amount in fiscal 2024 and 2025 to pay any remaining workers a $15.00 minimum wage. 
For illustrative purposes, Salisbury University was the only USM institution to provide an 
estimate of the cost:  $366,000 in fiscal 2024 (but no estimate for fiscal 2025). The total 
effect diminishes across that time as the minimum wage increases to $15.00 per hour under 
current law.  
 
To the extent that the State contracts with service providers who employ low wage or 
minimum wage workers, State expenditures increase from fiscal 2024 through 2025 or 
2026 (if the State contracts with businesses with fewer than 15 employees). As the Tier 1 
living wage is now more than $15.00, the effect on State contract costs is limited to vendors 
paying living wages in Tier 2 jurisdictions. The effect diminishes across that time as the 
minimum wage increases to $15.00 per hour under current law. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 555/ Page 5 
Provider Rate Increases 
 
The bill repeals mandated 4.0% provider rate increases for fiscal 2025 and 2026. However, 
the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes an additional 
$206.7 million for such purposes, contingent on legislation accelerating the 
implementation of the State minimum wage law. The contingent funding is an 
8.0% increase, when annualized to align with the January 1, 2024 acceleration of the 
minimum wage increase, which equates to 4.0% year-over-year. The 8.0% rate increase 
carries through in fiscal 2025 (as opposed to 4.0% in current law). Therefore, the bill’s 
overall effect is to increase expenditures for provider reimbursements by 4.0% in both 
fiscal 2024 and 2025 before generally realigning with current law beginning in fiscal 2026. 
Accordingly, State expenditures increase by $206.7 million in both fiscal 2024 and 2025 
($109.1 million general funds, $97.6 million federal funds). 
 
Local Expenditures:  Generally, expenditures increase significantly in fiscal 2024 and 
2025 for local governments to pay employees (typically part-time or contractual 
employees) the accelerated minimum wage rate of $15.00 per hour. 
 
The Maryland Association of Counties advises that the difference in increased pay and 
expense will vary among counties and positions, but generally, counties will have increased 
wage expenses for several classes of employees, especially in Parks and Recreation and 
Public Works departments. These increases extend to part-time and seasonal employees, 
such as those staffing county parks or pools during the summer season. The effect 
diminishes from fiscal 2024 through 2025 as the minimum wage increases to $15.00 
per hour under current law. 
 
Montgomery and Howard counties, as employers, are not affected by the change because 
both jurisdictions have local minimum wage rates that will be $15.00 or more per hour for 
large employers as of January 1, 2024. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local revenues from income taxes associated with higher wages paid 
under the bill increase – beginning in the second half of fiscal 2024 and extending through 
fiscal 2026 – but any such increase may be offset from diminished revenues from 
businesses with higher payroll expenses as well as a potential decrease in demand for labor. 
The amounts are likely minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 721 and HB 698 of 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 555/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  HB 549 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; University System 
of Maryland; Baltimore City Community College; Morgan State University; 
Baltimore City; Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; Economic Policy Institute; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 5, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 555/ Page 7 
Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law 
 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal Fair Labor 
Standards Act, which specifies minimum wage and overtime requirements for employers 
and employees in the State. Chapters 10 and 11 of 2019 increase the State minimum 
wage rate for employers with 15 or more employees in increments until the full phase-in 
of $15.00 per hour on January 1, 2025. For employers with 14 or fewer employees, the 
wage rate reaches full phase-in on July 1, 2026. 
 
The Board of Public Works (BPW), however, may temporarily suspend one scheduled 
increase in the State minimum wage for one year between October 1, 2020, and 
October 1, 2024, if it determines that the seasonally adjusted total employment is negative 
as compared with the previous six-month period. If total adjusted employment is negative, 
BPW may also consider the recent performance of State revenues in making its 
determination. BPW has not exercised this authority. 
 
The Acts specify that, unless the federal minimum wage is set at a higher rate, the 
State minimum wage for employers with 15 or more employees is as follows:  
 
 
$13.25 per hour as of January 1, 2023;  
 
$14.00 per hour as of January 1, 2024; and  
 
$15.00 per hour as of January 1, 2025. 
 
The State minimum wage for an employer that employs 14 or fewer employees is as 
follows:  
 
 
$12.80 per hour as of January 1, 2023;  
 
$13.40 per hour as of January 1, 2024;  
 
$14.00 per hour as of January 1, 2025;  
 
$14.60 per hour as of January 1, 2026; and  
 
$15.00 per hour as of July 1, 2026. 
 
An employer may pay 85% of the State minimum wage rate to employees younger than 
age 18. 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law and minimum wage requirements do not apply to 
certain categories of employees, including those defined as administrative, executive, or 
professional; certain seasonal employees; part-time employees younger than age 16; 
salesmen and those who work on commission; an employer’s immediate family; drive-in 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 555/ Page 8 
theater employees; employees training in a special education program in a public school; 
employees of an establishment that sells food and drink for on-premises consumption and 
has an annual gross income of $400,000 or less; employees employed by an employer who 
is engaged in canning, freezing, packing, or first processing of perishable or seasonal fresh 
fruits, vegetables, poultry, or seafood; certain farm workers; and covered employees under 
the Secure Maryland Wage Act. 
 
Generally, the employer of a tipped employee is allowed a tip credit that can be applied 
against the direct wages paid by the employer. The employee can be paid tipping wages so 
long as the wages plus the tips received equal at least the minimum wage, the employee 
retains all tips, and the employee customarily receives more than $30.00 a month in tips. 
The tip credit is equal to the State minimum wage, less $3.63. Thus, the tip credit increases 
as the minimum wage increases, and the wage paid by employers to tipped employees 
remains $3.63, as long as their wages plus tips equal the minimum wage. 
 
Under Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, an employer is required to pay an overtime wage 
of at least 1.5 times the usual hourly wage for each hour over 40 hours that an employee 
works during one work week. This requirement does not apply to an employer that is 
subject to federal rail laws; a nonprofit concert promoter, legitimate theater, music festival, 
music pavilion, or theatrical show; or specified amusement or recreational establishments. 
It also does not apply to an employee for whom the U.S. Secretary of Transportation sets 
qualifications and maximum hours of service under federal law; a mechanic, parts person, 
or salesperson, under certain conditions; a driver employed by a taxicab operator; or 
specified air carrier employees under certain conditions. Also, specific exemptions apply 
for farm work, bowling establishments, and infirmaries. 
 
If an employer pays less than the wages required, the employee may bring an action against 
the employer to recover (1) the difference between the wage paid to the employee and the 
wage required; (2) an additional amount equal to the difference as liquidated damages; and 
(3) legal fees. The court must award these differences in wages, damages, and counsel fees 
if the court determines that an employee is entitled to recovery. However, if an employer 
shows to the satisfaction of the court that the employer acted in good faith and reasonably 
believed that the wages paid to the employee were not less than the required wages, then 
the court must award liquidated damages of an amount less than the difference in wages or 
no liquidated damages. 
 
A person who violates the Maryland Wage and Hour Law is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 555/ Page 9 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Fair Wage Act of 2023 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB555/HB549 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Myles Hicks 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X   
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Small businesses that are currently paying employees less than $15 per hour will need to raise 
wages. Small businesses will likely benefit from increased economic activity due to higher 
wages. 
 

END OF PAGE 9