START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 527 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 527 
(Senators Waldstreicher and Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations 
 
Fire, Rescue, or Emergency Medical Services Entities - Peer Support Programs 
 
 
This bill alters the term “peer support counseling program” to be “peer support program”; 
removes related references to counseling, counseling services, and counseling session; and 
requires that a peer support program and related services and training be evidence-based.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The changes are technical in nature and do not directly affect 
governmental finances.     
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Pursuant to Chapters 151 and 152 of 2022, “peer support 
counseling program” means a program provided by a fire, rescue, or emergency medical 
services (EMS) entity or the International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) that provides 
counseling services from a “peer support specialist” to a member of a fire, rescue, or EMS 
entity. The bill alters the defined term to be “peer support program” and modifies the 
definition to mean an evidence-based program that provides evidence-based support. 
 
Under current law, “peer support specialist” means a member of a fire, rescue, or EMS 
entity or the IAFF who (1) has received training in peer support counseling and providing 
emotional and moral support to members of fire, rescue, or EMS entities who have been 
involved in or exposed to an emotionally traumatic experience in the course of duty as a 
member of a fire, rescue, or EMS entity and (2) is designated by the fire, rescue, or EMS 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 527/ Page 2 
entity to provide these services. The bill requires that a peer support specialist have 
received evidence-based training in peer support.  
  
Under current law, the disclosure of the contents of any written or oral communication 
regarding a peer support counseling session by a peer support specialist or a peer support 
participant is prohibited. The prohibition does not apply under specified circumstances. A 
peer support specialist must inform the peer support participant in writing of these 
confidentiality provisions before the initial peer support counseling session with a peer 
support participant. The bill replaces the terms counseling session with interaction.  
 
Under current law, by October 1, 2024, the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA), in 
consultation with the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems, must 
develop a report on best practices and professional standards for a peer support counseling 
program, as specified. BHA must make the published report and a list of peer support 
specialist training programs publicly available on its website. Under the bill, the developed 
report on best practices and professional standards must be for an evidence-based peer 
support program and the list published on its website must be for evidence-based peer 
support specialist training programs. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Department of Health advises that the bill alters 
statutory language to accurately reflect the intended purpose of peer support programs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2