START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 517 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 517 
(Cecil County Senators and Senator Augustine) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Port of Deposit State Historical Park - Planning 
 
 
This emergency bill makes several changes to State law related to the establishment of Port 
of Deposit State Historical Park; specifically, the bill (1) changes the date by which the 
Bainbridge Development Corporation (BDC) must transfer specified property to the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for the park – from June 1, 2023, to June 1, 2025; 
(2) requires specified preservation of any property that is transferred but not included in 
the park; (3) authorizes funding for an archaeological survey and soil study for the 
property; (4) modifies the membership of a stakeholder advisory committee that advises 
DNR on the scope and management of the park; and (5) requires DNR to submit a specified 
report to the General Assembly by September 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase by at least $400,000 in FY 2025 
only, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill changes the date – from June 1, 2023, to June 1, 2025 – by which 
BDC must transfer to DNR a portion of the Bainbridge Naval Training Center site 
consisting of not less than 120 acres and not more than 150 acres, including (1) the historic 
Tome School; (2) the Snow Hill archaeological site; and (3) the adjacent wooded 
conservation area. The bill establishes that any property transferred to DNR pursuant to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 517/ Page 2 
this provision that is not included in Port of Deposit State Historical Park must be preserved 
in perpetuity for its archaeological, historical, and cultural significance, in accordance with 
the recommendations of the stakeholder advisory committee established by DNR (pursuant 
to Chapter 39 of 2022) to advise the department on the scope and management of the park. 
 
For fiscal 2025, the bill authorizes the Governor to include in the annual State budget an 
appropriation of at least $400,000 to DNR to conduct a Phase 1 Archaeological Survey and 
Soil Study for the Tome School and Snow Hill sites. 
 
The bill modifies the membership of the stakeholder advisory committee by adding 
specified members and nonvoting ex officio members and repealing a provision that allows 
DNR to include other members on the committee. The bill also requires the department to 
submit a report to the General Assembly, by September 1, 2024, on (1) property that is 
suitable for inclusion in Port of Deposit State Historical Park; (2) the funding needed to 
establish and promote the park; and (3) the appropriate manner of preserving property that 
is not identified for inclusion in the park in perpetuity for its archaeological, historical, and 
cultural significance. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 39 requires DNR to establish the Port of Deposit State Historical 
Park as a specified partnership park that seeks to educate the public about and preserve and 
interpret the lives and experiences of Black Americans both before and after the abolition 
of slavery. The park must be held by the State as a State park under the protection and 
administration of DNR. The park must consist of a portion of the Bainbridge Naval 
Training Center site – measuring not less than 120 acres and not more than 150 acres – that 
BDC transfers to DNR, including (1) the historic Tome School; (2) the Snow Hill 
archaeological site; and (3) the adjacent wooded conservation area. Chapter 39 requires 
BDC to transfer that specified portion of the site to DNR, by June 1, 2023. 
 
Chapter 39 requires DNR to establish a stakeholder advisory committee to advise the 
department on the scope and management of Port of Deposit State Historical Park which, 
to the extent practicable, must reflect the diversity of Cecil County. 
 
Chapter 39 required DNR to submit to the General Assembly, by January 1, 2023, a report 
on (1) property that is suitable for inclusion in Port of Deposit State Historical Park and 
(2) the funding needed to establish and promote the park. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase by at least $400,000 in 
fiscal 2025, pursuant to the bill’s authorization for the Governor to include an appropriation 
to DNR of that amount in the annual State budget for fiscal 2025 to conduct a 
Phase 1 Archaeological Survey and Soil Study for the Tome School and Snow Hill sites. 
However, to the extent some portion, or all, of these expenditures are considered necessary, 
and incurred, even in the absence of the bill (pursuant to the requirement under current law 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 517/ Page 3 
that DNR establish Port of Deposit State Historical Park consisting of the specified portion 
of the Bainbridge Naval Training Center site), the fiscal impact attributable to this bill is 
less significant or even none. The report mentioned above, submitted by DNR pursuant to 
Chapter 39, indicates the need for environmental studies and archaeological surveys, 
among other efforts, to determine the type and level of public access that can be provided 
to the portion of the Bainbridge Naval Training Center site that must be transferred to 
DNR for the park. 
 
The bill’s change to the date by which BDC must transfer to DNR the specified portion of 
the Bainbridge Naval Training Center site is not expected to affect the timing of any State 
expenditures to establish and maintain the Port of Deposit State Historical Park pursuant 
to Chapter 39. 
 
The report required by the bill is assumed to be completed by DNR with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1140 (Delegate Reilly, et al.) - Environment and 
Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Bainbridge Development 
Corporation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3