START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 629

Chapter 629

(Senate Bill 540)

AN ACT concerning

Human Relations – Civil Rights Enforcement – Powers of the Attorney General

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Attorney General to investigate, prosecute, and
remediate certain civil rights violations under certain circumstances and in a certain
manner; authorizing the Attorney General to intervene in certain causes of action
under certain circumstances; establishing certain penalties and authorizing the
Attorney General to obtain certain relief in certain civil actions, conciliation
agreements, and settlement agreements; authorizing the Attorney General to
recover certain investigation and litigation costs in a certain manner; establishing
the Civil Rights Enforcement Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring the
Attorney General to coordinate with the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights in
areas of overlapping jurisdiction; and generally relating to civil rights enforcement.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 20–101(a), (b), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 20–1040 through 20–1048 to be under the new part “Part III. Enforcement
by the Attorney General”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

20–101.

(a) In Subtitles 1 through 11 of this title the following words have the meanings
indicated.

(b) “Commission” means the Commission on Civil Rights.

(d) “Discriminatory act” means an act prohibited under:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 629 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Subtitle 3 of this title (Discrimination in Places of Public
Accommodation);

(2) Subtitle 4 of this title (Discrimination by Persons Licensed or Regulated
by Maryland Department of Labor);

(3) Subtitle 5 of this title (Discrimination in Leasing of Commercial
Property);

(4) Subtitle 6 of this title (Discrimination in Employment);

(5) Subtitle 7 of this title (Discrimination in Housing); or

(6) Subtitle 8 of this title (Aiding, Abetting, or Attempting Discriminatory
Act; Obstructing Compliance).

20–1038. RESERVED.

20–1039. RESERVED.

PART III. ENFORCEMENT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

20–1040.

(A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ATTORNEY GENERAL” MEANS THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

(C) (1) “CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION” MEANS AN ACT OF DISCRIMINATION
PROHIBITED UNDER THE U.S. CONSTITUTION, THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION, OR
STATE OR FEDERAL LAW.

(2) “CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION” INCLUDES A DISCRIMINATORY ACT AS
DEFINED IN § 20–101 OF THIS TITLE.

20–1041.

(A) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY INVESTIGATE, PROSECUTE, AND
REMEDIATE, ON BEHALF OF THE RESIDENTS OF THE STATE, ANY CONDUCT THAT
CONSTITUTES A CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 629

(B) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY NOT BRING A CIVIL RIGHTS ACTION
UNDER THIS PART:

(1) ON BEHALF OF AN INDIVIDUAL; OR

(2) AGAINST A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION;

(3) AGAINST ANY UNIT OF STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHED BY LAW; OR

(4) AGAINST ANY EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF AN ENTITY IDENTIFIED IN
ITEM (2) OR (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION WHO IS ACTING UNDER THE COLOR OF LAW.

(C) NOTHING IN THIS PART MAY BE INTERPRETED TO IMPAIR THE RIGHTS
AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION UNDER SUBTITLES 1 THROUGH 11 OF THIS
TITLE.

20–1042.

(A) IF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL HAS REASONABLE CAUSE TO BELIEVE
THAT A PERSON IS ENGAGED IN DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED BY THE U.S.
CONSTITUTION, THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION, OR STATE OR FEDERAL LAW, THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY COMMENCE A CIVIL ACTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
PART.

(B) THE CIVIL ACTION SHALL BE INSTITUTED IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR
THE COUNTY WHERE:

(1) THE ALLEGED VIOLATOR RESIDES OR HAS A PRINCIPAL PLACE OF
BUSINESS; OR

(2) THE ALLEGED VIOLATION OCCURRED.

20–1043.

(A) TO OBTAIN RELIEF WITH RESPECT TO AN ALLEGED CIVIL RIGHTS
VIOLATION, AN ACTION SHALL BE COMMENCED NOT LATER THAN 3 YEARS AFTER
THE DISCOVERY, OCCURRENCE, OR TERMINATION, WHICHEVER OCCURS LAST, OF
THE ALLEGED CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION.

(B) TO OBTAIN RELIEF WITH RESPECT TO AN ALLEGED BREACH OF A
CONCILIATION OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO UNDER THIS TITLE, AN
ACTION SHALL BE COMMENCED NOT LATER THAN 3 YEARS AFTER THE DISCOVERY,
OCCURRENCE, OR TERMINATION OF THE ALLEGED BREACH.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 629 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

20–1044.

(A) BEFORE INITIATING A CIVIL ACTION, THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL SHALL CONDUCT A PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION TO DETERMINE
WHETHER THERE IS REASONABLE CAUSE TO BELIEVE THAT ANY PERSON
COMMITTED A CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION.

(B) DURING ANY EXAMINATION, INVESTIGATION, OR HEARING, THE OFFICE
OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY:

(1) SUBPOENA WITNESSES;

(2) ADMINISTER OATHS;

(3) EXAMINE INDIVIDUALS UNDER OATH; AND

(4) COMPEL PRODUCTION OF RECORDS, BOOKS, PAPERS,
CONTRACTS, AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.

(C) INFORMATION UNLESS OBTAINED BY A METHOD INDEPENDENT OF A
SUBPOENA, INFORMATION OBTAINED UNDER A SUBPOENA DESCRIBED UNDER THIS
SECTION IS NOT ADMISSIBLE IN A LATER CRIMINAL PROCEEDING AGAINST THE
PERSON WHO PROVIDES THE EVIDENCE.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY COMMENCE A CIVIL ACTION UNDER THIS PART.

(2) IF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OBTAINS A CONCILIATION OR
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT UNDER THIS PART, NO ACTION MAY BE FILED UNDER
THIS PART WITH RESPECT TO THE ALLEGED CONDUCT THAT FORMS THE BASIS FOR
THE COMPLAINT COVERED BY THE AGREEMENT EXCEPT FOR THE PURPOSE OF
ENFORCING THE TERMS OF THE AGREEMENT.

(E) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY INTERVENE IN A CIVIL ACTION
CONCERNING AN ALLEGED CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION, IF:

(1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL CERTIFIES THAT THE CASE IS OF
GENERAL IMPORTANCE; AND

(2) TIMELY APPLICATION IS MADE.

20–1045.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 629

(A) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY SEEK AN INJUNCTION TO PROHIBIT A
PERSON THAT HAS ENGAGED OR IS ENGAGING IN A CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION, FROM
CONTINUING OR ENGAGING IN THE VIOLATION.

(B) IN A REQUEST FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF BROUGHT UNDER THIS
SECTION, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL IS NOT REQUIRED TO:

(1) POST BOND;

(2) ALLEGE OR PROVE THAT AN ADEQUATE REMEDY AT LAW DOES
NOT EXIST; OR

(3) ALLEGE OR PROVE THAT SUBSTANTIAL OR IRREPARABLE DAMAGE
WOULD RESULT FROM ANY CONDUCT ALLEGED.

(C) THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL SERVE NOTICE OF
THE GENERAL RELIEF SOUGHT ON THE ALLEGED VIOLATOR AT LEAST 7 DAYS
BEFORE THE ACTION FOR AN INJUNCTION IS FILED.

(D) THE COURT MAY ENTER ANY ORDER OF JUDGMENT NECESSARY TO:

(1) PREVENT THE USE BY A PERSON OF ANY PROHIBITED PRACTICE;

(2) RESTORE TO A PERSON ANY MONEY, REAL PROPERTY, OR
PERSONAL PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY MEANS OF ANY PROHIBITED PRACTICE; OR

(3) APPOINT A RECEIVER TO PREVENT WILLFUL VIOLATION OF THIS
TITLE.

20–1046.

(A) IN ANY CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS PART, OR ANY
CONCILIATION OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO UNDER THIS PART,
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY OBTAIN AS A REMEDY EQUITABLE RELIEF,
INCLUDING:

(1) A PERMANENT INJUNCTION;

(2) A PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION;

(3) A TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDER; OR

(4) ANY OTHER ORDER, INCLUDING:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 629 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) AN ORDER ENJOINING THE DEFENDANT FROM ENGAGING IN
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATIONS; OR

(II) AN ORDER REQUIRING ANY APPROPRIATE ACTION.

(B) (1) IN ANY CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS PART, OR ANY
CONCILIATION OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO UNDER THIS PART,
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY OBTAIN A CIVIL PENALTY TO VINDICATE THE PUBLIC
INTEREST.

(2) A CIVIL PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE IN
AN AMOUNT NOT EXCEEDING:

(I) $10,000 FOR A FIRST VIOLATION; OR

(II) $25,000 FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION;

(3) THE FINES PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) ARE CIVIL PENALTIES AND ARE RECOVERABLE BY THE
STATE IN A CIVIL ACTION; AND

(II) SHALL BE DEPOSITED IN THE CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT
FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 20–1047 OF THIS PART.

(C) IN ANY CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS PART, OR ANY
CONCILIATION OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO UNDER THIS PART,
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY OBTAIN RESTITUTION, INCLUDING A REQUIREMENT
THAT THE VIOLATOR OR ALLEGED VIOLATOR:

(1) REIMBURSE THE COSTS OF THE INVESTIGATION AND LITIGATION
TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE COMMISSION;

(2) MAKE RESTITUTION TO ANY AGGRIEVED PERSON OF MONEY,
PROPERTY, OR ANY OTHER THING RECEIVED FROM THE AGGRIEVED PERSON IN
CONNECTION WITH A VIOLATION OR AN ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE;

(3) PAY ECONOMIC DAMAGES TO AN AGGRIEVED PERSON; OR

(4) POST A PERFORMANCE BOND OR OTHER SECURITY.

20–1047.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 629

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT
FUND.

(B) THERE IS A CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR:

(1) CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL AND THE COMMISSION; AND

(2) EDUCATION AND OUTREACH IN THE COMMUNITY RELATING TO
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATIONS.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) CIVIL PENALTIES DEPOSITED INTO THE FUND UNDER § 20–1046
OF THIS PART;

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND; AND

(3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY:

(1) TO REIMBURSE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE COMMISSION
FOR COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH INVESTIGATING AND PROSECUTING CIVIL RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS; AND

(2) EDUCATION AND OUTREACH IN THE COMMUNITY RELATING TO
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATIONS.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO THE
GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 629 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(I) MONEY OF THE FUND IS NOT SUBJECT TO TRANSFER BY BUDGET
AMENDMENT.

(J) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE ENFORCEMENT
ACTIVITIES OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE COMMISSION IS SUPPLEMENTAL
TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT WOULD
OTHERWISE BE APPROPRIATED FOR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR THE
COMMISSION.

20–1048.

(A) IN AREAS OF OVERLAPPING JURISDICTION, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
AND THE COMMISSION SHALL COORDINATE AND MAKE REFERRALS TO MINIMIZE
AND ELIMINATE DUPLICATION OF EFFORT AND PROMOTE COLLABORATION.

(B) (1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, IN COORDINATION WITH THE
COMMISSION, SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.

(2) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PUBLISH PROPOSED
REGULATIONS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION FOR NOTICE AND COMMENT ON OR BEFORE
JULY 1, 2024.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8