START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 691 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 691 
(Senator King) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Home Amenity Rentals - Sales and Use Tax Imposed and Local Tax Authorized 
 
 
This bill imposes the State sales and use tax on specified home amenity rentals; and 
authorizes counties and municipalities to impose a home amenity rental tax. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and special fund revenues increase by a potentially significant 
amount beginning in FY 2025 depending on the value of home amenity rentals subject to 
the State sales and use tax. General fund expenditures may increase for administrative costs 
to implement the sales and use tax on home amenity rentals. 
  
Local Effect:  County and municipal revenues increase beginning in FY 2025 to the extent 
home amenity rental taxes are imposed. Local expenditures may increase for administrative 
costs to implement a new tax. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses that rent home amenities 
will be responsible for collecting and remitting State and local taxes. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The bill alters the definition of taxable price under the State sales and use tax to include 
the full amount of consideration paid by a buyer for the sale or use of a home amenity 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 691/ Page 2 
rental facilitated by a home amenity rental intermediary or home amenity rental platform. 
Taxable price does not include a commission paid by a home amenity rental provider to a 
person after facilitating the sale or use of a home amenity rental. In addition, the taxable 
price does not include any tax that is remitted to a taxing authority. 
 
County Home Amenity Rental Tax 
 
The bill authorizes counties to impose, by resolution, a home amenity rental tax. The bill 
specifies that in Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary’s counties, the county must hold a public 
hearing before imposing a home amenity rental tax. The hearing must be advertised 
twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 10 days before the hearing 
and may not be part of the annual budget hearing. 
 
The county home amenity rental tax rate must be set by the county through a resolution; 
however, in certain counties the tax rate cannot exceed a certain limit, as shown in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
Counties may adopt regulations to provide for the orderly, systematic, and thorough 
administration of the home amenity rental tax that are consistent with provisions of the bill 
and conform to the applicable provisions and regulations for the sales and use tax under 
Title 11 of the Tax – General Article. 
 
Municipal Home Amenity Rental Tax 
 
The bill authorizes municipalities to impose, by ordinance or resolution, a home amenity 
rental tax. A municipality is prohibited from imposing a home amenity rental tax if the 
municipality is located in a county that does not impose a home amenity rental tax. 
A municipal home amenity rental tax may not exceed 1%. 
 
A municipality that imposes a home amenity rental tax may provide for the administration 
and collection of the tax. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 691/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
County Home Amenity Rental Tax Rates 
 
County 
Tax Rate 
Allegany 
up to 4%* 
Anne Arundel 
set by resolution 
Baltimore City 
set by resolution 
Baltimore 
set by resolution 
Calvert 
up to 2.5% 
Caroline 
up to 2.5%* 
Carroll 
up to 2.5% 
Cecil 
up to 1.5% 
Charles 
up to 2.5%* 
Dorchester 
up to 2.5% 
Frederick 
up to 2.5% 
Garrett 
up to 4% 
Harford 
set by resolution 
Howard 
set by resolution 
Kent 
up to 2.5%* 
Montgomery 
set by resolution 
Prince George’s 
set by resolution 
Queen Anne’s 
up to 2.5%* 
St. Mary’s 
up to 2.5% 
Somerset 
up to 2.5% 
Talbot 
up to 2% 
Washington 
3% 
Wicomico 
up to 3% 
Worcester 
up to 2.5%* 
 
*With unanimous consent of county commissioners 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 691/ Page 4 
Definitions 
 
 
home amenity – any portion, whether indoors or outdoors, of a residential property, 
excluding bedrooms or any portion of the property intended for sleeping quarters, 
that is occupied by the hour and for not more than 15 hours consecutively; 
 
home amenity rental – the temporary use in exchange for consideration of a home 
amenity; 
 
home amenity rental intermediary – a person, other than a home amenity rental 
provider, who facilitates the sale or use of a home amenity and charges a buyer the 
taxable price for the home amenity rental. A person is considered to facilitate the 
sale or use of a home amenity if the person brokers, coordinates, or in any other way 
arranges for the sale or use of a home amenity by a buyer; 
 
home amenity rental platform – an Internet-based digital entity that advertises the 
availability of home amenities and receives compensation for facilitating 
reservations or processing booking transactions on behalf of the owner, operator, or 
manager of a home amenity; 
 
home amenity rental charge – a charge for a home amenity rental, excluding any 
charge for services; and 
 
home amenity rental tax – the tax on a home amenity rental charge. 
 
Current Law:  The State general sales and use tax rate is 6%. The sales and use tax is 
imposed on (1) the purchase of goods, including certain digital products and codes, sold in 
Maryland; (2) the use, storage, or consumption in Maryland of tangible personal property 
purchased outside the State; (3) certain services defined as taxable services under State 
law; and (4) remote sales of goods or taxable services for delivery in Maryland by 
out-of-state vendors. Vendors who are engaged in business in the State are required to 
collect the tax from purchasers. 
 
The taxable price of goods subject to tax is defined by statute to include any consideration 
of any kind for a sale, including the value of a trade-in. Exclusions are provided for 
separately stated charges for installation, professional services, finance charges, delivery 
charges, certain taxes, certain mandatory gratuities for serving food or beverages, certain 
service charges in connection with the rental of video and audio equipment, or 
reimbursement of certain expenses in connection with providing a taxable detective 
service, and for the value of certain used parts on sales of remanufactured truck parts. 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $6.2 billion in fiscal 2023 and 2024, according to the 
December 2022 revenue forecast. Exhibit 2 shows the sales and use tax rates in 
surrounding states and the District of Columbia. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 691/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 2 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
*An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, and 
Patrick counties; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in localities in the Historic Triangle. The sales and use tax rate 
for food and personal hygiene products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) the following percentage of the 
remaining sales and use tax revenues:   
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 691/ Page 6 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out-of-state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes. 
 
County Sales and Service Taxes 
 
Currently, most counties and Baltimore City impose one or more local sales and service 
taxes. Hotel and motel rentals and utilities are typical examples of services subject to these 
taxes. Counties, municipalities, and special taxing districts are generally limited to 
imposing sales and use taxes on fuels, utilities, space rentals, controlled dangerous 
substances, and, in code counties only and to a limited extent, on food and beverages in a 
resort area. For example, Worcester County, a code county, imposes a 0.5% food and 
beverage tax within the Town of Ocean City. A county must have specific authorization 
from the General Assembly to impose these taxes. The authorizations in some cases allow 
for exemptions to be granted by the counties, restrict the use of the revenue collected, set 
a limit on the tax rate, or require certain procedures such as a public hearing before 
imposing a tax. 
 
These taxes generally are a percentage of the item’s selling or rental price, or, in the case 
of fuels and utilities, a dollar amount per gallon, kilowatt hour, etc. The tax rate may be set 
by State statute or by the county, depending upon the type of tax and the county in which 
it is imposed. Typically, these taxes are collected by the vendor and remitted directly to the 
local governments. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund and special fund revenues increase by a potentially 
significant amount beginning in fiscal 2025. The amount of the revenue increase depends 
on the number of home amenity rentals that occur each year and the value of the home 
amenity rentals that are subject to the State sales and use tax, which cannot be reliably 
estimated. As a point of reference, total sales and use tax revenues increase by $6,000 for 
each $100,000 of taxable home amenity rentals. General fund expenditures may increase 
for administrative costs to implement the sales and use tax on home amenity rentals. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County and municipal revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2025 to 
the extent home amenity rental taxes are imposed. The amount of the revenue increase will 
vary by jurisdiction and will depend on the number of home amenity rentals that occur 
each year, the value of home amenity rentals subject to local taxes, and the local tax rates 
imposed. Local expenditures may increase for administrative costs associated with 
implementing and administering a new home amenity rental tax. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 691/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1064 (Delegate Vogel) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Charles, Garrett, and Howard counties; 
City of Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7