START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 694 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 694 
(Senator Jennings) 
Budget and Taxation 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of Natural Resources' Real Property - Exchange With Private Real 
Property 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) – subject to certain 
requirements – to dispose of specified State-owned real property of less than five acres in 
size, in exchange for privately owned real property, without complying with procedures in 
current law governing excess real property and the sale, transfer, grant, or exchange of 
State-owned real property. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is authorizing in nature and, thus, has no direct effect on State 
operations or finances. Presumably, the bill’s authorization would only be used if the State 
benefits from the exchange. Because exchanges covered by the bill bypass current statutory 
requirements for the disposition of State property, the bill may have an operational effect 
on DNR, the Board of Public Works (BPW), and the Maryland Department of Planning 
(MDP). 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes DNR to dispose of real property owned by the State 
for the use and benefit of the department, in exchange for privately owned real property, 
without complying with procedures in current law governing excess real property and the 
sale, transfer, grant, or exchange of State-owned real property, if (1) the privately owned 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 694/ Page 2 
real property and the State-owned real property are adjacent; (2) the real property owned 
by the State does not exceed five acres in size; and (3) the owner of the privately owned 
real property requesting the exchange pays all costs associated with the exchange.  
 
Prior to such a property exchange, DNR must: 
 
 
notify in writing by electronic mail or first-class mail (1) owners of property 
adjacent to the privately owned real property subject to the exchange; (2) the 
General Assembly members who represent the legislative district in which the real 
property exchange is located; and (3) the governing body of the county in which the 
real property exchange is located; and 
 
refer the proposed exchange to BPW for final disposition. 
 
Current Law:  Except for real property acquired by gift, before DNR acquires any real 
property from a private owner, it must obtain two independent appraisals of the property. 
Contracts for the acquisition of property by DNR must be approved and executed by BPW, 
following procedures specified in statute. DNR may exchange land that it owns and 
manages for land that it does not own; any such exchange must be consistent with existing 
statutory procedures for the disposal of real property (described below). 
 
Excess Real Property 
 
Each unit of State government must notify MDP in writing of any real property that is in 
excess of the needs of the unit, or any substantial change to any real property owned by the 
State. MDP must (1) study the proper disposition of the property; (2) determine whether 
any local government or unit of the State government is interested in the property; and 
(3) make an appropriate recommendation to the using unit of the State government and to 
BPW. 
 
For real property acquired under specified provisions of the Natural Resources Article of 
the Maryland Code, and other similar, specified public lands, when a unit notifies MDP, 
the unit must include with the notification specified information relating to the property, 
and the information must be made available by the unit or MDP upon request. After 
MDP receives notice from a unit of State government, among other things, MDP must 
notify (1) specified committees of the General Assembly; (2) the General Assembly 
members who represent the legislative district in which the property is located; and 
(3) owners of property adjacent to the property declared excess, as specified. 
 
Sale, Transfer, Grant, or Exchange of State-owned Real Property 
 
Any real property of the State may be sold, leased, transferred, exchanged, granted, or 
otherwise disposed of. With respect to the sale, transfer, grant, or exchange of real property 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 694/ Page 3 
acquired under specified provisions of the Natural Resources Article (and other similar, 
specified public lands), and State-owned real property that has an appraised value of more 
than $100,000, with some exceptions, BPW may not approve the disposition of the 
property until (1) the Department of General Services or DNR has submitted 
two independent appraisals and (2) specified information about the property has been 
shared with the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Appropriations 
Committee, and, if the land meets both criteria above of being specified real property 
acquired under the Natural Resources Article (and other similar, specified public lands) 
and having an appraised value of more than $100,000, the Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC). LPC has 45 days to (1) approve the disposition of real property or 
(2) refer the proposed disposition to the full General Assembly. If LPC refers the 
disposition to the full General Assembly, BPW may not approve the disposition unless it 
is approved by the passage of legislation during the next legislative session. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 974 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; Board of Public Works; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - May 2, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3