START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 641 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 641 
(Senator Jackson) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System – City of Bowie Police Department – 
Transfers and Purchases of Service 
 
 
This bill allows a member of the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS) 
employed by the City of Bowie who meets specified criteria to (1) request a transfer of 
service credit earned during employment with a prior employer to LEOPS and (2) purchase 
service credit in LEOPS for which the member is not otherwise entitled. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2023, and terminates December 31, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only participating governmental units (PGUs). 
  
Local Effect:  As the bill is expected to affect only a limited number of individuals (as 
discussed below), it is expected to result in only a minimal increase in PGU pension 
liabilities and likely no discernible effect on PGU employer contributions in LEOPS. No 
effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to an individual who (1) was hired as an employee of the 
City of Bowie Police Department on or after January 1, 2007, and not later than  
December 31, 2015, and (2) by December 31, 2023, submits documentation verifying:   
 
 
the date the individual ceased employment with a prior employer; 
 
the date the individual began employment with the City of Bowie Police 
Department; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 641/ Page 2 
 
that the City of Bowie Police Department did not provide accurate and complete 
information regarding eligibility to transfer service credit under State pension law; 
and 
 
acknowledgement that the City of Bowie Police Department affirms that it failed to 
provide accurate and complete information, as specified. 
 
Transfer of Service Credit 
 
An individual described above who (1) did not incur a break in service prior to employment 
with the City of Bowie Police Department and (2) has not withdrawn member contributions 
from the prior employer’s system may request a transfer of creditable service to LEOPS on 
a form provided by the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS). In general, the 
transfer must be in accordance with provisions of Title 37 of the State Personnel and 
Pensions Article, except that the transfer is not subject to provisions that (1) require the 
transfer to occur within one year of becoming a member of a State system and (2) limit 
benefits payable on the transferred service if the individual retires within five years of the 
transfer. 
 
Purchase of Service Credit 
 
An individual described above who (1) has not incurred a break in service prior to 
employment with the City of Bowie Police Department and (2) has withdrawn the 
individual’s member contributions from the prior employer’s retirement system may 
purchase service credit by completing a claim for service on a form provided by SRPS. 
The individual must pay the SRPS Board of Trustees a single payment consisting of the 
member contributions the member would have made had the member earned the prior 
service in LEOPS, plus regular interest. 
 
Current Law:  The City of Bowie Police Department is a PGU in LEOPS. 
 
Transfer of Service Credit 
 
In general, service credit is transferrable between local and State retirement and pension 
systems, subject to the provisions of Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, 
which governs such transfers. Specifically, § 37-203.1 governs transfers from a local 
contributory system to a State contributory pension system, including LEOPS. Members 
requesting a transfer from a local contributory system to LEOPS must do so within one year 
of becoming a member of LEOPS on a form provided by SRPS (the bill waives this 
requirement). They must also deposit into the LEOPS annuity fund all member 
contributions that would have been paid for service in the local contributory system after  
June 30, 2000, including regular interest of 5% per year on those contributions. If the 
contributions to the local contributory system for that service exceed the amount payable 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 641/ Page 3 
to LEOPS, the local system must refund the excess amount on request. If an individual 
retires within five years after transferring to LEOPS, the benefits payable for the transferred 
service may not be greater than the benefits that would have been payable by the previous 
system if the individual had remained in that system (the bill waives this provision). 
 
Purchase of Service Credit 
 
Members of LEOPS may not purchase service credit for past service in a local pension 
plan. Members of LEOPS may purchase service only for past service in:  
 
 
the Employees’ Pension System (EPS); 
 
specified positions for which membership in EPS is optional; or 
 
LEOPS. 
 
The cost of purchasing credit in LEOPS varies according to the type of past service being 
purchased. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The State Retirement Agency advises that it is aware of 
nine individuals who are employed by the City of Bowie Police Department and currently 
members of LEOPS. All nine individuals were previously employed by local governments 
and either (1) did not transfer their service credit to LEOPS within one year of joining 
LEOPS or (2) withdrew their member contributions from their previous plan and are not 
eligible to purchase credit for that service. 
 
As a result, the bill increases PGU pension liabilities in LEOPS by (1) allowing some or 
all affected members to transfer service credit after the deadline for doing so has passed; 
(2) requiring LEOPS to pay full benefits to affected members who retire within five years 
of transferring their service credit; and (3) allowing some or all affected members to 
purchase service credit to which they are not otherwise entitled (and only paying the 
member cost instead of the full cost). PGU liabilities are pooled for each plan, so liabilities 
increase for all PGUs who participate in LEOPS. 
 
The bill is anticipated to affect only a limited number of individuals. Moreover, although 
the bill allows transfers and purchases of service credit that would not otherwise be 
allowed, the terms of those transfers and purchases are generally consistent with current 
law. For these reasons, the bill is expected to have only a minimal effect on PGU liabilities 
for LEOPS and likely no discernible effect on PGU employer contributions. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 641/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4