START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 650 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 650 
(Senator Elfreth, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Public Safety - State Disaster Recovery Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the State Disaster Recovery Fund administered by the Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management (MDEM). The bill also expands the authorized 
uses of the Catastrophic Event Account administered by the Department of Budget and 
Management (DBM) to enable units of local government to receive funding directly from 
the account; the bill also makes corresponding changes to the established purpose of the 
account. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million in FY 2024 to capitalize 
the fund; special fund revenues increase correspondingly. Special fund expenditures 
increase beginning in FY 2024 for administrative costs (which are incurred annually) and 
disbursements (which occur depending on the occurrence of qualifying events). While 
future disbursements from the fund cannot be predicted, general fund expenditures increase 
as needed in future years for ongoing fund replenishments; special fund revenues to the 
new fund increase correspondingly. Federal fund revenues increase to the extent federal 
reimbursements are provided. Altering the Catastrophic Event Account is not anticipated 
to materially affect State finances, as discussed below.   
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent local governments 
request and receive disaster recovery assistance from the fund. The bill’s changes regarding 
the Catastrophic Event Account are not anticipated to materially affect local government 
finances, as discussed below.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 650/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The stated purpose of the State Disaster Recovery Fund is to provide:  
 
 
disaster recovery assistance to individuals and families when a unit of local 
government has submitted a request for a disaster declaration but a federal 
declaration disaster is not received; 
 
disaster recovery assistance to units of local government of the State for the repair, 
restoration, reconstruction, or replacement of a public facility damaged or destroyed 
when a federal disaster declaration is not received;  
 
low-interest or no-interest loans to businesses and nonprofits for disaster recovery 
assistance when a federal disaster declaration is not received;  
 
disaster-related assistance for unmet needs of individuals and families following a 
federal disaster declaration;  
 
disaster-related assistance for unmet needs of individuals and families who have 
been denied federal assistance but otherwise meet criteria established for the fund; 
and 
 
matching funds for assistance to individuals and State and local governmental units 
after a federal disaster declaration. 
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund and must be available in perpetuity for the purpose 
of providing disaster recovery assistance in accordance with the bill’s provisions. The fund 
may only be used if (1) the Governor has declared a state of emergency or (2) a local 
organization for emergency management requests assistance from the fund. However, a 
portion of the fund may be used to administer the fund, including providing disaster case 
management resources. 
 
The fund is not intended to duplicate or replicate federal disaster assistance, and the fund 
may not be used for any other purpose than those described above. 
 
The Governor may include in the annual budget bill an appropriation to the fund. The fund 
must consist of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (2) repayments of 
principal and interest from loans made from the fund; (3) reimbursements from the federal 
government or other legal entities for disaster recovery assistance expenditures made from 
the fund; (4) interest earnings of the fund; and (5) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
Any funds expended from the fund are supplemental to and are not intended to take the 
place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated to eligible recipients from the fund 
for any other purpose.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 650/ Page 3 
MDEM must (1) establish eligibility criteria, policies, and procedures for the 
administration of the fund while considering existing State disaster recovery programs and 
federal disaster relief and recovery requirements and (2) consult with appropriate State 
agencies and local organizations for emergency management in the development of 
eligibility criteria, policies, and procedures for administration of the fund. 
 
MDEM may establish (1) regulations related to the administration of the fund; (2) accounts 
and sub-accounts within the fund to effectuate the purposes of the bill; and (3) formal 
advisory bodies to advise on the administration of the fund. 
 
By December 31, 2023, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Emergency Management 
must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the use of the fund for the 
previous fiscal year. The report must include specified information, including, among other 
things, (1) the number of state of emergency declarations issued by the Governor; (2) the 
number of local state of emergency and local disaster declarations submitted to the 
Secretary; (3) a summary of the damage assessment data related to each declaration; (4) the 
amount of funding distributed from the fund; and (5) a summary of any federal disaster 
assistance received. 
 
“Local disaster declaration” means a formal request for State disaster relief and recovery 
assistance made as a result of an emergency by the senior elected official through the local 
organization for emergency management. 
 
Current Law: 
 
States of Emergency 
 
Title 14, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article requires the Governor to declare a state of 
emergency by executive order or proclamation if the Governor finds that an emergency has 
developed or is impending due to any cause. The state of emergency continues until the 
Governor (1) finds that the threat or danger has passed or the emergency has been dealt 
with to the extent that emergency conditions no longer exist and (2) terminates the state of 
emergency by executive order or proclamation. A state of emergency may not continue for 
longer than 30 days unless renewed by the Governor. The General Assembly may terminate 
a state of emergency at any time by joint resolution. 
 
The Secretary of Emergency Management is responsible for coordinating the activities of 
State agencies and affected political subdivisions in all actions that serve to prevent or 
alleviate the ill effects of the imminent or actual emergency. An executive order or 
proclamation that declares a state of emergency activates the emergency response and 
recovery aspects of State and local emergency plans, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 650/ Page 4 
Only the principal executive officer of a political subdivision may declare a local state of 
emergency. Except with the consent of the local governing body, a local state of emergency 
may not continue or be renewed for longer than 30 days. Declaration of a local state of 
emergency activates the response and recovery aspects of any applicable local state of 
emergency plan and authorizes the provision of aid and assistance under the applicable 
plan. 
 
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 
 
The federal Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 
(Stafford Act) is the process that brings federal assistance to state and local governments 
in response to natural disasters. After the governor of a state or tribal chief executive 
request that the President of the United States declare an emergency or major disaster, the 
President may issue declarations that provides federal assistance in response to the incident. 
However, the governor or tribal chief executive must demonstrate that they are unable to 
effectively respond to the incident without federal assistance. After the President declares 
an emergency or major disaster, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) can 
provide federal assistance to the affected jurisdiction. FEMA recommends a major disaster 
be declared only if assessments of public and nonprofit infrastructure damages in the state 
meet or exceed specified per capita levels. The damage assessments must also exceed 
$1.0 million across the state or territory, or $250,000 across a tribe. 
 
Individuals and Households Programs and Public Assistance Program 
 
Among other programs, FEMA administers the Individuals and Households Program (IHP) 
and the Public Assistance Program (PA). IHP provides financial and direct services to 
eligible individuals and households affected by disasters who have uninsured or 
underinsured necessary expenses and serious needs. IHP is intended to meet basic needs 
and supplement disaster recovery efforts. Assistance may include funds for temporary 
housing while individuals are unable to live in their homes, temporary housing units, funds 
to support the repair or replacement of owner-occupied homes, funds for other uninsured 
or under-insured disaster-caused expenses, and funds for hazard mitigation assistance. 
 
PA provides supplemental federal grant assistance to eligible government entities and 
private nonprofit organizations. Eligible PA projects include debris removal, emergency 
protective measures, and the restoration of disaster-damaged, publicly owned facilities. 
However, a private nonprofit organization must demonstrate that the facility provides a 
critical service or provides a noncritical but essential government service and is open to the 
general public. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 650/ Page 5 
Workgroup to Study the Establishment of a State Disaster Relief Fund 
 
Chapters 490 and 491 of 2022, among other things, established the Workgroup to Study 
the Establishment of a State Disaster Relief Fund. The workgroup was required to study 
and report its recommendations regarding the efficacy and sustainability of existing 
emergency fund sources and the potential establishment of a State Disaster Relief Fund. 
The workgroup submitted its findings to the Governor and the General Assembly on  
December 29, 2022, and the report may be viewed here. One of the workgroup’s 
recommendations is the establishment of a State disaster relief fund within MDEM. 
 
Resilient Maryland Revolving Loan Fund 
 
Chapter 644 of 2021 established the Resilient Maryland Revolving Loan Fund within 
MDEM. The revolving loan fund is a special, nonlapsing fund with the stated purpose of 
providing loans for resilience projects that address mitigation of all hazards, including 
natural disasters. MDEM must prioritize making loans to projects it determines to have the 
greatest impact on eliminating hazards. The fund may be used for the administration and 
management of the fund, in addition to providing low- or no-interest loans to local 
governments and nonprofit organizations for resilience projects. Local governments 
providing loans to private property owners are authorized to establish a specified graduated 
loan forgiveness program for loans issued to private property owners. As of March 2023, 
the fund contains $25.0 million in pay-as-you-go general funds. The fiscal 2024 budget 
does not include any additional funding for the fund.  
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
Chapters 287 and 288 of 2021 established MDEM as a principal department of the 
Executive Branch of State government and as the successor to the Maryland Emergency 
Management Agency. MDEM is responsible for coordinating the State response in any 
major emergency or disaster. This includes supporting local governments as needed or 
requested and coordinating assistance with FEMA and other federal partners. MDEM 
manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad range of initiatives leading to 
enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of natural and man-made disasters 
that could threaten the State’s citizens. 
 
Political subdivisions of the State (i.e., local governments) are required to (1) establish 
local organizations for emergency management in accordance with the State’s emergency 
management plan and program and (2) participate in federal programs for emergency 
management. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 650/ Page 6 
Catastrophic Event Account 
 
The Catastrophic Event Account, which is administered by DBM, was established in 1990 
to enable the State to respond quickly to a natural disaster or catastrophe that could not be 
addressed within existing State appropriations. Chapters 1 and 2 of 2019, among other 
things, expanded the account so that it may be used in the event of a full or partial federal 
government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
Funds appropriated to the Catastrophic Event Account (1) may not be used to offset 
operating deficiencies in regular programs of State government but (2) as noted above, may 
be expended to assist a unit of State government in funding costs in connection with a 
natural disaster, a catastrophic situation, or a full or partial federal government shutdown 
due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
In the event of a natural disaster or catastrophe, prior to transferring funds by budget 
amendment to the appropriate unit of State government, the Governor must notify the 
Legislative Policy Committee (LPC) of the proposed amendment and allow the committee 
to review and approve the proposed amendment. LPC has 15 days to review and comment. 
If the federal government is in a full or partial shutdown, after a two-day review and 
comment period by LPC, the Governor may transfer funds by budget amendment from the 
account to the Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund. 
 
The account consists of direct appropriations in the budget bill. Investment earnings are 
credited to the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day Fund).  
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Capitalizing the State Disaster Recovery Fund and Associated Special Fund Finances 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2024 to capitalize the new 
fund; this level of funding is needed to ensure the viability of the fund and to provide 
meaningful disaster recovery assistance to eligible applicants. Special fund revenues to the 
fund increase correspondingly in fiscal 2024 and, in future years, by an amount 
corresponding to any further appropriations made to the fund. Due to the unpredictable 
nature of the authorized uses of the fund, overall special fund expenditures in any given 
year cannot be predicted.  
 
Although the pace at which funds will be spent from the State Disaster Recovery Fund is 
unknown, it is assumed that the fund must be replenished so that the fund balance is at least 
$10.0 million at the start of each fiscal year. To the extent the fund receives reimbursements 
from the federal government (or other specified entities) or loan repayments, the need for 
general funds to capitalize the fund in some years may be reduced. Even if no disaster 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 650/ Page 7 
assistance is provided from the fund in a given year, general fund expenditures increase 
each year to replenish the fund to cover MDEM’s costs to administer the fund (discussed 
below); special fund revenues and expenditures increase accordingly.  
 
Administrative Costs 
 
The bill explicitly authorizes a portion of the fund to be used for administration. Thus, 
special fund administrative expenditures increase by at least $344,442 in fiscal 2024, 
which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects MDEM’s minimum 
administrative expenses and includes the cost to hire one program manager, one fiscal 
administrator, one assistance specialist, and one half-time fiscal services officer. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including 
an ongoing public outreach campaign. 
 
Positions 
3.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$307,703 
Public Outreach Campaign 
7,500 
Operating Expenses 
29,239 
Minimum FY 2024 MDEM Admin. Exp. 
$344,442 
 
Future year administrative expenditures – which range from a minimum of $413,773 in 
fiscal 2025 to a minimum of $473,915 by fiscal 2028 – reflect full salaries with annual 
increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. To the extent MDEM requires additional staff, administrative expenditures 
increase further.  
 
Altering the Catastrophic Event Account 
 
As local governments can receive funding from the Catastrophic Event Account under 
current law (albeit indirectly, through funding provided by State entities), the bill’s changes 
to the account are not anticipated to affect the overall level of funding needed for the 
account in any given year. The estimated fiscal 2024 beginning balance of the Catastrophic 
Event Account is approximately $10.1 million.  
 
DBM can implement the bill’s changes regarding the account with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase to the extent local governments request and 
receive disaster recovery assistance from the fund; local expenditures increase 
correspondingly as local governments spend the assistance.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 650/ Page 8 
It is assumed that local emergency management agencies can consult with MDEM in the 
development of eligibility criteria, policies, and procedures for administration of the fund 
using existing resources. 
 
As previously stated, local governments can already receive funding from the Catastrophic 
Event Account under current law (though indirectly, through funding provided by State 
entities). Therefore, the bill’s changes regarding the account are not anticipated to 
materially affect local government finances.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that receives a low-interest or no-interest loan 
from the fund due to a State or local disaster benefits from the financial assistance. 
However, small business loan recipients must repay any loans received.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 789 (Delegate D. Jones) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Department of Emergency Management;  
City of Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Budget and 
Management; Federal Emergency Management Agency; Congressional Research Service; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 
Third Reader - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8