START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 626 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 626 
(Senators Lam and Salling) 
Executive Nominations 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission - Members - Appointment 
 
 
This bill requires that the members of the Health Services Cost Review Commission 
(HSCRC) be appointed with the advice and consent of the Senate.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.   
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  HSCRC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department 
of Health established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, 
provide access to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in 
the State. HSCRC is responsible for implementing the Total Cost of Care Model, the 
successor to the Maryland All-Payer Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital 
population-based revenues (commonly referred to as global budgets). 
 
HSCRC consists of seven members appointed by the Governor. When appointing a 
member, the Governor must consider and make appointments that would promote the 
racial, gender, and geographic diversity of the commission. Four members must be 
individuals who do not have any connections with the management of policy of any health 
care facility. A member’s term is four years, and terms are staggered. At the end of a term, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 626/ Page 2 
members continue to serve until a qualified successor is appointed. A member who serves 
two consecutive full four-year terms may not be reappointed for four years after completion 
of those terms.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2