START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 333

Chapter 333

(Senate Bill 648)

AN ACT concerning

Electronic Health Networks and Electronic Medical Records – Nursing Homes –
Release of Records

FOR the purpose of authorizing a nursing home that contracts with or uses an electronic
health network or electronic medical record vendor, ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~consent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~patient~~
~~or~~ ~~patient’s~~ ~~personal~~ ~~representative,~~ to direct the network or vendor to release
electronic medical records and electronic health care transactions to a business
associate of the nursing home; and generally relating to electronic health networks
and electronic medical records.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 4–302.5
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

4–302.5.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “BUSINESS ASSOCIATE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 45 C.F.R.
~~§~~ ~~106.103~~ § 160.103.

(3) “ELECTRONIC HEALTH CARE TRANSACTIONS” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 4–302.3 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) “ELECTRONIC HEALTH NETWORK” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
§ 4–302.3 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(5) “NURSING HOME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 19–1401 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) IF A NURSING HOME CONTRACTS WITH OR USES AN ELECTRONIC
HEALTH NETWORK OR ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORD VENDOR, THE NURSING
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 333 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

HOME, WITH THE CONSENT OF THE PATIENT OR THE PATIENT’S PERSONAL
REPRESENTATIVE AS REQUIRED UNDER THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY
AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996, MAY DIRECT THE ELECTRONIC HEALTH
NETWORK OR ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORD VENDOR TO RELEASE PATIENT
MEDICAL RECORDS OR ELECTRONIC HEALTH CARE TRANSACTIONS HELD BY THE
ELECTRONIC HEALTH NETWORK OR ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORD VENDOR TO A
BUSINESS ASSOCIATE OF THE NURSING HOME.

(2) AN ELECTRONIC HEALTH NETWORK OR ELECTRONIC MEDICAL
RECORD VENDOR RELEASING PATIENT MEDICAL RECORDS OR ELECTRONIC HEALTH
CARE TRANSACTIONS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) SHALL RELEASE THE PATIENT MEDICAL RECORDS OR
ELECTRONIC HEALTH CARE TRANSACTIONS IN AN ELECTRONIC FORMAT THAT
CONFORMS TO THE SPECIFICATIONS OF THE OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL
COORDINATOR FOR HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY OR ANOTHER FORM
REQUIRED BY THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE;

(II) SHALL MAKE THE PATIENT MEDICAL RECORDS OR
ELECTRONIC HEALTH CARE TRANSACTIONS AVAILABLE ON A REGULAR BASIS AND
RELEASE THE INFORMATION IN A TIMELY MANNER TO SUPPORT PATIENT CARE AND
MONITORING; AND AND

(III) MAY NOT RESTRICT, LIMIT, OR CHARGE A FEE FOR OR
LIMIT, LIMIT, OR CHARGE A FEE FOR THE RELEASE OF THE PATIENT MEDICAL
RECORDS OR ELECTRONIC HEALTH CARE TRANSACTIONS; AND

(IV) MAY NOT CHARGE A FEE TO A BUSINESS ASSOCIATE
CONTRACTED WITH THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE TO
IMPROVE NURSING HOME QUALITY THROUGH DATA INTEGRATION, UNLESS THE FEE
IS APPROVED BY THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION EXCHANGE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 3, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2