START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 453

Chapter 453

(Senate Bill 694)

AN ACT concerning

Department of Natural Resources’ Real Property – Exchange With Private Real
Property

FOR the purpose of authorizing the State to exchange real property owned by the State for
the use and benefit of the Department of Natural Resources with private real
property under certain circumstances; and generally relating to the exchange of real
property owned by the State for the use and benefit of the Department of Natural
Resources.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 1–109(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5–310(c)(1) and 10–305(b)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

1–109.

(e) (1) Subject to [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of this subsection,
the Department may dispose of land owned and managed by the Department as
consideration for the acquisition of land not owned by the Department.

(2) [In] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, IN implementing this subsection, the Department shall comply with the
procedures established under Title 5, Subtitle 3 and Title 10, Subtitle 3 of the State Finance
and Procurement Article.

(3) (I) THE DEPARTMENT MAY DISPOSE OF REAL PROPERTY
OWNED BY THE STATE FOR THE USE AND BENEFIT OF THE DEPARTMENT IN
EXCHANGE FOR PRIVATELY OWNED REAL PROPERTY WITHOUT COMPLYING WITH

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 453 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED UNDER §§ 5–301 THROUGH 5–311 OR §§ 10–301
THROUGH 10–309 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, IF:

1. THE PRIVATELY OWNED REAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO
THE EXCHANGE IS ADJACENT TO THE REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE STATE FOR
THE USE AND BENEFIT OF THE DEPARTMENT;

2. THE REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE STATE FOR THE
USE AND BENEFIT OF THE DEPARTMENT SUBJECT TO THE EXCHANGE IS ADJACENT
TO THE PRIVATELY OWNED REAL PROPERTY;

3. THE REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE STATE DOES
NOT EXCEED 5 ACRES IN SIZE; AND

2. 4. THE OWNER OF THE PRIVATELY OWNED REAL
PROPERTY REQUESTING THE EXCHANGE PAYS ALL COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
EXCHANGE OF THE REAL PROPERTY, INCLUDING LEGAL FEES AND BOUNDARY
RELOCATION, SURVEYING, ENGINEERING, AND RECORDATION COSTS.

(II) PRIOR TO A PROPERTY EXCHANGE UNDER THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REFER SHALL:

1. NOTIFY IN WRITING BY ELECTRONIC MAIL OR
FIRST–CLASS MAIL:

A. OWNERS OF PROPERTY ADJACENT TO THE PRIVATELY
OWNED REAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THE EXCHANGE;

B. THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY MEMBERS WHO REPRESENT
THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT IN WHICH THE REAL PROPERTY EXCHANGE IS LOCATED;
AND

C. THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE
REAL PROPERTY EXCHANGE IS LOCATED; AND

2. REFER THE PROPOSED EXCHANGE TO THE BOARD OF
PUBLIC WORKS FOR FINAL DISPOSITION.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

5–310.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 453

(c) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, this
subsection applies to the following categories of real property owned by the State in fee
simple:

1. property acquired with Program Open Space funds under
Title 5, Subtitle 9 of the Natural Resources Article;

2. property acquired with Rural Legacy Program funds
under Title 5, Subtitle 9A of the Natural Resources Article;

3. public park land and recreational areas acquired under
Title 5, Subtitle 10 of the Natural Resources Article;

4. wildland and open areas acquired under Title 5, Subtitle
12 of the Natural Resources Article;

5. heritage conservation areas acquired with funds under
Title 5, Subtitle 15 of the Natural Resources Article;

6. forest conservation areas acquired under Title 5, Subtitle
6 of the Natural Resources Article;

7. GreenPrint areas acquired under Title 5, Subtitle 15A of
the Natural Resources Article;

8. property identified in the most current public lands
acreage report published by the Department of Natural Resources that is classified under
designated land units or under undesignated land units within an agency or program; and

9. outdoor recreation, open space, conservation,
preservation, park, or forest land property identified by the Department of Natural
Resources in regulation.

(ii) This subsection does not apply to:

1. property declared excess for purposes of corrective
disposal, including boundary or access corrections and minor road improvements for public
safety; OR

2. PROPERTY EXCHANGED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
NATURAL RESOURCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 1–109(E)(3) OF THE NATURAL
RESOURCES ARTICLE.

10–305.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 453 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) (i) Except as provided under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
this subsection applies to the sale, transfer, grant, or exchange of:

1. real property identified under § 5–310(c)(1) of this article;
and

2. State–owned real or personal property, funded in
accordance with an appropriation act of the General Assembly, that has an appraised value
over $100,000.

(ii) This subsection does not apply to the following dispositions of
property identified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph:

1. leasing the property; [or]

2. the sale, transfer, grant, or exchange of a corrective or
access easement on the property; OR

3. AN EXCHANGE BY THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL
RESOURCES UNDER § 1–109(E)(3) OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4