START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 610 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 610 
(Senator M. Washington, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Primary and Secondary Education - Virtual Education  
 
 
This bill establishes requirements related to virtual education for public schools, including 
requirements for (1) virtual schools; (2) teacher preparation programs; and (3) expanding 
computer and Internet security infrastructure for virtual education. The bill also authorizes 
virtual education days for severe weather conditions under specified circumstances. No 
virtual schools for the elementary band may be approved for operation before 
December 1, 2024. A virtual school may not include classes for prekindergarten or 
kindergarten students. The bill includes various reporting requirements for the Maryland 
State Department of Education (MSDE). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures by MSDE increase by at least $100,000 in 
FY 2024 and $500,000 in FY 2025 to increase computer security. MSDE can otherwise 
implement the bill’s provisions with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
500,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
($500,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can likely handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources, as explained below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 610/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Virtual Education Days for a Severe Weather Event 
 
A local board of education may authorize the local superintendent, in cases of severe 
weather conditions, to provide virtual education days to students instead of closing the 
public schools in the county. Before a local board of education may authorize the local 
superintendent to provide these virtual education days to students, the local board must 
(1) discuss this topic at an open meeting and (2) vote affirmatively to authorize the local 
superintendent to provide virtual education days to students during a severe weather event. 
 
A local board must publish the local board’s plan for the use of virtual education days on 
the school system’s website. The local board’s plan must include (1) a plan to ensure that 
attendance will be taken for all students and teachers during each virtual education day; 
(2) a plan to provide opportunities for students to make up work missed during virtual 
education days when they return to in-person school; (3) a plan to ensure that all staff and 
students, including students with disabilities, homeless students, and English language 
learners, have the necessary devices at home for virtual education days, including access 
to Wi-Fi; and (4) specific strategies for the continued implementation of Individualized 
Education Programs during the virtual education day, including specially designed 
instruction, related services, supplementary aids and services, and accommodations. 
 
A local superintendent may decide to provide a day of virtual education for public school 
students in the county only if (1) the local school system has used all the days incorporated 
into its calendar for school closures for severe weather conditions; (2) the local board of 
education has authorized the local superintendent to provide virtual education days to 
students; and (3) the local superintendent determines that severe weather conditions are 
likely to prevent normal attendance at the public school. 
 
If a local superintendent decides to provide a virtual education day for public school 
students in the jurisdiction, the superintendent must notify the school principals as soon as 
possible after the decision is made. A school principal who receives notice of a virtual 
education day immediately must notify the students, parents, and school staff of the 
implementation of the virtual education day. 
 
A virtual education day must consist of not less than four hours of synchronous instruction 
and asynchronous instruction designed to maximize the advantages of online access. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an employee organization designated as an 
exclusive representative may negotiate with a local school system about (1) the period of 
time that public school employees require for preparation on a virtual education day and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 610/ Page 3 
(2) the time at which synchronous instruction must begin on a virtual education day. A 
local superintendent must adequately design the virtual education day model, including any 
time requirements negotiated through collective bargaining as specified, before 
implementation of the first virtual education day. If a local board of education provides a 
day of virtual education, the local school system must offer public school employees who 
are not assigned to work during the virtual education day an opportunity to make up the 
lost work through other duties before the beginning of the next school year. 
 
Virtual Schools 
 
The bill significantly alters the definition of, and approval process for, virtual schools. 
 
Defined:  A “virtual school” is defined as a public school established by a local board or 
multiple local boards that uses one or more technologies to deliver instruction to its 
students entirely or primarily online and in which students and instructors participate 
remotely from separate locations. MSDE’s authority to establish a virtual school is 
repealed. 
 
The bill’s requirements for virtual schools do not apply to (1) a virtual learning opportunity 
offered by MSDE or a local board of education under the Maryland Virtual Learning 
Opportunities (MVLO) program; (2) an upper-level high school program that has online 
components and designs a student’s schedule to accommodate the student’s work schedule; 
or (3) a public school operating under a virtual education plan during a prolonged state of 
emergency. 
 
Multiple County Agreements:  Requirements in the virtual school subtitle referencing a 
local board of education include multiple county boards operating a virtual school under a 
written agreement. If multiple local boards of education establish a virtual school, the local 
boards must designate a lead county. Unless inconsistent with the provisions of the subtitle 
or the written agreement specifies otherwise, the policies on personnel, instruction, 
scheduling, and student support in the lead county must govern the virtual school. 
 
Authorization:  Subject to the approval of MSDE, a local board may establish one virtual 
school for the elementary, middle, and high school grade bands. MSDE may provide 
preliminary authorization to a local board of education to establish one additional virtual 
school on a showing of just cause, as determined by MSDE. 
 
MSDE may revoke approval of a virtual school if during the previous school year the 
virtual school fails to meet the standards established by MSDE in regulation.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 610/ Page 4 
A local board of education may appeal a denial or revocation of approval for the 
establishment of a virtual school to the State Board of Education (SBE) for adjudication 
during a public hearing. SBE must develop an appeals process to carry out these provisions. 
 
Accountability and For-profit Entities:  Each approved virtual school must have a unique 
school code assigned by MSDE. 
 
A local board of education may not contract with a for-profit entity, but may contract with 
a nonprofit entity, to operate or administer a virtual school; however, this may not be 
construed to prohibit a local board from contracting with a for-profit entity for goods and 
services for a virtual school. 
 
Student Enrollment:  In addition to the criteria established by MSDE or a local board, an 
application for enrollment in a virtual school must require an applicant to describe why 
instruction in a virtual learning environment will lead to successful academic outcomes for 
the applicant. Not more than 10% of the students from a single public school in the county 
in any school year may enroll in a virtual school established by a local board of education; 
however, a sudden decrease in enrollment in a single public school that results in 10% or 
more of the students who would otherwise attend that public school attending a virtual 
school established by a local board is not a violation. Further, MSDE may authorize a local 
board to exceed the cap on a showing of just cause. 
 
If a local board of education receives more applications than there are available spaces in 
a virtual school, the local board must admit all students on a lottery basis. A local board 
must give greater weight to a student’s lottery status based on demographic diversity and 
any other criteria established by the local board. To the extent practicable, the student body 
of a virtual school must reflect the socioeconomic, racial, ethnic, cultural, and gender 
diversity of the students enrolled in the county’s public school system. 
 
The local board must develop an outreach campaign to provide information to the public 
on the availability of the virtual school option. The outreach campaign must be designed 
to encourage applications from students that reflect the diversity of the students enrolled in 
the public school system, as specified. 
 
Services and Curriculum:  A virtual school must provide each enrolled student with access 
to the following services:  (1) to the extent practicable, extracurricular activities at the 
public school the student would otherwise attend in person; (2) notwithstanding any other 
law or regulation and subject to a participation agreement between the public school and 
the parent or guardian of the student, to the extent practicable, participation in organized 
athletics and on athletic teams at the public school the student would otherwise be required 
to attend in person; (3) wraparound services; (4) food and nutrition services; and (5) health 
care services equivalent to services available to students who receive in-person instruction 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 610/ Page 5 
in the county’s public schools. A virtual school must provide informational material on 
specified school policies. A virtual school curriculum must have an interactive social and 
emotional wellness component designed for a virtual school environment. If required, a 
virtual school must provide the appropriate digital device to a student to participate in the 
virtual school. 
 
A virtual school is strongly encouraged to hold in-person orientation sessions. If the virtual 
school is unable to hold in-person orientation sessions, it must hold online orientation to 
provide specified information. 
 
After collaboration with local school systems, MSDE must establish in regulations 
specified standards for a virtual school. A local board must adopt policies for the mandatory 
return to in-person instruction for students enrolled in a virtual school, including students 
who are failing academically after receiving the appropriate supports. 
 
Teachers and Staff:  In addition to a current requirement to have a teaching certificate or 
any other relevant professional certification authorized under the Maryland Code of 
Regulations (COMAR 13A.12.01), a teacher or education support personnel assigned to a 
virtual school must (1) be an employee of the county, or collaborating county, that 
established the virtual school; (2) be subject to the collective bargaining agreement of that 
jurisdiction; and (3) have access to professional development. 
 
A collective bargaining agreement may include provisions specific to employees who work 
in a virtual school in consideration of the conditions and requirements relevant to that work 
environment. An employee assigned to a virtual school may not be required to provide 
virtual and in-person instruction or support to students simultaneously. 
 
Subject to standards set by MSDE, the local board must determine the appropriate 
student-teacher ratio for the size of a class in a virtual school based on multiple factors. 
The student-teacher ratio of a class in a virtual school must be consistent with the median 
in-person class size by course and grade level. 
 
A virtual school must provide teachers and any other employees assigned to teach or 
provide direct instruction in a virtual school the technology and equipment required and if 
necessary, a physical space to conduct teaching or provide direct instruction. 
 
A virtual school must have a planned staffing model, including provisions for staff 
recruitment, training, evaluation, and professional development. 
 
Oversight:  The State Superintendent of Schools may assign the duties related to the 
oversight of virtual schools to the appropriate office or division within MSDE. These duties 
must include (1) the development, compilation, and updating of best practices for teaching 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 610/ Page 6 
and learning in a virtual environment, provision of services, and the operation and 
administration of a virtual school and (2) liaising with local boards that operate virtual 
schools or other stakeholders. 
 
Prolonged State of Emergency 
 
By June 1, 2024, a local board of education must, in consultation with local administrators 
and school staff, adopt a virtual education plan for use during a prolonged state of 
emergency using the local board’s continuity of learning plan in effect during the 
2020-2021 school year. 
 
The virtual education plan for a prolonged State of Emergency adopted by a local board of 
education must contain specified components and be updated by the board every two years. 
While a school is operating under a virtual education plan during a prolonged state of 
emergency, the principal must require a staff member to conduct regular wellness check-ins 
with students at least once per week, with appropriate follow-up. If funding is available 
during the prolonged state of emergency, a local board must establish additional learning 
centers, as specified. 
 
Virtual Education Teacher Preparation 
 
Each teacher preparation program must include training in the skills and techniques for 
teaching effectively in a virtual learning environment, including the use of online 
curriculum. 
 
Computer and Internet Security 
 
MSDE must expand computer and Internet security infrastructure for virtual education, 
including staff to maintain security. Each local school system must dedicate at least 
one staff member to oversee computer and Internet security infrastructure for virtual 
education. 
 
Revoking of Approval of Current Virtual Schools 
 
MSDE may revoke approval of a virtual school authorized to continue to operate through 
the 2024-2025 school year if during the previous school year the virtual school performed 
in the bottom 10% of schools. A virtual school that is authorized to continue to operate is 
encouraged to seek all available opportunities to bring the virtual school into compliance 
with the requirements established by the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 610/ Page 7 
Regulations 
 
SBE must adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of the bill, including establishing 
minimum criteria for the adoption and implementation of virtual education plans by a local 
board during a prolonged state of emergency. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 31, 2023, the State Superintendent of Schools must submit a report to SBE 
and the General Assembly on findings and recommendations regarding the appropriate 
balance of the number of hours of synchronous learning and asynchronous learning for 
instructional effectiveness of students in virtual schools based on research that has 
systematically examined this issue and collaboration with local school systems. 
 
By July 1, 2023, MSDE must convene a study group, including local boards of education, 
institutions of higher education, public school administrators, parents, teachers, students, 
and other relevant stakeholders, to:  (1) study and identify appropriate next steps in virtual 
education and leveraging technology and digital learning in the classroom, including those 
specified and (2) develop criteria for the establishment of virtual schools that incorporate 
the data gathered and are as least as rigorous as the criteria established by the bill. By 
September 1, 2024, MSDE must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
results of the study and criteria developed. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Establishment of a Public School 
 
Subject to approval by the State Superintendent and in accordance with SBE regulations, 
a local board may establish a public school if, in its judgment, it is advisable. On approval 
by the State Superintendent, any school established becomes a part of the State program of 
public education. With the advice of the local superintendent of schools, a local board of 
education must determine the geographical attendance area for each school established. 
 
Virtual Schools 
 
“Virtual school” is defined as a public school established by MSDE or by a local board in 
which the school uses technology to deliver a significant portion of instruction to its 
students via the Internet in a virtual or remote setting. 
 
Subject to the approval of MSDE, a local board may establish a virtual school. A virtual 
school is subject to all applicable federal and State laws and regulations governing the 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 610/ Page 8 
operation of a public school. A student who is eligible for enrollment in a public school in 
the State may enroll in a virtual school. 
 
Enrolled students must be provided with a sequential curriculum that meets or exceeds the 
local standards and is approved by SBE, as well as regular assessments. Enrolled students 
must also be provided with the same length of time for learning opportunities per 
academic year that is required for public school students unless the virtual school can show 
that a student has demonstrated mastery or completion of the subject area. A virtual 
school’s curriculum must have an interactive program with significant online components. 
 
A virtual school must provide the parents or guardians of enrolled students with 
instructional materials, including software, and information on the closest public facility 
that offers access to a computer, printer, and Internet connection. A virtual school may not 
provide funds for the purchase of instructional programs or materials to a student or to a 
student’s parent or guardian. 
 
A teacher employed by a virtual school must have a teacher’s certificate issued by the 
State Superintendent. A virtual school must maintain an administrative office in the State 
that must be considered its principal place of business. 
 
A virtual school must be evaluated each year by its sponsor based on the following criteria:  
(1) the extent to which the school demonstrates increases in student achievement according 
to local and State academic standards; and (2) the accountability and viability of the virtual 
school, as demonstrated by its academic, fiscal, and operational performance. 
 
SBE must adopt regulations related to virtual schools, including establishing minimum 
criteria for the establishment and approval of a virtual school. 
 
Maryland Virtual Learning Opportunities Program 
 
MSDE must provide MVLO that include (1) offering a distance learning program to 
provide Maryland public school students with equal opportunities to develop a strong 
academic foundation; (2) offering expanded educational choices not otherwise available to 
students through online courses and services; and (3) expanding the professional 
development opportunities available to educational staff in Maryland public schools 
through online courses and services. 
 
MSDE must develop, or review and approve, online courses and services. MSDE must also 
(1) develop standards for teachers and other school system employees for the offering of 
courses or services on the Internet or through other developing technologies and (2) review 
courses and courseware to assure quality and alignment with the Maryland content 
standards and other appropriate standards. Further, the development, review, and approval 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 610/ Page 9 
of an online course or service as part of the MVLO program must include an assessment 
regarding the accessibility of the online course or service to individuals with disabilities, 
including the blind. 
 
A local board of education may request that MSDE develop, or review and approve, online 
courses and services. MSDE may delegate this responsibility to a local board of education. 
If MSDE delegates this authority to a local board, the local board must request approval of 
the online course from MSDE once it has completed the development or the review and 
approval. A local board may impose reasonable fees to be paid by the vendor to cover the 
cost of reviewing and approving online courses and services and must remit 15% of the 
fees collected to MSDE. SBE may set reasonable fees for developing or reviewing online 
courses and services and for processing approvals for online courses and services. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under one set of assumptions, State expenditures increase for MSDE 
by at least $100,000 in fiscal 2024 and $500,000 in fiscal 2025 to increase computer 
security. 
 
In response to a similar note during the 2022 session, MSDE advised that it will need to 
collaborate with the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) on additional support 
required to improve its computer and Internet security. It is unknown if the current 
technology infrastructure could support additional simultaneous users. MSDE estimates a 
$100,000 contract in fiscal 2025 for a project manager to research current capacity and 
develop a plan for expanding the current infrastructure. The Department of Legislative 
Services estimates costs of approximately $500,000 in fiscal 2025 with no ongoing costs 
to implement the plan’s recommendations. An in-depth needs assessment by DoIT is 
necessary for a more accurate cost estimate. Thus, there may be additional expenditures 
related to improving computer and Internet security that cannot be reliably estimated at this 
time; however, any such costs could be significant. Costs could include hiring additional 
information technology staff. 
 
Teacher Preparation Programs and Reporting Requirements 
 
Public four-year institutions can meet the teacher preparation requirements using existing 
resources. MSDE can produce the required virtual education reports using existing 
resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  A local school system that elects to establish a virtual school must 
meet specified requirements. A local board of education may authorize a local 
superintendent to provide virtual education days during a severe weather event during 
specified circumstances. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 610/ Page 10 
All local school systems developed Continuity of Learning plans for use during the 
2020-2021 school year; thus, local school systems already have a plan that includes the 
components required for the virtual education plan for use during a prolonged State of 
Emergency. 
 
Overall, local school systems can likely meet the requirements of the bill using existing 
resources, although local school systems may make different choices about virtual 
education than under current law. 
 
It is assumed that a local school system that chooses to establish a virtual school will choose 
to do so by reallocating existing resources. Therefore, revenues and expenditures are not 
materially affected. Further, the establishment of a virtual school is at the discretion of each 
local board. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 362 and HB 1163 of 2022 and HB 1376 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10