START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 695 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 695 
(Senator Jennings, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Military Service Credit 
 
 
This bill allows a member or former member of the State Retirement and Pension System 
(SRPS) to receive service credit at the rate of four months for each full year of attendance 
at a United States service academy that preceded employment, up to a total of 16 months. 
It also allows a member of a State or local retirement or pension system to receive the same 
credit for attendance at a United States service academy that interrupts employment. 
Service credit received under the bill is subject to an overall cap of five years of military 
service credit in current law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect until FY 2026, but a reliable estimate of the total cost is not 
feasible, as discussed below. In FY 2026, the average cost to the State for a member of 
SRPS to claim the maximum 16 months of service credit ranges from $1,200 to $3,600, 
depending on the plan to which the member belongs. Out-year costs increase according to 
actuarial assumptions and are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 20% special 
funds, and 20% federal and other funds. No effect on revenues.   
  
Local Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in only a limited number of circumstances, 
it has no discernible effect on local pension liabilities or employer contributions, as 
discussed below.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 695/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Credit for Military Service That Precedes Employment  
 
In general, any member or vested former member of SRPS who accrues 10 years of service 
as a member of any State plan may receive one year of additional service credit for each 
year of active military duty performed prior to membership in SRPS, up to a maximum of 
five years. That credit is granted at no cost to the member or former member and is applied 
using the accrual rate in effect when the member or former member submits an application 
for the credit to the State Retirement Agency. 
 
A member of the Maryland National Guard or a reserve component of the U.S. 
Armed Forces who is not activated for military service receives service credit at the rate of 
four months for each full year of service in the Maryland National Guard or reserves, up to 
36 months. 
 
However, SRPS members or vested former members who claim credit for the same military 
service from another retirement system may not receive military service credit from SRPS, 
unless they claimed credit for that military service from: 
 
 
Social Security; 
 
the National Railroad Retirement Act; or 
 
National Guard or military reserves pensions (Title 3 or Title 10 of the U.S. Code). 
 
This generally means that any SRPS member receiving a military pension after completing 
20 years of active military service cannot claim the military service credit from SRPS. 
 
Credit for Military Service That Interrupts Employment  
 
In general, a member of a State or local retirement or pension system must receive service 
credit for a period of absence from employment while in military service if (1) the member 
returns to active employment and (2) membership in a State or local retirement or pension 
system is a requirement of employment. Service credit awarded for an absence due to 
military service cannot exceed five years. For a member of a State system, the service credit 
applies to the individual’s retirement allowance using the accrual rate in effect at the time 
the individual retires. 
 
For SRPS members, the five-year cap on military service credit applies to the combined 
total of credit earned for military service during or prior to employment. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 695/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Neither SRPS nor the Department of Legislative Services is aware 
of how many members have attended United States service academies, so a reliable 
estimate of the bill’s effect is not feasible. However, the General Assembly’s consulting 
actuary has calculated the employer costs associated with 16 months of additional service 
credit (the maximum allowed by the bill) for the average member of each State plan. As 
the cost of service credit varies by age and tenure (e.g., the cost of the thirtieth year of 
service is higher than the cost of the fifth year of service), this analysis covers only the 
average cost across current active members (the cost for vested former members is likely 
similar). Actual costs for each individual likely vary from the average. 
 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, so members would not be able to claim the additional 
service credit until fiscal 2024. Any service credit awarded in fiscal 2024 is reflected in the 
actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2024, which calculates employer contributions for 
fiscal 2026. Therefore, there is no fiscal effect until fiscal 2026.  
 
Exhibit 1 includes the average employer cost to the State for a member of each of the 
SRPS plans to receive 16 months of service credit under the bill. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Average Cost of 16 Months of Service Credit, by Plan 
Fiscal 2026 
 
 
Average Cost 
Per Member 
Teachers’ Retirement System 
$2,500 
Teachers’ Pension System 
1,600 
Employees’ Retirement System 
1,800 
Employees’ Pension System 
1,200 
Correctional Officers Retirement System 
1,400 
State Police Retirement System 
2,600 
Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System 
2,000 
Legislative Pension Plan 
1,300 
Judges’ Retirement System 
3,600 
 
Source:  Bolton 
 
 
The total cost to the State depends on the number and distribution of SRPS members who 
claim military service credit under the bill, and how much credit they claim. Those costs 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 695/ Page 4 
are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 20% special funds, and 20% federal and 
other funds. Out-year costs increase according to actuarial assumptions. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill applies to members of local pension plans only if their 
attendance at a United States service academy interrupts their employment with a local 
government. Although this may be the case for some local employees, it likely is not a 
common occurrence. Therefore, the bill has limited applicability to local governments. To 
the extent it does apply to some members of local pension plans, the costs per member 
listed above are likely comparable for local pension plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - April 3, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4