START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 638

Chapter 638

(Senate Bill 621)

AN ACT concerning

Gaming – Sports Wagering – Independent Evaluation of Sports Wagering
Content and Sports Wagering Facility Application Amendments

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission to
identify and ~~accredit~~ license certain independent evaluators to evaluate and rate
certain sports wagering content provided by certain sports wagering experts, sports
wagering influencers, and content partners; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~establish~~
~~standards~~ ~~of~~ ~~practice~~ ~~governing~~ ~~sports~~ ~~wagering~~ ~~content;~~ ~~requiring~~ authorizing
certain sports wagering licensees and sports wagering operators to contract with
certain independent evaluators for certain purposes under certain circumstances;
authorizing the Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission and the Sports
Wagering Application Review Commission to consider certain requests for certain
application amendments received on or before a certain date; and generally relating
to sports wagering and the evaluation of sports wagering content.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 9–1E–17
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

9–1E–17.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CONTENT PARTNER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO OR A
PLATFORM THAT CREATES SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT FOR A SPORTS WAGERING
LICENSEE THROUGH CONTRACTED WORK, AFFILIATION, OR OTHER PARTNERSHIP.

(3) “SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT” MEANS PREDICTIONS OF
SPORTING EVENT OUTCOMES, INCLUDING MONEYLINES, AGAINST THE SPREAD,
TOTALS, FUTURES, PARLAYS, AND OTHER OUTCOMES, WHETHER PROVIDED AT NO
COST OR THROUGH A SUBSCRIPTION OR OTHER PARTNERSHIP.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 638 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) “SPORTS WAGERING EXPERT” OR “SPORTS WAGERING
INFLUENCER” MEANS A PERSON WHO CREATES SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT FOR A
SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE, A CONTENT PARTNER, OR THE PERSON’S OWN
BENEFIT.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2023, THE THE COMMISSION
SHALL ~~IDENTIFY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ACCREDIT~~ LICENSE INDEPENDENT EVALUATORS TO
EVALUATE AND RATE SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT PROVIDED BY SPORTS
WAGERING EXPERTS, SPORTS WAGERING INFLUENCERS, AND CONTENT PARTNERS.

(2) IN ORDER TO BE ACCREDITED LICENSED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR:

(I) SHALL HAVE DEMONSTRATED EXPERIENCE AND EXPERTISE
IN EVALUATING AND RATING SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT;

(II) SHALL HAVE AN AUDIT PROCESS CONSTRUCTED AND
MAINTAINED BY IN–HOUSE, LICENSED CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS;

(III) SHALL HAVE EVALUATION AND RATING PROCEDURES THAT
ARE UNABLE TO BE ADJUSTED, DUPLICATED, OR ALTERED BY THE PERSONS
SUBJECT TO EVALUATION;

(IV) MAY NOT HAVE AN OFFICIAL RELATIONSHIP WITH A SPORTS
WAGERING LICENSEE OR SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR;

(V) (IV) MAY NOT HAVE ANY DIRECT OR INDIRECT FINANCIAL
INTEREST, OWNERSHIP, OR MANAGEMENT, INCLUDING HOLDING ANY STOCKS,
BONDS, OR OTHER SIMILAR FINANCIAL INTERESTS IN ANY SPORTS WAGERING
ACTIVITIES;

(VI) (V) MAY NOT RECEIVE OR SHARE IN, DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY, THE RECEIPTS OR PROCEEDS OF ANY SPORTS WAGERING ACTIVITIES;
AND

(VII) (VI) MAY NOT HAVE ANY REVENUE–SHARING
RELATIONSHIP WITH OR OTHER FINANCIAL INTEREST IN A SPORTS WAGERING
LICENSEE OR SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR.

(3) AN EMPLOYEE OR A PRINCIPAL OF AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR,
OR THE INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR AS AN ENTITY, MAY NOT WAGER ON A SPORTING
EVENT.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 638

(3) (4) (I) AN EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH, AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR MAY NOT BE COMPENSATED BY A
SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE OR SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR ~~THAT~~ ~~UTILIZES~~
THE INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR’S EVALUATIONS IN ITS MARKETING MATERIALS FOR
~~INDEPENDENT~~ ~~EVALUATION~~ ~~SERVICES~~ THAT UTILIZES THE INDEPENDENT
EVALUATOR’S EVALUATION SERVICES SOLELY FOR MARKETING MATERIALS.

(II) AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR MAY BE COMPENSATED BY A
SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE OR SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR FOR ITS
EVALUATION AND RATING OF SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT.

(4) (5) THE COMMISSION MAY ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE ~~ACCREDITATION~~ LICENSING OF INDEPENDENT
EVALUATORS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH STANDARDS OF PRACTICE
~~GOVERNING~~ ~~SPORTS~~ ~~WAGERING~~ ~~CONTENT~~ ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT
THIS SECTION.

(D) ON OR BEFORE APRIL 1, 2024, A A SPORTS WAGERING LICENSEE OR
SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR THAT ADVERTISES IN THE STATE SHALL MAY
CONTRACT WITH AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR ~~ACCREDITED~~ LICENSED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION TO EVALUATE AND RATE THE SPORTS WAGERING
LICENSEE’S SPORTS WAGERING CONTENT, SPORTS WAGERING EXPERTS, SPORTS
WAGERING INFLUENCERS, AND CONTENT PARTNERS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the State Lottery and Gaming
Control Commission and the Sports Wagering Application Review Commission may
consider a request to amend a Class B–2 sports wagering facility license application for the
purpose of altering the proposed location of the sports wagering facility if:

(1) a sports wagering facility license was awarded to the applicant on or
before February 15, 2023; and

(2) a written request to amend the application is received by the State
Lottery and Gaming Control Commission and the State Wagering Application Review
Commission on or before December 31, 2023.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3