START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 621 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 621 
(Senators Zucker and Hettleman) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Gaming - Sports Wagering - Independent Evaluation of Sports Wagering 
Content and Sports Wagering Facility Application Amendments 
 
 
This bill requires the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) to license 
independent evaluators to evaluate and rate sports wagering content provided by, as defined 
by the bill, sports wagering experts, sports wagering influencers, and content partners. The 
bill specifies criteria for licensing of an independent evaluator. A sports wagering licensee 
or sports wagering operator that advertises in the State may contract with a licensed 
independent evaluator. An independent evaluator and its principals and employees may not 
wager on a sporting event. An independent evaluator may not be compensated by a sports 
wagering licensee or sports wagering operator that uses the evaluator’s evaluation services 
solely for marketing materials but may be compensated for its evaluation and rating of 
sports wagering content. SLGCC must also adopt regulations relevant to these provisions. 
In addition, SLGCC and the Sports Wagering Application Review Commission (SWARC) 
may consider a request to amend a Class B-2 sports wagering facility license application 
for the purpose of altering the proposed location of the facility if a sports wagering facility 
license was awarded to the applicant by February 15, 2023, and a written request to amend 
the application is received by December 31, 2023. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) administrative costs 
may increase beginning in FY 2024. A precise estimate of such costs, and thus of associated 
SLGCA expenditures, is not available at this time. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 621/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 492 of 2020 authorized sports and event wagering generally, 
subject to voter referendum, which was approved by Maryland voters in November 2020.  
Chapter 356 of 2021 implemented sports and event wagering in the State and provided for 
regulation of sports wagering by SLGCC. The Act also established the Sports Wagering 
Application Review Commission to review and award applications for sports wagering 
facility and mobile sports wagering licensure. 
 
Licensing is required for the following who are involved in sports wagering:   
 
 
a person that operates sports wagering; 
 
a person that operates sports wagering on behalf of a sports wagering licensee, 
including an online sports wagering operator; 
 
a person that manages, operates, supplies, provides security for, or provides service, 
maintenance, or repairs for sports wagering equipment and devices; and 
 
an individual directly employed in the operation of sports wagering by a sports 
wagering licensee if the individual does not otherwise hold a valid State gaming 
license. 
 
Additionally, SLGCC may, by regulation, require a person that contracts with a licensee 
and the person’s employees to be licensed if deemed necessary. 
 
A sports wagering licensee may not (1) target advertising to individuals who are prohibited 
from participating in sports wagering and other at-risk individuals or (2) engage in any 
false or deceptive advertising. SLGCC may deny a license to an applicant for specified 
sports wagering licenses, reprimand or fine a licensee, or suspend or revoke a license for a 
violation of sports wagering law in the State. 
 
SWARC must award Class B-1 and B-2 facility licenses to applicants meeting specified 
requirements. Qualifying applicants with fewer than 25 full-time equivalent employees or 
less than $3.0 million in annual gross receipts are awarded B-2 licenses, while qualifying 
applicants exceeding either of those thresholds are awarded B-1 licenses. SWARC must 
award a Class B-1 or B-2 license to specified qualifying horse racing, simulcast betting, 
and commercial bingo entities and to no more than 30 additional qualifying applicants. 
 
State Expenditures:  SLGCA advises its administrative costs may increase beginning in  
FY 2024 in order to license independent evaluators of sports wagering content. However, 
SLGCA is unable to estimate staffing or other operational costs at this time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 621/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 13, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 13, 2023 
 
db/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3