START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 651 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 651 
(Senator Carter) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Real Estate - Real Estate Brokerage Services and Termination of Residential 
Real Estate Contracts (The Anthony Moorman Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a real estate broker or an escrow agent to distribute “trust money” to a 
purchaser – if the purchaser terminates a residential real estate contract under the terms of 
a contingency clause – after written notice of a request to return the money is provided to 
the holder of the trust money and the seller and specified procedures are satisfied. Within 
10 days of receiving this notice, the seller must provide the holder of the trust money with 
a copy of a complaint filed in the District Court or a notarized, written request for mediation 
relating to the distribution of the trust money. On receipt of a complaint/request for 
mediation, the holder of trust money must hold the trust money until a court order or 
mediation agreement authorizes the distribution or the holder files an interpleader action 
in the District Court. Conversely, if the holder of the trust money does not receive a copy 
of a complaint or a request for mediation within 30 days, the holder must distribute the 
trust money to the purchaser and notify the purchaser and seller of the distribution. A holder 
of trust money may not be held liable for a decision to distribute the trust money in 
accordance with the bill’s provisions. A claimant aggrieved by a distribution of trust money 
under the bill’s provisions may file an action in the District Court, as specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 651/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “contingency” means a clause included in a contract of sale for 
residential real estate that (1) requires a specific event or action to occur for the contact to 
be enforceable and (2) entitles a party exercising the contingency to terminate the contact 
and receive distribution of the trust money. The bill specifies numerous examples of 
contingencies, including clauses relating to appraisals; conservation easements; home or 
environmental inspections; property condition disclosures and disclaimer act notices; short 
sales; and water and sewer assessments notices.  
 
Current Law:  Under § 10-802 of the Real Property Article, “trust money” means a deposit 
made by a purchaser in connection with a residential real estate sales transaction that the 
purchaser delivers to an escrow agent to hold for the benefit of the purchaser and the seller. 
 
Distribution of Trust Money 
 
A real estate broker must maintain trust money in an authorized account until: 
 
 
the real estate transaction for which the trust money was entrusted is consummated 
or terminated; 
 
the real estate broker receives proper written instructions from the owner and 
beneficial owner directing withdrawal or other disposition of the trust money; 
 
on an interpleader filed by the real estate broker, a court orders a different 
disposition; or 
 
the owner or beneficial owner of the trust money fails to complete the real estate 
transaction for which the trust money was entrusted and the real estate broker, in the 
real estate broker’s sole discretion, decides to distribute the trust money, subject to 
notification requirements. 
 
Prior to distributing the trust money under the latter conditions, the broker must notify both 
the owner and the beneficial owner that the broker intends to distribute the money to the 
person who, in the good faith opinion of the broker, is entitled to receive the money in 
accordance with the terms of the real estate contract that established the trust. The notice 
in the event of a failed transaction must be in writing and include (1) a statement of whether 
the trust money will be paid to the owner or the beneficial owner and (2) disclosure to the 
owner and the beneficial owner that either party may prevent distribution of the funds by 
submitting a written protest within 30 days, as specified. If a written protest is received, 
then funds must be distributed in accordance with one of the other three processes 
described above. If no written protest is received, then the funds must be disbursed in 
accordance with the terms of the notice. A real estate broker may not be liable to an owner 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 651/ Page 3 
or beneficial owner of the trust money for a good faith decision to distribute the trust money 
or a decision not to distribute the trust money under these circumstances. 
 
An agreement under which a real estate broker is entrusted with the trust money must 
contain a statement that the real estate broker may distribute the trust money as described 
above if the owner or beneficial owner of the trust money fails to complete the real estate 
transaction for which the trust money was entrusted. 
 
Trust Money Agreements  
 
When an escrow agent agrees to hold trust money, the escrow agent must enter into a 
written agreement with the purchaser and seller of the residential real estate that contains 
the following information:  
 
 
the amount of the trust money delivered to the escrow agent; 
 
the date the trust money was delivered to the escrow agent; 
 
the responsibility of the escrow agent to notify the purchaser and seller of trust 
money returned due to dishonored funds; 
 
the conditions under which the escrow agent may release the trust money; and 
 
the process to address disputes over the release of the trust money. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 424 and HB 720 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1235 (Delegate Wells) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3