START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

Chapter 804

(Senate Bill 610)

AN ACT concerning

Primary and Secondary Education – Virtual Education

FOR the purpose of requiring a teacher preparation program to include certain training
related to teaching in a virtual learning environment as a component of instruction;
providing that a county board of education may authorize a county superintendent
of schools, under certain circumstances, to provide virtual education days to students
instead of closing the public schools in the county because of severe weather
conditions; requiring the county board to publish the county board’s plan for the use
of virtual education days on the school system’s website and requiring the plan to
include certain items; requiring a county superintendent to take certain actions and
make certain accommodations if the county superintendent decides to provide a
virtual education day for public school students in the county; altering the
requirements for virtual schools established by a county board; requiring county
boards to adopt virtual education plans for the operation of public schools during a
prolonged state of emergency; providing for the contents of a virtual education plan;
requiring public schools to establish certain learning supports and a behavioral
health plan under certain circumstances; requiring the State Department of
Education to establish certain training standards for teachers on the provision of
virtual education under certain circumstances; requiring the Department to expand
computer and Internet security infrastructure for virtual education; requiring the
State Superintendent of Schools to report to the State Board of Education and the
General Assembly on or before a certain date certain findings and recommendations
regarding the balance between certain types of learning in virtual schools; providing
that certain virtual schools approved by the Department on or before a certain date
may continue to operate as a virtual school for a certain period of time under certain
circumstances; requiring the Department, ~~in~~ ~~consultation~~ ~~with~~ to convene a study
group of certain stakeholders, to study ~~best~~ ~~practices~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~virtual~~
~~education~~ and identify certain information relating to virtual education in the State
and submit a certain report on or before a certain date; prohibiting the approval of a
new elementary grade band virtual school on or before a certain date; and generally
relating to virtual education in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–121(a) and 7–1401 through 7–1408
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Education

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Section 7–103.2 and 7–1401.1; and 7–14A–01 through 7–14A–09 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle 14A. Operation of Public Schools During a Prolonged State
of Emergency – Virtual Education Plans”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

6–121.

(a) A teacher preparation program shall:

(1) Include the following components of instruction:

(i) Basic research skills and methods and training on the routine
evaluation and use of research and data to improve student performance;

(ii) Differentiation of instruction and demonstration of cultural
competence for students of diverse racial, ethnic, linguistic, and economic backgrounds with
different learning abilities;

(iii) Implementation of restorative approaches for student behaviors;

(iv) Identifying and assessing, in the context of the classroom, typical
student learning deficits and techniques to remedy learning deficits;

(v) Recognizing and effectively using high quality instructional
materials, including digital resources and computer technology;

(vi) Core academic subjects that teachers will be teaching;

(vii) Methods and techniques for identifying and addressing the social
and emotional needs of students, including trauma–informed approaches to pedagogy;
[and]

(viii) Skills and techniques for effective classroom management; AND

(IX) TRAINING IN THE SKILLS AND TECHNIQUES FOR TEACHING
EFFECTIVELY IN A VIRTUAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT, INCLUDING THE USE OF
ONLINE CURRICULUM;

(2) Require program participants to demonstrate competency in each of the
components required under paragraph (1) of this subsection;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(3) Provide training in the knowledge and skills required to understand
and teach the Maryland curriculum frameworks; and

(4) On or after July 1, 2025, require passing a nationally recognized,
portfolio–based assessment of teaching ability as a requirement for graduation.

7–103.2.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A COUNTY BOARD MAY
AUTHORIZE THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT, IN CASES OF SEVERE WEATHER
CONDITIONS, TO PROVIDE VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAYS TO STUDENTS INSTEAD OF
CLOSING THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTY DURING A SEVERE WEATHER EVENT.

(B) BEFORE A COUNTY BOARD MAY AUTHORIZE THE COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAYS TO STUDENTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL:

(1) DISCUSS THIS TOPIC AT AN OPEN MEETING; AND

(2) VOTE AFFIRMATIVELY TO AUTHORIZE THE COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAYS TO STUDENTS DURING A
SEVERE WEATHER EVENT.

(C) (1) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL PUBLISH THE COUNTY BOARD’S PLAN
FOR THE USE OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAYS ON THE SCHOOL SYSTEM’S WEBSITE.

(2) THE COUNTY BOARD’S PLAN PUBLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A PLAN TO ENSURE THAT ATTENDANCE WILL BE TAKEN FOR
ALL STUDENTS AND TEACHERS DURING EACH VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY;

(II) A PLAN TO PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR STUDENTS TO
MAKE UP WORK MISSED DURING VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAYS WHEN THEY RETURN TO
IN–PERSON SCHOOL;

(III) A PLAN TO ENSURE THAT ALL STAFF AND STUDENTS,
INCLUDING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES, HOMELESS STUDENTS, AND ENGLISH
LANGUAGE LEARNERS, HAVE THE NECESSARY DEVICES AT HOME FOR VIRTUAL
EDUCATION DAYS, INCLUDING ACCESS TO WI–FI; AND

(IV) SPECIFIC STRATEGIES FOR THE CONTINUED
IMPLEMENTATION OF INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAMS DURING THE

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY, INCLUDING SPECIALLY DESIGNED INSTRUCTION,
RELATED SERVICES, SUPPLEMENTARY AIDS AND SERVICES, AND
ACCOMMODATIONS.

(D) A COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT MAY DECIDE TO PROVIDE A DAY OF
VIRTUAL EDUCATION FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS IN THE COUNTY ONLY IF:

(1) THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM HAS USED ALL THE DAYS
INCORPORATED INTO ITS CALENDAR FOR SCHOOL CLOSURES FOR SEVERE
WEATHER CONDITIONS;

(2) THE COUNTY BOARD HAS AUTHORIZED THE COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAYS TO STUDENTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(3) THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT DETERMINES THAT SEVERE
WEATHER CONDITIONS ARE LIKELY TO PREVENT NORMAL ATTENDANCE AT THE
PUBLIC SCHOOL.

(E) (1) IF A COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT DECIDES TO PROVIDE A VIRTUAL
EDUCATION DAY FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS IN THE COUNTY, THE COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT SHALL NOTIFY THE SCHOOL PRINCIPALS AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
AFTER THE DECISION IS MADE.

(2) A SCHOOL PRINCIPAL WHO RECEIVES NOTICE OF A VIRTUAL
EDUCATION DAY IMMEDIATELY SHALL NOTIFY THE STUDENTS, PARENTS, AND
SCHOOL STAFF OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY.

(F) (1) A VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY SHALL CONSIST OF NOT LESS THAN 4
HOURS OF SYNCHRONOUS INSTRUCTION, AND ASYNCHRONOUS INSTRUCTION
DESIGNED TO MAXIMIZE THE ADVANTAGES OF ONLINE ACCESS.

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION DESIGNATED AS AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY
NEGOTIATE WITH A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM ABOUT:

(I) THE PERIOD OF TIME THAT PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEES
REQUIRE FOR PREPARATION ON A VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY; AND

(II) THE TIME AT WHICH SYNCHRONOUS INSTRUCTION SHALL
BEGIN ON A VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(3) A COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT SHALL ADEQUATELY DESIGN THE
VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY MODEL, INCLUDING ANY TIME REQUIREMENTS
NEGOTIATED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, BEFORE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FIRST VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY.

(G) IF A COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION PROVIDES A DAY OF VIRTUAL
EDUCATION FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS IN THE COUNTY, THE LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM SHALL OFFER PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEES WHO ARE NOT ASSIGNED TO
WORK DURING THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION DAY AN OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE UP THE
LOST WORK THROUGH OTHER DUTIES BEFORE THE BEGINNING OF THE NEXT
SCHOOL YEAR.

Subtitle 14. Virtual Schools.

7–1401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Quality online education standards” means the National Standards for
Quality Online Programs: Second Edition (2019).

(c) “Sponsor” means [the Department or] a county [school] board, having a
fiduciary responsibility for the operation of the virtual school.

(d) “Virtual school” means a public school [established]:

(1) ESTABLISHED by [the Department or by] a county board OR
MULTIPLE COUNTY BOARDS UNDER A WRITTEN AGREEMENT under § 4–109 of this
article [in which the school];

(2) THAT uses [technology] ONE OR MORE TECHNOLOGIES to deliver [a
significant portion of] instruction to its students [via the Internet in a virtual or remote
setting] ENTIRELY OR PRIMARILY ONLINE; AND

(3) IN WHICH THE STUDENTS AND INSTRUCTORS PARTICIPATE
REMOTELY FROM SEPARATE LOCATIONS.

7–1401.1.

(A) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(1) A VIRTUAL LEARNING OPPORTUNITY OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OR A COUNTY BOARD UNDER § 7–1002 OF THIS TITLE;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) AN UPPER–LEVEL HIGH SCHOOL PROGRAM THAT:

(I) HAS ONLINE COMPONENTS; AND

(II) DESIGNS A STUDENT’S ACADEMIC PROGRAM TO MAXIMIZE
THE FLEXIBILITY OF THE STUDENT’S SCHEDULE TO ACCOMMODATE THE STUDENT’S
WORK SCHEDULE; OR

(3) A PUBLIC SCHOOL OPERATING UNDER A VIRTUAL EDUCATION
PLAN DURING A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY UNDER SUBTITLE 14A OF THIS
TITLE.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IN THIS
SUBTITLE ANY REFERENCES TO A COUNTY BOARD INCLUDE MULTIPLE COUNTY
BOARDS OPERATING A VIRTUAL SCHOOL UNDER A WRITTEN AGREEMENT.

(2) (I) IF MULTIPLE COUNTY BOARDS ESTABLISH A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL UNDER A WRITTEN AGREEMENT, THE COUNTY BOARDS SHALL DESIGNATE A
LEAD COUNTY FROM AMONG THE PARTICIPATING COUNTIES.

(II) UNLESS INCONSISTENT WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
SUBTITLE OR THE WRITTEN AGREEMENT SPECIFIES OTHERWISE, THE POLICIES ON
PERSONNEL, INSTRUCTION, SCHEDULING, AND STUDENT SUPPORT IN THE LEAD
COUNTY SHALL GOVERN THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL.

7–1402.

(a) (1) [Subject] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION AND SUBJECT to the approval of the Department, a county board may
establish [a] ONE virtual school FOR THE ELEMENTARY, MIDDLE, AND HIGH SCHOOL
GRADE BANDS.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY PROVIDE PRELIMINARY AUTHORIZATION
TO A COUNTY BOARD TO ESTABLISH ONE ADDITIONAL VIRTUAL SCHOOL ON A
SHOWING OF JUST CAUSE, AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REVOKE APPROVAL OF A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL IF DURING THE PREVIOUS SCHOOL YEAR THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL FAILS TO
MEET THE STANDARDS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN REGULATION.

(4) (I) A COUNTY BOARD MAY APPEAL A DENIAL OR REVOCATION
OF APPROVAL FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A VIRTUAL SCHOOL TO THE STATE
BOARD FOR ADJUDICATION DURING A PUBLIC HEARING.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(II) THE STATE BOARD SHALL DEVELOP AN APPEALS PROCESS
TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(B) A VIRTUAL SCHOOL MAY NOT INCLUDE CLASSES FOR
PREKINDERGARTEN OR KINDERGARTEN STUDENTS.

[(b)] (C) A virtual school is subject to all applicable federal and State laws and
regulations governing the operation of a public school.

(D) EACH APPROVED VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL HAVE A UNIQUE SCHOOL
CODE ASSIGNED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(E) (1) A COUNTY BOARD MAY NOT CONTRACT WITH A FOR–PROFIT
ENTITY, BUT MAY CONTRACT WITH A NONPROFIT ENTITY, TO OPERATE OR
ADMINISTER A VIRTUAL SCHOOL FOR THE COUNTY BOARD.

(2) THE PROVISIONS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY
NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT A COUNTY BOARD FROM CONTRACTING WITH A
FOR–PROFIT ENTITY FOR GOODS AND SERVICES FOR A VIRTUAL SCHOOL.

7–1403.

[(c)] (A) A student who is eligible for enrollment in a public school in the State
[may] IS ELIGIBLE TO enroll in a virtual school.

(B) IN ADDITION TO THE CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR
A COUNTY BOARD, AN APPLICATION FOR ENROLLMENT IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL
REQUIRE AN APPLICANT TO DESCRIBE WHY INSTRUCTION IN A VIRTUAL LEARNING
ENVIRONMENT WILL LEAD TO SUCCESSFUL ACADEMIC OUTCOMES FOR THE
APPLICANT.

(C) (1) (I) NOT SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
NOT MORE THAN 10% OF THE STUDENTS WHO WOULD OTHERWISE ATTEND A SINGLE
PUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY IN ANY SCHOOL YEAR MAY ENROLL IN A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL ESTABLISHED BY A COUNTY BOARD.

(II) A SUDDEN DECREASE IN ENROLLMENT IN A SINGLE PUBLIC
SCHOOL THAT RESULTS IN 10% OR MORE OF THE STUDENTS WHO WOULD
OTHERWISE ATTEND THAT PUBLIC SCHOOL ATTENDING A VIRTUAL SCHOOL
ESTABLISHED BY A COUNTY BOARD IS NOT A VIOLATION OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY AUTHORIZE A COUNTY BOARD TO EXCEED
THE CAP UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON A SHOWING OF JUST
CAUSE.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF
A COUNTY BOARD RECEIVES MORE APPLICATIONS THAN THERE ARE AVAILABLE
SPACES IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL, THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL ADMIT ALL STUDENTS
ON A LOTTERY BASIS.

(2) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL GIVE GREATER WEIGHT TO A STUDENT’S
LOTTERY STATUS AS A PART OF A LOTTERY HELD UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION BASED ON DEMOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
SECTION AND ANY OTHER CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY THE COUNTY BOARD.

(E) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE STUDENT BODY OF A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL SHALL REFLECT THE SOCIOECONOMIC, RACIAL, ETHNIC, CULTURAL, AND
GENDER DIVERSITY OF THE STUDENTS ENROLLED IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM
IN THE COUNTY.

(F) (1) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL DEVELOP AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN
TO PROVIDE INFORMATION TO THE PUBLIC ON THE AVAILABILITY OF THE VIRTUAL
SCHOOL OPTION.

(2) THE OUTREACH CAMPAIGN SHALL BE DESIGNED TO ENCOURAGE
APPLICATIONS FROM STUDENTS WHO MEET THE INTENT OF SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
SECTION, INCLUDING THE PRODUCTION OF MATERIALS AND COMMUNICATIONS IN
LANGUAGES SPOKEN BY MORE THAN THE PERCENTAGE OF THE STUDENT
POPULATION IN THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM DETERMINED APPROPRIATE BY THE
COUNTY BOARD.

[7–1403.] 7–1404.

(a) A virtual school shall provide each enrolled student:

(1) Access to a sequential curriculum approved by the State Board that
meets or exceeds the standards adopted by the county board in the county of the virtual
school’s principal place of business OR THE COUNTY DESIGNATED UNDER A WRITTEN
AGREEMENT BETWEEN MULTIPLE COUNTY BOARDS;

(2) The same length of time for learning opportunities per academic year
that is required for public school students, unless the virtual school can show that a student
has demonstrated mastery or completion of the subject area; [and]

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(3) Regular assessment in the core areas of instruction as required by
regulations adopted by the State Board under [§ 7–1408] § 7–1409 of this subtitle; AND

(4) ACCESS TO THE FOLLOWING SERVICES:

(I) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, EXTRACURRICULAR
ACTIVITIES ~~INCLUDING~~ ~~SPORTS~~ AT THE PUBLIC SCHOOL THE STUDENT WOULD
OTHERWISE BE REQUIRED TO ATTEND IN PERSON;

(II) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW OR REGULATION AND
SUBJECT TO A PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL AND
THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF THE STUDENT, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE,
PARTICIPATION IN ORGANIZED ATHLETICS AND ON ATHLETIC TEAMS AT THE PUBLIC
SCHOOL THE STUDENT WOULD OTHERWISE BE REQUIRED TO ATTEND IN PERSON;

(III) WRAPAROUND SERVICES;

(IV) FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICES; AND

(V) HEALTH CARE SERVICES EQUIVALENT TO SERVICES
AVAILABLE TO STUDENTS WHO RECEIVE IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION IN THE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTY.

(b) A curriculum adopted under subsection (a) of this section shall have [an]:

(1) AN interactive program with significant online components; AND

(2) AN INTERACTIVE SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL WELLNESS
COMPONENT DESIGNED FOR A VIRTUAL SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT.

(c) Beginning in the 2022–2023 school year, a virtual school shall follow the
quality online education standards.

(D) THE AFTER COLLABORATION WITH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH IN REGULATION THE FOLLOWING STANDARDS FOR
ALL VIRTUAL SCHOOLS:

(1) AFTER COLLABORATION WITH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS,
STUDENT STUDENT ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS AND REPORTING;

(2) STUDENT ENGAGEMENT AND CONDUCT;

(3) PROGRAM QUALITY METRICS;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) TRACKING AND USE OF STUDENT DATA; AND

(5) DATA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

(E) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL ADOPT POLICIES FOR THE MANDATORY
RETURN TO IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION FOR STUDENTS ENROLLED IN A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL, INCLUDING STUDENTS WHO ARE FAILING ACADEMICALLY AFTER
RECEIVING THE APPROPRIATE SUPPORTS.

[7–1404.] 7–1405.

(a) A virtual school shall provide to the parent or guardian of each enrolled
student:

(1) Instructional materials, including software; [and]

(2) Information on the closest public facility that offers access to a
computer[, printer,] and Internet connection; AND

(3) INFORMATIONAL MATERIALS ON:

(I) SCHOOL POLICIES;

(II) STUDENT ATTENDANCE, CONDUCT, AND ENGAGEMENT
REQUIREMENTS;

(III) ACCESS TO EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES AND
WRAPAROUND SERVICES;

(IV) ACCESS TO FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICES AND HEALTH
CARE SERVICES;

(V) TECHNOLOGY REQUIREMENTS AND SUPPORT SERVICES;

(VI) CYBERSECURITY POLICY AND BEST PRACTICES;

(VII) TEACHER CONTACT INFORMATION AND OFFICE HOURS;
AND

(VIII) ANY OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION AS DETERMINED BY
THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL.

(B) (1) A VIRTUAL SCHOOL IS STRONGLY ENCOURAGED TO HOLD
IN–PERSON ORIENTATION SESSIONS WITH THE STUDENTS, PARENTS OR GUARDIANS,

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

AND SCHOOL PERSONNEL TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL HOLD AN ONLINE ORIENTATION TO
PROVIDE THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
IF THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL IS UNABLE TO HOLD IN–PERSON ORIENTATION SESSIONS.

[(b)] (C) A virtual school [may]:

(1) MAY not provide funds for the purchase of instructional programs or
materials to a student or to a student’s parent or guardian; AND

(2) SHALL PROVIDE THE APPROPRIATE DIGITAL DEVICE TO A
STUDENT TO PARTICIPATE IN THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL, IF REQUIRED.

[7–1405.] 7–1406.

(A) (1) A teacher [employed by] ASSIGNED TO a virtual school shall have a
teacher’s certificate issued by the State Superintendent under Title 6 of this article OR ANY
OTHER RELEVANT PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION AUTHORIZED UNDER COMAR
13A.12.01.

(2) TEACHERS OR EDUCATION SUPPORT PERSONNEL ASSIGNED TO
WORK IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL:

(I) BE AN EMPLOYEE OF THE COUNTY, OR A COLLABORATING
COUNTY, THAT ESTABLISHED THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL;

(II) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, BE
SUBJECT TO THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT OF THAT JURISDICTION;
AND

(III) HAVE ACCESS TO PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.

(B) A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT MAY INCLUDE PROVISIONS
SPECIFIC TO EMPLOYEES WHO WORK IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL IN CONSIDERATION OF
THE CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS RELEVANT TO THAT WORK ENVIRONMENT.

(C) AN EMPLOYEE ASSIGNED TO A VIRTUAL SCHOOL MAY NOT BE REQUIRED
TO PROVIDE VIRTUAL AND IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION OR SUPPORT TO STUDENTS
SIMULTANEOUSLY.

(D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COUNTY
BOARD SHALL DETERMINE THE APPROPRIATE STUDENT–TEACHER RATIO FOR THE
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SIZE OF A CLASS IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL BASED ON MULTIPLE FACTORS, INCLUDING
GRADE LEVEL, SUBJECT MATTER, AND TEACHER WORKLOAD.

(2) THE SIZE OF A CLASS IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL BE
CONSISTENT WITH THE COUNTYWIDE AVERAGE CLASS SIZE FOR IN–PERSON
CLASSES STUDENT–TEACHER RATIO OF A CLASS IN A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL BE
CONSISTENT WITH THE MEDIAN IN–PERSON CLASS SIZE BY COURSE AND GRADE
LEVEL.

(E) A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL PROVIDE TO A TEACHER AND ANY OTHER
EMPLOYEE ASSIGNED TO TEACH OR PROVIDE DIRECT INSTRUCTION IN A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL:

(1) THE TECHNOLOGY AND EQUIPMENT REQUIRED TO PERFORM THE
FUNCTIONS OF THE JOB; AND

(2) IF NECESSARY, A PHYSICAL SPACE TO CONDUCT TEACHING OR
PROVIDE DIRECT INSTRUCTION IN THE VIRTUAL SCHOOL.

(F) A VIRTUAL SCHOOL SHALL HAVE A PLANNED STAFFING MODEL,
INCLUDING PROVISIONS FOR STAFF RECRUITMENT, TRAINING, EVALUATION, AND
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.

[7–1406.] 7–1407.

A virtual school shall maintain an administrative office in the State that shall be
considered its principal place of business.

[7–1407.] 7–1408.

A virtual school shall be evaluated each year by [its sponsor] THE COUNTY BOARD
based on the following criteria:

(1) The extent to which the school demonstrates increases in student
achievement according to county and State academic standards; and

(2) The accountability and viability of the virtual school, as demonstrated
by its academic, fiscal, and operational performance.

[7–1408.] 7–1409.

(A) (1) (I) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT MAY ASSIGN THE DUTIES
RELATED TO THE OVERSIGHT OF VIRTUAL SCHOOLS TO THE APPROPRIATE OFFICE
OR DIVISION WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(II) THESE DUTIES SHALL INCLUDE:

1. THE DEVELOPMENT, COMPILATION, AND UPDATING
OF BEST PRACTICES FOR TEACHING AND LEARNING IN A VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT,
PROVISION OF SERVICES, AND THE OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF A VIRTUAL
SCHOOL; AND

2. LIAISING WITH COUNTY BOARDS THAT OPERATE
VIRTUAL SCHOOLS OR OTHER STAKEHOLDERS.

(2) THE OFFICE OR DIVISION ASSIGNED THE DUTIES UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY CREATE AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO
PROVIDE ADVICE ON TOPICS REGARDING VIRTUAL SCHOOLS AND VIRTUAL
LEARNING.

(B) The State Board shall adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this
subtitle, including establishing minimum criteria for the establishment and approval of a
virtual school.

SUBTITLE 14A. OPERATION OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS DURING A PROLONGED STATE
OF EMERGENCY – VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLANS.

7–14A–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “LEARNING LOSS” MEANS A GENERAL OR SPECIFIC LOSS OF
KNOWLEDGE OR SKILLS DUE TO AN EXTENDED GAP OR DISCONTINUITY IN A
STUDENT’S REGULAR EDUCATION PROGRAM.

(C) “PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY” MEANS A STATE OF EMERGENCY
DECLARED BY THE GOVERNOR UNDER TITLE 14 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE
THAT PREVENTS REGULAR, IN–PERSON ATTENDANCE AT A PUBLIC SCHOOL FOR AT
LEAST 14 CONSECUTIVE SCHOOL DAYS.

(D) “STUDENT ELIGIBLE FOR AID” MEANS A CHILD WHO:

(1) MEETS THE CERTIFICATION OF INCOME ELIGIBILITY UNDER ANY
OF THE FOLLOWING:

(I) SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM;

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES;

(III) HEAD START;

(IV) EVEN START;

(V) MEDICAID AND THE MARYLAND CHILDREN’S HEALTH
PROGRAM, UP TO 189% OF THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL; OR

(VI) FREE OR REDUCED PRICE MEALS FOR SCHOOLS NOT
PARTICIPATING IN THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE COMMUNITY
ELIGIBILITY PROVISION;

(2) IS IN FOSTER CARE;

(3) IS A MIGRANT STUDENT;

(4) IS A HOMELESS STUDENT; OR

(5) QUALIFIES UNDER AN ALTERNATIVE FORM DEVELOPED BY THE
DEPARTMENT FOR THE COMPENSATORY EDUCATION FORMULA UNDER § 5–222 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

(E) “VIRTUAL EDUCATION” MEANS ACADEMIC INSTRUCTION:

(1) IN WHICH ONE OR MORE TECHNOLOGIES ARE USED TO DELIVER A
SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF THE TEACHING TO STUDENTS ENTIRELY OR PRIMARILY
ONLINE; AND

(2) IN WHICH STUDENTS AND INSTRUCTORS PARTICIPATE REMOTELY
FROM SEPARATE LOCATIONS.

7–14A–02.

(A) IF THERE IS A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY, A COUNTY BOARD
MAY TRANSITION THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTY TO VIRTUAL EDUCATION
UNDER AN APPROVED VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN, SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS OF
THIS SECTION.

(B) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2024, A COUNTY BOARD SHALL, IN
CONSULTATION WITH COUNTY ADMINISTRATORS AND SCHOOL STAFF, ADOPT A
VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN FOR USE DURING A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(II) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL USE THE COUNTY BOARD’S
CONTINUITY OF LEARNING PLAN IN EFFECT DURING THE 2020–2021 SCHOOL YEAR
TO FORM A VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN.

(2) A VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING
COMPONENTS:

(I) A STAFFING AND PERSONNEL ASSIGNMENT PLAN;

(II) A STUDENT INSTRUCTION PLAN;

(III) A STUDENT ASSESSMENT AND LEARNING SUPPORT PLAN;

(IV) A SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING PLAN;

(V) A COMMUNITY COMMUNICATIONS PLAN;

(VI) A TECHNOLOGY PLAN;

(VII) A NUTRITIONAL AND HEALTH SERVICES PLAN; AND

(VIII) A PLAN FOR RETURN TO IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION.

(C) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL UPDATE THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN
EVERY 2 YEARS.

(D) (1) IF A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY REQUIRES THE
CESSATION OF IN–SCHOOL ATTENDANCE AT A PUBLIC SCHOOL AND THE COUNTY
BOARD DETERMINES VIRTUAL EDUCATION IS REQUIRED, A COUNTY BOARD
IMMEDIATELY SHALL IMPLEMENT THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN AND TRANSITION
THE PUBLIC SCHOOL TO VIRTUAL EDUCATION.

(2) (I) A COUNTY BOARD MAY ADJUST THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION
PLAN TO FIT THE SPECIFIC NEEDS OF THE SCHOOLS AFFECTED AND THE SPECIFIC
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE EMERGENCY.

(II) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL SUBMIT AN ADJUSTED PLAN TO
THE STATE BOARD AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE.

(E) (1) WITHIN 10 CALENDAR DAYS OF RECEIPT OF A VIRTUAL
EDUCATION PLAN, THE STATE BOARD SHALL:

(I) ACCEPT THE PLAN; OR

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) RETURN THE PLAN TO THE COUNTY BOARD FOR SPECIFIC
MODIFICATION.

(2) IF AN ADJUSTED VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN IS RETURNED, THE
COUNTY BOARD SHALL MODIFY AND RESUBMIT THE PLAN WITHIN 5 CALENDAR DAYS
AFTER THE DATE THE PLAN IS RETURNED.

(F) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL PUBLISH THE MOST RECENT VERSION OF
THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN ON THE COUNTY BOARD’S WEBSITE.

7–14A–03.

(A) THE COMPONENTS OF A VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN ADOPTED UNDER §
7–14A–02 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL INCLUDE THE INFORMATION INDICATED IN
THIS SECTION.

(B) THE STAFFING AND PERSONNEL ASSIGNMENT PLAN SHALL PROVIDE AN
APPROPRIATE ASSIGNMENT FOR ALL SCHOOL PERSONNEL AND, TO THE EXTENT
PRACTICABLE, REASONABLY BALANCED WORKLOADS.

(C) (1) THE STUDENT INSTRUCTION PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) PROVISION OF INSTRUCTION THROUGH THE APPROPRIATE
BALANCE OF SYNCHRONOUS AND ASYNCHRONOUS LEARNING;

(II) ACCESS TO THE SAME CURRICULUM, SUBJECT TO THE
EQUIVALENT STANDARDS, AS PROVIDED THROUGH IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION;

(III) STUDENT ENGAGEMENT PROCEDURES, INCLUDING
METHODS TO ENCOURAGE ACTIVE PARTICIPATION, VERIFIED STUDENT PRESENCE
DURING AN ENTIRE CLASS PERIOD, AND ACTIVATED CAMERAS WHEN APPROPRIATE;

(IV) A METHOD FOR PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS TO
STUDENTS; AND

(V) ATTENTION TO STUDENT EQUITY TO ENSURE ALL
STUDENTS ARE RECEIVING A THOROUGH AND APPROPRIATE EDUCATION DURING
THE PERIOD OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION.

(2) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL ENSURE THAT STUDENTS WITH A
DISABILITY ARE RECEIVING THEIR REQUIRED SERVICES AND A FREE AND
APPROPRIATE PUBLIC EDUCATION THROUGH VIRTUAL EDUCATION.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(D) THE STUDENT ASSESSMENT AND LEARNING SUPPORT PLAN SHALL
INCLUDE:

(1) THE ADMINISTRATION OF REGULAR ASSESSMENTS, PROVIDED
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION DOES NOT SIGNIFICANTLY DISRUPT REGULAR
INSTRUCTION;

(2) A PROCESS FOR ESTABLISHING BENCHMARKS AT THE START AND
END OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION, AND PERIODICALLY DURING THE COURSE OF VIRTUAL
EDUCATION IF REQUIRED; AND

(3) PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL LEARNING SUPPORTS FOR STUDENTS
IDENTIFIED AS HAVING LEARNING LOSS.

(E) THE SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) AN INTERACTIVE SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL WELLNESS
COMPONENT DESIGNED FOR THE VIRTUAL EDUCATION ENVIRONMENT;

(2) REGULAR STUDENT WELLNESS CHECK–INS IN ACCORDANCE WITH
§ 7–14A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(3) THE DEVELOPMENT OF A SCHOOL BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PLAN IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–14A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(F) THE COMMUNITY COMMUNICATIONS PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE FAMILY ENGAGEMENT PLAN THAT
HAS METHODS OF ENGAGING WITH:

(I) PARENTS AND GUARDIANS AND STUDENTS FROM VARIOUS
ETHNIC, RACIAL, AND CULTURAL BACKGROUNDS;

(II) STUDENTS ELIGIBLE FOR AID; AND

(III) PARENTS AND GUARDIANS AND STUDENTS WHOSE PRIMARY
LANGUAGE IS NOT ENGLISH;

(2) MULTIPLE METHODS FOR COMMUNICATING WITH STUDENTS,
PARENTS AND GUARDIANS, AND OTHER COMMUNITY STAKEHOLDERS DURING THE
PERIOD OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION; AND

(3) A METHOD FOR PRIORITIZING IMPORTANT INFORMATION THAT
MUST BE PROVIDED.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) THE TECHNOLOGY PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE PROVISION OF TECHNOLOGY, INCLUDING HARDWARE AND
SOFTWARE, TO STUDENTS AND SCHOOL PERSONNEL TO RECEIVE AND PROVIDE
INSTRUCTION AND SUPPORT SERVICES; AND

(2) ACCESS TO BROADBAND AND INTERNET SERVICES TO ALL
STUDENTS AND SCHOOL PERSONNEL.

(H) THE NUTRITIONAL AND HEALTH SERVICES PLAN SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE PLACES AND TIMES THAT STUDENTS AND OTHER ELIGIBLE
INDIVIDUALS MAY RECEIVE FREE MEALS; AND

(2) THE AVAILABILITY OF HEALTH SERVICES TO ELIGIBLE
INDIVIDUALS.

(I) THE PLAN FOR RETURN TO IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) PLANS TO RETURN RAPIDLY TO IN–PERSON LEARNING AS SOON
AS IT IS SAFE TO DO SO;

(2) A CLEAR PROCESS FOR STUDENT ENGAGEMENT ON RETURN TO
IN–PERSON LEARNING; AND

(3) IDENTIFIED STRATEGIES FOR A RETURN TO IN–PERSON
LEARNING FOLLOWING A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY.

7–14A–04.

(A) (1) THE SCHOOL PERSONNEL AT EACH SCHOOL SHALL DEVELOP A
SCHOOL BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PLAN TO ASSIST STUDENTS WHO ARE STRUGGLING
WHEN THE SCHOOL IS OPERATING UNDER A VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN THAT
INCLUDES:

(I) PROPER ASSIGNMENTS FOR ALL BEHAVIORAL AND MENTAL
HEALTH STAFF;

(II) METHODS FOR ALL STUDENTS TO ACCESS BEHAVIORAL AND
MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS, INCLUDING THROUGH TELEHEALTH IF NECESSARY;

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(III) PROCEDURES FOR REFERRAL OF STUDENTS WHO ARE
STRUGGLING TO ACCESS PROPER BEHAVIORAL AND MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS;
AND

(IV) INCREASED ATTENTION AND CARE FOR STUDENTS
STRUGGLING WITH THE EMOTIONAL, BEHAVIORAL, OR PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESSORS
OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION.

(2) IN ESTABLISHING A BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PLAN UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, A SCHOOL MAY USE A MULTITIERED SYSTEM OF SUPPORTS MODEL.

(B) (1) (I) WHILE A SCHOOL IS OPERATING UNDER A VIRTUAL
EDUCATION PLAN, THE PRINCIPAL SHALL REQUIRE A STAFF MEMBER TO CONDUCT
REGULAR WELLNESS CHECK–INS WITH STUDENTS AT LEAST ONCE PER WEEK.

(II) THE PRINCIPAL MAY ASSIGN A COMMUNITY SCHOOL
COORDINATOR, STAFF MEMBER, OR TEAM OF STAFF TO CONDUCT THE WELLNESS
CHECK–INS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) (I) IF A REGULAR WELLNESS CHECK–IN REVEALS THAT A
STUDENT IS STRUGGLING WITH THE EDUCATIONAL, EMOTIONAL, BEHAVIORAL, OR
PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESSORS OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION, THE PRINCIPAL SHALL
REQUIRE A STAFF MEMBER, IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, TO:

1. CHECK IN WITH THE STUDENT MULTIPLE TIMES PER
WEEK; AND

2. DEVELOP AN INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PLAN
CONSISTENT WITH THE SCHOOL BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PLAN ESTABLISHED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(II) THE PRINCIPAL SHALL ARRANGE FOR A SCHOOL
PSYCHOLOGIST, PUPIL PERSONNEL WORKER, SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKER, SCHOOL
COUNSELOR, OR BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SPECIALIST TO PERFORM THE TASKS
REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

7–14A–05.

(A) (1) A PUBLIC SCHOOL SHALL ESTABLISH A SYSTEM OF LEARNING
SUPPORTS WHILE OPERATING UNDER A VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN BY:

(I) 1. ESTABLISHING A VIRTUAL TUTORING SYSTEM; OR

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONAL TIME FOR VIRTUAL
LEARNING THAT IS IN ADDITION TO THE DAILY AND HOURLY ATTENDANCE
REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 7–103 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(II) DEVELOPING A PLAN TO FOCUS ON STUDENTS WITH THE
GREATEST NEED AND THE MOST LEARNING LOSS, INCLUDING:

1. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES; AND

2. STUDENTS IN HISTORICALLY UNDERSERVED
GROUPS, INCLUDING:

A. ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS; AND

B. STUDENTS ELIGIBLE FOR AID.

(2) IN SATISFYING ITS DUTIES UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, A PUBLIC
SCHOOL MAY NOT REQUIRE STAFF MEMBERS WHOSE TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT ARE
SUBJECT TO A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT TO WORK IN EXCESS OF
NEGOTIATED TERMS ON WORK HOURS.

(B) (1) IN COMPLIANCE WITH PUBLIC HEALTH GUIDANCE, A COUNTY
BOARD THAT HAS PUBLIC SCHOOLS OPERATING UNDER A VIRTUAL EDUCATION
PLAN SHALL ESTABLISH LEARNING CENTERS IN SUITABLE UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS,
INCLUDING STATE BUILDINGS THAT ARE NOT IN USE.

(2) IF FUNDING IS AVAILABLE DURING THE PROLONGED SCHOOL
CLOSURE, A COUNTY BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL LEARNING CENTERS
PRIORITIZING:

(I) COMMUNITY SCHOOLS ELIGIBLE FOR CONCENTRATION OF
POVERTY GRANTS UNDER § 5–223 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(II) 1. AREAS WITH HIGH LEVELS OF ABSENTEEISM DURING
THE PROLONGED SCHOOL CLOSURE; OR

2. IF THE DATA UNDER ITEM 1 OF THIS ITEM IS
UNAVAILABLE, AREAS WITH HIGH LEVELS OF ABSENTEEISM DURING THE PREVIOUS
SCHOOL YEAR.

7–14A–06.

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

(A) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 15, 2023, AND EACH AUGUST 15 THEREAFTER,
ONLY WHEN APPLICABLE, EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL COLLECT THE FOLLOWING
DATA FROM EACH SCHOOL THAT ENGAGED IN VIRTUAL EDUCATION IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE COUNTY BOARD’S VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLAN DURING THE PREVIOUS
SCHOOL YEAR:

(1) THE LEARNING MODELS EMPLOYED, INCLUDING:

(I) VIRTUAL EDUCATION;

(II) IN–PERSON INSTRUCTION; AND

(III) HYBRID INSTRUCTION;

(2) THE PROPORTION OF SCHOOL HOURS SPENT IN EACH LEARNING
MODEL;

(3) STUDENT ATTENDANCE;

(4) STUDENT ENGAGEMENT; AND

(5) TEACHER ATTENDANCE.

(B) EACH APPLICABLE YEAR, EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL PUBLISH ON ITS
WEBSITE THE DATA REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
DISAGGREGATED BY RACE, ETHNICITY, GENDER, DISABILITY STATUS, ENGLISH
PROFICIENCY STATUS, AND INCOME.

7–14A–07.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH STANDARDS FOR TRAINING
TEACHERS ON THE PREPARATION OF PLANS FOR THE PROVISION OF VIRTUAL
EDUCATION WHEN A PUBLIC SCHOOL IS OPERATING UNDER A VIRTUAL EDUCATION
PLAN.

(B) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL PROVIDE PERIODIC PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORTS FOR TEACHERS.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE FUNDING FOR THE PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORTS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION.

(D) DURING PERIODS OF A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY DURING
WHICH A SCHOOL HAS ELECTED TO TRANSITION TO VIRTUAL EDUCATION, THE

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR SCHOOL
PERSONNEL.

7–14A–08.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL EXPAND COMPUTER AND INTERNET
SECURITY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR VIRTUAL EDUCATION, INCLUDING STAFF TO
MAINTAIN SECURITY.

(B) EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL DEDICATE AT LEAST ONE STAFF
MEMBER TO OVERSEE COMPUTER AND INTERNET SECURITY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR
VIRTUAL EDUCATION.

7–14A–09.

THE STATE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING ESTABLISHING MINIMUM CRITERIA FOR
THE ADOPTION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF VIRTUAL EDUCATION PLANS BY A COUNTY
BOARD DURING A PROLONGED STATE OF EMERGENCY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 31,
2023, the State Superintendent of Schools shall submit a report to the State Board of
Education and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General
Assembly on findings and recommendations regarding the appropriate balance of the
number of hours of synchronous learning and asynchronous learning for instructional
effectiveness for students in virtual schools based on research that has systematically
examined this issue and collaboration with local school systems.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, a virtual school established
and operated by a county board of education under § 4–109 of the Education Article and
approved by the State Department of Education under § 7–1402 of the Education Article
before the effective date of this Act, including a virtual education program established
through the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational Consortium for students enrolled in
public schools in counties that are members of the Consortium, may continue to operate as
a virtual school through the 2024–2025 school year.

(2) The State Department of Education may revoke approval of a virtual
school authorized to continue operations under paragraph (1) of this subsection if during
the previous school year the virtual school performed in the bottom 10% of schools as
determined by metrics of the State accountability system.

(b) A virtual school that is authorized to continue operations under subsection (a)
of this section is encouraged to seek all available opportunities to bring the virtual school

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 804

into compliance with the requirements for virtual schools enacted under Section 1 of this
Act as soon as practicable if not otherwise inconsistent with the law.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) On or before July 1, ~~2024,~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education,~~ ~~in~~ ~~consultation~~
~~with~~ ~~current~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~teachers,~~ ~~current~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~administrators,~~ ~~academic~~ ~~experts,~~
~~and~~ ~~state~~ ~~and~~ ~~national~~ ~~experts~~ ~~in~~ ~~online~~ ~~education,~~ ~~shall~~ 2023, the State Department of
Education shall convene a study group, including county boards of education, institutions
of higher education, public school administrators, parents, teachers, students, and other
relevant stakeholders, to:

(1) study ~~best~~ ~~practices~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~virtual~~ ~~education,~~ and identify
appropriate next steps in virtual education and leveraging technology and digital learning
in the classroom, including:

(i) the successes and failures of virtual education during the
COVID–19 pandemic and how lessons learned can be incorporated into virtual education
going forward;

(ii) how to ensure equitable education to all students in a virtual
education setting;

(iii) whether particular students excel or are harmed under virtual
education, the causes of those outcomes, and whether student enrollment in a virtual school
should be limited or expanded based on those outcomes;

(iv) accommodations that may need to be made in order to provide
students with a fair and appropriate public education;

(v) the best methods to select students for enrollment in a virtual
school;

(vi) criteria for selecting staff to work in and administrators to lead
virtual schools;

(vii) methods to accurately assess student progress during virtual
education;

(viii) the types of tools and resources that are necessary for a student
to fully learn when engaged in virtual education and how a county board can provide the
tools and resources;

(ix) the behavioral health costs of virtual education and how those
costs might be mitigated;

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 804 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(x) how best to actively involve parents and families in the virtual
education process; ~~and~~

(xi) documenting existing resources for virtual schools and programs;

(xii) reviewing models of virtual schools and programs in other states
and nations;

(xiii) exploring alternative models and recommending improvements
for Maryland virtual schools and programs; ~~and~~

~~(xi)~~ (xiv) the infrastructure necessary for and effectiveness of
collaborations between multiple counties operating a single virtual school; and

(xv) how needed services, including nutritional services, may be best
provided to a student enrolled in a virtual school; and

(2) develop criteria for the establishment of virtual schools that:

(i) incorporate the data gathered under item (1) of this subsection;
and

(ii) are at least as rigorous as the criteria listed under Title 7,
Subtitle 14 of the Education Article as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

(b) On or before September 1, 2024, the Department shall report to the Governor
and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly
on the results of the study and the criteria developed under subsection (a) of this section.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a county board of education may
not establish, and the State Department of Education and the State Board of Education
may not approve, a new elementary grade band virtual school on or before December 1,
2024.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Enacted under Article II, § 17(c) of the Maryland Constitution, May 28, 2023.

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24