START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 648 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 648 
(Senator Rosapepe) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Electronic Health Networks and Electronic Medical Records - Nursing Homes - 
Release of Records 
 
 
This bill authorizes a nursing home that contracts with or uses an electronic health 
network (EHN) or electronic medical record (EMR) vendor to direct the vendor to release 
patient medical records or electronic health care transactions to a “business associate” of 
the nursing home. The bill includes requirements for EHN or EMR vendors related to 
release this information. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An EHN or EMR vendor releasing patient medical records or electronic 
health care transactions under the bill:   
 
 
must release the records or transactions in an electronic format that conforms to 
certain specifications; 
 
must make the records or transactions available on a regular basis and release the 
information in a timely manner to support patient care and monitoring; and 
 
may not restrict, limit, or charge a fee for the release of the records or transactions. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 648/ Page 2 
Current Law:   
 
Business Associate 
 
Under federal regulations (45 CFR § 160.103), “business associate” includes (1) a health 
information organization, electronic prescribing gateway, or other person that provides 
data transmission services with respect to protected health information to a covered entity; 
(2) a person that offers a personal health record to one or more individuals on behalf of the 
covered entity; and (3) a subcontractor that creates, receives, maintains, or transmits 
protected health information on behalf of the business associate. 
 
Electronic Sharing of Health Information 
 
The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) designated the Chesapeake Regional 
Information System for Our Patients (CRISP) as the statewide health information 
exchange (HIE) in 2009, and the infrastructure became operational in 2010. An HIE allows 
clinical information to move electronically among disparate health information systems. 
CRISP offers tools aimed at improving the facilitation of care for the region’s health care 
providers. Pursuant to Chapters 790 and 791 of 2021, a nursing home, on request of the 
Maryland Department of Health, must electronically submit clinical information to CRISP. 
 
An EHN is an entity (1) involved in the exchange of electronic health care transactions 
between a payor, health care provider, vendor, and any other entity and (2) certified by 
MHCC. Electronic health care transactions are health care transactions that have been 
approved by a nationally recognized health care standards development organization to 
support health care informatics, information exchange, systems integration, and other 
health care applications. 
 
An EHN must provide electronic health care transactions to CRISP for the following public 
health and clinical purposes:  (1) a State health improvement program; (2) mitigation of a 
public health emergency; and (3) improvement of patient safety. An EHN may not charge 
a fee to a health care provider, health care payor, or CRISP for providing the required 
information. 
 
Nationally, the electronic transmission and sharing of health information is governed by 
the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). HIPAA 
requires the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish standards for 
electronic health transactions, including claims, enrollment, eligibility, payment, and 
coordination of benefits. These standards also must address the security of electronic health 
information systems. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 648/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 786 (Delegate Guzzone, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - April 13, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 13, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3