START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

Chapter 549

(Senate Bill 650)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – State Disaster Recovery Fund

FOR the purpose of establishing the State Disaster Recovery Fund as a special, nonlapsing
fund to provide disaster related assistance under certain circumstances; requiring
interest earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; requiring the Maryland
Department of Emergency Management to administer the State Disaster Recovery
Fund; ~~authorizing~~ ~~a~~ ~~portion~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Disaster~~ ~~Recovery~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~transferred~~
~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Federal~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Shutdown~~ ~~Employee~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Loan~~
~~Fund~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~event~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~government~~ ~~shutdown;~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Catastrophic~~ ~~Event~~
~~Account;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~the~~ ~~balance~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Catastrophic~~ ~~Event~~
~~Account~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Disaster~~ ~~Recovery~~ ~~Fund~~ making alterations to the Catastrophic
Event Account authorized uses to allow funds to be used by a unit of local government;
and generally relating to the State Disaster Recovery Fund and Catastrophic Event
Account.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 14–110.5
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~7–324~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171. and 7–324
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 549 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

14–110.5.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE STATE DISASTER RECOVERY FUND.

(3) “LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATION” MEANS A FORMAL REQUEST
FOR STATE DISASTER RELIEF AND RECOVERY ASSISTANCE MADE AS A RESULT OF
AN EMERGENCY BY THE SENIOR ELECTED OFFICIAL THROUGH THE LOCAL
ORGANIZATION FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.

(B) THERE IS A STATE DISASTER RECOVERY FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE:

(1) DISASTER RECOVERY ASSISTANCE TO INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES
WHEN A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS SUBMITTED A REQUEST FOR A DISASTER
DECLARATION BUT A FEDERAL DISASTER DECLARATION IS NOT RECEIVED;

(2) DISASTER RECOVERY ASSISTANCE TO UNITS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE FOR THE REPAIR, RESTORATION, RECONSTRUCTION,
OR REPLACEMENT OF A PUBLIC FACILITY DAMAGED OR DESTROYED WHEN A
FEDERAL DISASTER DECLARATION IS NOT RECEIVED;

(3) LOW–INTEREST OR NO–INTEREST LOANS TO BUSINESSES AND
NONPROFITS FOR DISASTER RECOVERY ASSISTANCE WHEN A FEDERAL DISASTER
DECLARATION IS NOT RECEIVED;

(4) DISASTER–RELATED ASSISTANCE FOR UNMET NEEDS OF
INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES FOLLOWING A FEDERAL DISASTER DECLARATION;

(5) DISASTER–RELATED ASSISTANCE FOR UNMET NEEDS OF
INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES WHO HAVE BEEN DENIED FEDERAL ASSISTANCE BUT
OTHERWISE MEET CRITERIA ESTABLISHED FOR THE FUND; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

(6) MATCHING FUNDS FOR ASSISTANCE TO INDIVIDUALS AND STATE
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL UNITS AFTER A FEDERAL DISASTER DECLARATION.

(D) THE FUND:

(1) IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO §
7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE;

(2) SHALL BE AVAILABLE IN PERPETUITY FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PROVIDING DISASTER RECOVERY ASSISTANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION;

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION, MAY
BE USED ONLY IF:

(I) THE GOVERNOR HAS DECLARED A STATE OF EMERGENCY;
OR

(II) A LOCAL ORGANIZATION FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
REQUESTS ASSISTANCE FROM THE FUND;

(4) IS NOT INTENDED TO DUPLICATE OR REPLACE FEDERAL
DISASTER ASSISTANCE; AND

(5) MAY NOT BE USED FOR ANY OTHER PURPOSE OTHER THAN THOSE
DESCRIBED IN THIS SECTION.

(E) A PORTION OF THE FUND MAY BE USED TO ADMINISTER THE FUND,
INCLUDING PROVIDING DISASTER CASE MANAGEMENT RESOURCES.

(F) (1) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2025, THE THE GOVERNOR SHALL
MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL ~~A~~ ~~SUFFICIENT~~ AN APPROPRIATION TO
BRING THE MINIMUM BALANCE OF THE FUND TO AT LEAST $20,000,000 AT THE
START OF EACH FISCAL YEAR, WITH FUNDS CONSISTING.

(2) THE FUND SHALL CONSIST OF:

(1) (I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND;

(2) (II) REPAYMENTS OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST FROM LOANS
MADE FROM THE FUND;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 549 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) (III) REIMBURSEMENTS FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR
OTHER LEGAL ENTITIES FOR DISASTER RECOVERY ASSISTANCE EXPENDITURES
MADE FROM THE FUND; AND

(4) (IV) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(V) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND IN
THE SAME MANNER THAT OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(G) (1) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(H) ANY FUNDS EXPENDED FROM THE FUND ARE SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND
ARE NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT OTHERWISE WOULD BE
APPROPRIATED TO ELIGIBLE RECIPIENTS FROM THE FUND FOR ANY OTHER
PURPOSE.

(I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) ADMINISTER THE FUND;

(2) ESTABLISH ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA, POLICIES, AND PROCEDURES
FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND, WHILE CONSIDERING EXISTING STATE
DISASTER RECOVERY PROGRAMS AND FEDERAL DISASTER RELIEF AND RECOVERY
REQUIREMENTS; AND

(3) CONSULT WITH APPROPRIATE STATE AGENCIES AND LOCAL
ORGANIZATIONS FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA, POLICIES, AND PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF THE
FUND.

(J) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ESTABLISH:

(1) REGULATIONS RELATED TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

(2) ACCOUNTS AND SUB–ACCOUNTS WITHIN THE FUND TO
EFFECTUATE THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION; AND

(3) FORMAL ADVISORY BODIES TO ADVISE ON THE ADMINISTRATION
OF THE FUND.

(K) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2023, AND ON OR BEFORE EACH
DECEMBER 31 THEREAFTER, THE SECRETARY SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR
AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE USE OF THE FUND FOR THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR.

(2) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE NUMBER OF STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARATIONS BY
THE GOVERNOR;

(II) THE NUMBER OF LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY
DECLARATIONS AND LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATIONS SUBMITTED TO THE
SECRETARY AND THE REASON FOR EACH DECLARATION;

(III) A SUMMARY OF THE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT DATA RELATED
TO EACH DECLARATION, AND THE DISPOSITION OF EACH REQUEST FOR THE
PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR;

(IV) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDING DISTRIBUTED TO EACH ELIGIBLE
ENTITY BY THE FUND FOR THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR;

(V) THE FUND BALANCE AT THE END OF THE PREVIOUS FISCAL
YEAR;

(VI) ANY FEDERAL DISASTER DECLARATIONS REQUESTED AND
ASSOCIATED DAMAGE ASSESSMENT DATA FOR THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR;

(VII) A SUMMARY OF ANY FEDERAL DISASTER ASSISTANCE
RECEIVED DURING THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR;

(VIII) A SUMMARY OF ANY REGULATIONS ISSUED RELATED TO THE
FUND DURING THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR; AND

(IX) ANY RECOMMENDED CHANGES TO THIS SECTION TO
INCREASE THE EFFICIENCY AND EFFICACY OF THE FUND.

(L) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AFTER A
15–DAY REVIEW AND COMMENT PERIOD BY THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE,
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 549 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE GOVERNOR MAY TRANSFER FUNDS BY BUDGET AMENDMENT FROM THE FUND
TO THE EXPENDITURE ACCOUNTS OF THE APPROPRIATE UNIT OF STATE
~~GOVERNMENT.~~

(2) IF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS IN A FULL OR PARTIAL
SHUTDOWN DUE TO A LAPSE IN APPROPRIATIONS, AFTER A 2–DAY REVIEW AND
COMMENT PERIOD BY THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE, THE GOVERNOR MAY
TRANSFER FUNDS BY BUDGET AMENDMENT FROM THE FUND TO THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE LOAN FUND ESTABLISHED
UNDER § 7–327 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the State
Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to receive
interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General Fund of
the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE STATE DISASTER RECOVERY FUND.

~~[7–324.~~

(a) In this section, “Account” means the Catastrophic Event Account.

(b) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Account is established to enable
the State OR A LOCAL GOVERNMENT to respond without undue delay to a natural disaster
or other catastrophic situation, or federal civilian employee financial hardship from a full
or partial federal government shutdown due to a lapse in federal appropriations that cannot
be taken care of within the resources of existing appropriations.

(c) The Governor may provide an appropriation in the budget bill to the Account.

(d) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, after a 15–day review and
comment period by the Legislative Policy Committee, the Governor may transfer funds by

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

budget amendment from the Account to the expenditure accounts of the appropriate unit
of State government OR UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.

(2) If the federal government is in a full or partial shutdown due to a lapse
in appropriations, after a 2–day review and comment period by the Legislative Policy
Committee, the Governor may transfer funds by budget amendment from the Account to
the Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund established under §
7–327 of this subtitle.

(e) Funds appropriated to the Catastrophic Event Account:

(1) may not be used to offset operating deficiencies in regular programs of
State government; but

(2) may be expended to assist a unit of State government OR UNIT OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT in funding costs in connection with a natural disaster, a
catastrophic situation, or a full or partial federal government shutdown due to a lapse in
appropriations.

(f) (1) The Account is a continuing, nonlapsing fund which is not subject to §
7–302 of this subtitle.

(2) The Treasurer shall separately hold, and the Comptroller shall account
for, the Account.

(3) The Account shall be invested and reinvested in the same manner as
other State funds.

(4) Any investment earnings shall be subject to § 7–311(d) of this subtitle.

(g) Money appropriated to the Account does not revert to the Revenue
Stabilization Account.]

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~balance~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Catastrophic~~ ~~Event~~ ~~Account~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~transferred~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Disaster~~
~~Recovery~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~established~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~14–110.5~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~
~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

SECTION ~~2.~~ ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7