START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 805

Chapter 805

(Senate Bill 691)

AN ACT concerning

Home Amenity Rentals – Sales and Use Tax Imposed and Local Tax Authorized

FOR the purpose of applying the sales and use tax to a sale or use of certain home amenity
rentals; authorizing a county or municipality to impose a certain home amenity
rental tax under certain circumstances and subject to certain limitations; and
generally relating to the taxation of home amenity rentals.

BY renumbering
Article – Tax – General
Section 11–101(c–6) through (c–8)
to be Section 11–101(c–10) through (c–12), respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 11–101(a) and (l)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Tax – General
Section 11–101(c–6) through (c–9)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 11–101(k)(1), (l)(5) and (6), and (o)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 20–901 through 20–911 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Local Home
Amenity Rental Tax”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2022 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 805 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 11–101(c–6) through (c–8) of Article – Tax – General of the Annotated Code
of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 11–101(c–10) through (c–12), respectively.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Tax – General

11–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(C–6) “HOME AMENITY” MEANS ANY PORTION, WHETHER INDOORS OR
OUTDOORS, OF A RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY, EXCLUDING BEDROOMS OR ANY
PORTION OF THE PROPERTY INTENDED FOR SLEEPING QUARTERS, THAT IS
OCCUPIED BY THE HOUR AND FOR NOT MORE THAN 15 HOURS CONSECUTIVELY.

(C–7) “HOME AMENITY RENTAL” MEANS THE TEMPORARY USE IN EXCHANGE
FOR CONSIDERATION OF A HOME AMENITY.

(C–8) (1) “HOME AMENITY RENTAL INTERMEDIARY” MEANS A PERSON,
OTHER THAN A HOME AMENITY RENTAL PROVIDER, WHO FACILITATES THE SALE OR
USE OF A HOME AMENITY AND CHARGES A BUYER THE TAXABLE PRICE FOR THE
HOME AMENITY RENTAL.

(2) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PERSON SHALL BE
CONSIDERED TO FACILITATE THE SALE OR USE OF A HOME AMENITY IF THE PERSON
BROKERS, COORDINATES, OR IN ANY OTHER WAY ARRANGES FOR THE SALE OR USE
OF A HOME AMENITY BY A BUYER.

(C–9) “HOME AMENITY RENTAL PLATFORM” MEANS AN INTERNET–BASED
DIGITAL ENTITY THAT:

(1) ADVERTISES THE AVAILABILITY OF HOME AMENITIES; AND

(2) RECEIVES COMPENSATION FOR FACILITATING RESERVATIONS OR
PROCESSING BOOKING TRANSACTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OWNER, OPERATOR, OR
MANAGER OF A HOME AMENITY.

(k) (1) “Tangible personal property” means:

(i) corporeal personal property of any nature;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 805

(ii) an accommodation; [or]

(iii) a short–term rental; OR

(IV) A HOME AMENITY RENTAL.

(l) (1) “Taxable price” means the value, in money, of the consideration of any
kind that is paid, delivered, payable, or deliverable by a buyer to a vendor in the
consummation and complete performance of a sale without deduction for any expense or
cost, including the cost of:

(i) any labor or service rendered;

(ii) any material used; or

(iii) any property, digital code, or digital product sold.

(5) “Taxable price” includes[,]:

(I) for the sale or use of an accommodation facilitated by an
accommodations intermediary or a short–term rental platform, the full amount of the
consideration paid by a buyer for the sale or use of an accommodation, but not including
any tax that is remitted to a taxing authority; AND

(II) FOR THE SALE OR USE OF A HOME AMENITY RENTAL
FACILITATED BY A HOME AMENITY RENTAL INTERMEDIARY OR HOME AMENITY
RENTAL PLATFORM, THE FULL AMOUNT OF CONSIDERATION PAID BY A BUYER FOR
THE SALE OR USE OF A HOME AMENITY RENTAL, BUT NOT INCLUDING ANY TAX THAT
IS REMITTED TO A TAXING AUTHORITY.

(6) “Taxable price” does not include[,]:

(I) for the sale or use of an accommodation facilitated by an
accommodations intermediary or a short–term rental platform, a commission paid by an
accommodations provider to a person after facilitating the sale or use of an accommodation;
OR

(II) FOR THE SALE OR USE OF A HOME AMENITY RENTAL
FACILITATED BY A HOME AMENITY RENTAL INTERMEDIARY OR HOME AMENITY
RENTAL PLATFORM, A COMMISSION PAID BY A HOME AMENITY RENTAL PROVIDER
TO A PERSON AFTER FACILITATING THE SALE OR USE OF A HOME AMENITY RENTAL.

(o) (1) “Vendor” means a person who:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 805 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) engages in the business of an out–of–state vendor, as defined in
§ 11–701 of this title;

(ii) engages in the business of a retail vendor, as defined in § 11–701
of this title;

(iii) holds a special license issued under § 11–707 of this title;

(iv) is an accommodations intermediary OR A HOME AMENITY
RENTAL INTERMEDIARY;

(v) is a short–term rental platform OR HOME AMENITY RENTAL
PLATFORM;

(vi) engages in the business of a marketplace facilitator; or

(vii) engages in the business of a marketplace seller.

Article – Local Government

SUBTITLE 9. LOCAL HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX.

PART I. COUNTY HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX.

20–901.

(A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “HOME AMENITY” MEANS ANY PORTION, WHETHER INDOORS OR
OUTDOORS, OF A RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY, EXCLUDING BEDROOMS OR ANY
PORTION OF THE PROPERTY INTENDED FOR SLEEPING QUARTERS, THAT IS
OCCUPIED BY THE HOUR AND FOR NOT MORE THAN 15 HOURS CONSECUTIVELY.

(C) “HOME AMENITY RENTAL” MEANS THE TEMPORARY USE IN EXCHANGE
FOR CONSIDERATION OF A HOME AMENITY.

(D) “HOME AMENITY RENTAL CHARGE” MEANS A CHARGE FOR A HOME
AMENITY RENTAL, EXCLUDING ANY CHARGE FOR SERVICES.

(E) “HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX” MEANS THE TAX ON A HOME AMENITY
RENTAL CHARGE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 805

(F) “WESTERN MARYLAND CODE COUNTY” MEANS A CODE COUNTY IN THE
WESTERN MARYLAND CLASS AS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–302 OF THIS ARTICLE.

20–902.

THIS PART APPLIES ONLY TO:

(1) A CHARTER COUNTY;

(2) A CODE COUNTY;

(3) CALVERT COUNTY;

(4) CARROLL COUNTY;

(5) CECIL COUNTY;

(6) GARRETT COUNTY;

(7) ST. MARY’S COUNTY;

(8) SOMERSET COUNTY; AND

(9) WASHINGTON COUNTY.

20–903.

(A) A COUNTY MAY IMPOSE, BY RESOLUTION, A HOME AMENITY RENTAL
TAX.

(B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO CALVERT COUNTY,
CHARLES COUNTY, AND ST. MARY’S COUNTY.

(2) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY SHALL HOLD A PUBLIC
HEARING BEFORE IMPOSING A HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX.

(3) THE HEARING:

(I) SHALL BE ADVERTISED TWICE IN A NEWSPAPER OF
GENERAL CIRCULATION IN THE COUNTY AT LEAST 10 DAYS BEFORE THE HEARING;
AND

(II) MAY NOT BE PART OF THE ANNUAL BUDGET HEARING.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 805 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

20–904.

(A) SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION, THE HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX RATE IS
THE RATE THAT THE COUNTY SETS BY RESOLUTION.

(B) THE HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX RATE MAY NOT EXCEED:

(1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, 1.5% IN A
CODE COUNTY;

(2) 1.5% IN CECIL COUNTY;

(3) 2% IN TALBOT COUNTY;

(4) 2.5% IN CALVERT COUNTY, CARROLL COUNTY, CHARLES
COUNTY, DORCHESTER COUNTY, FREDERICK COUNTY, ST. MARY’S COUNTY, AND
SOMERSET COUNTY;

(5) 3% IN WICOMICO COUNTY; AND

(6) 4% IN GARRETT COUNTY.

(C) WITH THE UNANIMOUS CONSENT OF THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS:

(1) A CODE COUNTY OTHER THAN A WESTERN MARYLAND CODE
COUNTY MAY SET A HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX RATE UP TO 2.5%; AND

(2) A WESTERN MARYLAND CODE COUNTY MAY SET A HOME AMENITY
RENTAL TAX RATE UP TO 4%.

(D) THE HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX RATE IN WASHINGTON COUNTY IS 3%.

20–905.

TO PROVIDE FOR THE ORDERLY, SYSTEMATIC, AND THOROUGH
ADMINISTRATION OF THE HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX, A COUNTY MAY ADOPT
REGULATIONS THAT:

(1) ARE CONSISTENT WITH THIS PART; AND

(2) CONFORM TO THE APPLICABLE PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
FOR THE SALES AND USE TAX UNDER TITLE 11 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

20–906. RESERVED

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 805

20–907. RESERVED.

PART II. MUNICIPAL HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX.

20–908.

THE DEFINITIONS IN § 20–901 OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLY IN THIS PART.

20–909.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A
MUNICIPALITY MAY IMPOSE, BY ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION, A HOME AMENITY
RENTAL TAX.

(B) A MUNICIPALITY MAY NOT IMPOSE A HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX IF THE
MUNICIPALITY IS LOCATED IN A COUNTY THAT DOES NOT IMPOSE A HOME AMENITY
RENTAL TAX UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

20–910.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A MUNICIPALITY SHALL
SET THE RATE OF THE HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX.

(B) THE HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX FOR A MUNICIPALITY MAY NOT
EXCEED 1%.

20–911.

A MUNICIPALITY THAT IMPOSES A HOME AMENITY RENTAL TAX MAY PROVIDE
FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF THE TAX.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, ~~2023~~ 2024.

Enacted under Article II, § 17(c) of the Maryland Constitution, May 28, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7