START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 190

Chapter 190

(Senate Bill 641)

AN ACT concerning

Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System – City of Bowie Police Department –
Transfers and Purchases of Service

FOR the purpose of authorizing a transfer of certain service credit to, and a purchase of
certain service credit in, the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System for certain
local law enforcement officers of the City of Bowie Police Department hired at certain
time periods under certain circumstances; and generally relating to transfers and
purchases of service credit in the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) This section applies to an individual who was hired on or ~~before~~ after January
1, 2007, and not later than December 31, 2015, as an employee of the City of Bowie Police
Department.

(b) On or before December 31, 2023, an individual described in subsection (a) of
this section may submit documentation verifying:

(1) the date the individual ceased employment with the employer
immediately prior to the City of Bowie Police Department, provided by the prior employer;

(2) the date the individual began employment with the City of Bowie Police
Department, provided by the City of Bowie Police Department;

(3) at the time of the individual’s hiring, that the City of Bowie Police
Department failed to provide accurate and complete information regarding eligibility to
transfer service credit accrued to the State Retirement and Pension System in accordance
with § 22–209 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, without which the individual
failed to transfer service credit accrued to the State Retirement and Pension System; and

(4) acknowledgement by the City of Bowie Police Department affirming
that the City of Bowie Police Department failed to provide the individual accurate and
complete information as described in item (3) of this subsection, provided in writing and
addressing only the individual requesting the acknowledgement.

(c) (1) This subsection applies to an individual who:

(i) meets the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 190 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) has not incurred a break in service prior to employment with the
City of Bowie Police Department; and

(iii) has not withdrawn the individual’s member contributions from
the prior employer’s retirement system.

(2) An individual described under paragraph (1) of this subsection may
request a transfer of creditable service to the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System
in accordance with this subsection and on a form that the Board of Trustees for the State
Retirement and Pension System provides.

(3) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, a
transfer of service under this subsection shall be in accordance with Title 37 of the State
Personnel and Pensions Article.

(ii) A transfer of service under this subsection is not subject to the
requirements under Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article:

1. to transfer service within 1 year of becoming a member of
a State system; and

2. limiting benefits payable on transferred service if the
individual retires within 5 years of transferring service.

(d) (1) This subsection applies to an individual who:

(i) meets the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section;

(ii) has not incurred a break in service prior to employment with the
City of Bowie Police Department; and

(iii) has withdrawn the individual’s member contributions from the
prior employer’s retirement system.

(2) An individual described under paragraph (1) of this subsection may
purchase service credit as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection for which the
individual is not otherwise entitled.

(3) An individual who purchases service credit under this subsection shall:

(i) complete a claim for the service credit and file it with the Board
of Trustees on a form that the Board of Trustees provides; and

(ii) pay to the Board of Trustees in a single payment the member
contributions the member would have made for the period of employment for which service
credit is being purchased if the member had earned the prior service in the same part of

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 190

the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System in which the member is currently enrolled,
plus regular interest to the date of payment.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. It shall remain effective for a period of 6 months and, at the end of December 31,
2023, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated
and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3