START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 639 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 639 
(Senator Bailey) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Historic St. Mary's City Commission Reform Act of 2023 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes to the governance of the Historic St. Mary’s City 
Commission, including (1) altering the commission’s membership; (2) requiring the 
commission to develop and publish written policies regarding the commission’s operating 
procedures; and (3) authorizing and establishing rules for the commission to collaborate 
with affiliated nonprofit organizations, including the Historic St. Mary’s City Foundation. 
By December 31, 2023, the commission must report to the General Assembly on the 
commission’s progress in addressing the concerns raised by its most recent independent 
audit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finance and operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances and operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission is an independent 
unit of State government with the mission of preserving and protecting the archaeological 
and historical record of Maryland’s first capital and to appropriately develop historic and 
scenic sites for the education, enjoyment, and general benefit of the public. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 639/ Page 2 
Membership and Meetings of the Historic St. Mary’s City Commission 
 
Under current law, there are 17 members of the commission, 13 of whom are appointed by 
the Governor with the advice and the consent of the Senate. In addition, the chairman of 
the St. Mary’s College of Maryland Board of Trustees (or the chairman’s designee) and 
the President of the Historic St. Mary’s Foundation are ex officio voting members. The 
President of the Senate (or a designee) and the Speaker of the House of Delegates (or a 
designee) also serve as ex officio nonvoting members. 
 
The bill makes numerous changes to the membership, including (1) requiring one member 
to be a representative of the Native American community, appointed in consultation with 
the Maryland Commission on Indian Affairs; (2) establishing that the President of the 
Historic St. Mary’s Foundation is a nonvoting member; and (3) repealing the ex officio 
membership of the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, instead 
establishing that these officials are each to appoint one member of the public to serve as a 
voting member. 
 
Under current law, the manner of election of officers and their terms of office must be as 
the commission determines. The bill requires that the officers of the commission be 
selected from the appointed members of the commission. 
 
Under current law, the commission must meet at least two times per year at  
Historic St. Mary’s City. The bill specifies that the commission may meet more than 
two times a year at Historic St. Mary’s City or virtually. 
 
Duties of the Historic St. Mary’s City Commission 
 
Among other duties specified in statute, the commission must:  
 
 
maintain and carry out the mission of Historic St. Mary’s City;  
 
protect and preserve the historical and archaeological resources found within the 
boundaries of Historic St. Mary’s City;  
 
enhance the role of Historic St. Mary’s City as a statewide educational center for 
historical archaeology and Maryland colonial history, as specified;  
 
develop close working relationships with public and private elementary and 
secondary schools, local and statewide businesses and governmental agencies, and 
conduct activities to educate the general public about the history and significance of 
Historic St. Mary’s City;  
 
seek private and other public grants, gifts, bequests, endowments, and legacies for 
the development and use of Historic St. Mary’s City; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 639/ Page 3 
 
prepare an overall strategic plan at least once every five years that establishes  
both short-range and long‐range goals, objectives, and priorities for  
Historic St. Mary’s City in support of its mission. 
 
The bill also requires the commission to develop and publish written policies regarding the 
commission’s operating procedures, including policies on (1) procurement; (2) human 
resources; (3) payroll; (4) cash management; (5) fleet management; and (6) property 
management, including rental tenant waiting lists. Furthermore, the commission must 
develop a comprehensive maintenance plan (and update the plan at least once every  
three years) and annually review the commission’s operating agreements and policies on 
operating procedures. 
 
Joint Operations with Other Agencies 
 
Under current law, the commission and the Board of Trustees of St. Mary’s College are 
authorized to undertake joint programs and otherwise to work collaboratively under 
contract or other agreement acceptable to the governing boards of each institution, for the 
purpose of furthering the missions of both institutions. The commission and the college 
may, 
by 
contract 
or 
mutual 
agreement, 
perform 
administrative 
tasks 
by  
one institution for the other, including, but not limited to, specified tasks such as 
procurement and insurance claim processing, purchasing, accounting, and information 
system design. The bill repeals the provision regarding the authority to perform 
administrative tasks by mutual agreement. 
 
The bill requires that if the commission obtains services under an agreement with 
St. Mary’s College, the services provided must be in accordance with the college’s policies 
and procedures.  
 
Furthermore, the bill requires that an operating agreement entered into by the commission 
with another unit of State government or an affiliated nonprofit organization be 
(1) executed in writing; (2) approved for form and legal sufficiency by the 
Attorney General; (3) reviewed by the commission annually; and (4) enacted for a term not 
exceeding three years, which may be renewed for additional terms not exceeding 
three years, without limit. 
 
Collaboration with Affiliated Nonprofit Organizations (As Added by the Bill) 
 
The bill specifies that the commission may collaborate with “affiliated nonprofit 
organizations,” which the bill specifically defines as including the Historic St. Mary’s City 
Foundation. The commission is also encouraged to promote private fundraising by 
strengthening institutional development activities. The commission must develop policies 
for collaboration with an affiliated nonprofit organization, which must be reviewed for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 639/ Page 4 
form and legal sufficiency by the Attorney General; if appropriate, the Attorney General 
must approve them to govern the collaboration. The State Ethics Commission must also 
review the policies that pertain to conflicts of interest and, if appropriate, approve them to 
govern an official or employee of the commission also serving as a director or official of 
an affiliated nonprofit organization. 
 
The bill further specifies that an affiliated nonprofit organization may not be considered an 
agency or instrumentality of the State or a unit of the Executive Branch for any purpose. A 
financial obligation or liability of an affiliated nonprofit organization may not be 
considered a debt or an obligation of the State or the commission. 
 
Specified provisions of the General Provisions Article (generally, ethics rules governing 
conflicts of interests) do not prohibit an official or employee of the commission from also 
becoming a director or an official of an affiliated nonprofit organization. An official or 
employee of the commission who serves as a director or official of an affiliated nonprofit 
organization may not be compensated (directly or indirectly) by the affiliated nonprofit 
organization but may be reimbursed for specified expenses. 
 
The commission must notify the State Ethics Commission in writing whenever the 
commission authorizes an official or employee of the commission to serve as a director or 
official of an affiliated nonprofit organization. Within 30 days of receipt of the notice, the 
State Ethics Commission must notify the commission of any objections or concerns 
pertaining to the joint service identified in the notice. If the State Ethics Commission sends 
a notice, the commission must reexamine the matter. 
 
Each year, the bill requires the commission to report the following information to the 
Governor, the State Ethics Commission, and the Legislative Policy Committee:  (1) the 
names of the officials and employees serving as a director or official of an affiliated 
nonprofit organization; and (2) how the policies and procedures regarding collaboration 
with the foundation have been implemented in the preceding year. 
 
The bill prohibits any funds from being accepted by the commission from an affiliated 
nonprofit organization unless an independent certified public accountant audits the fiscal 
affairs of the affiliated nonprofit organization each year. Funds given to the commission 
by an affiliated nonprofit organization may not include preconditions on the use of the 
funds. However, funds given to the commission through an affiliated nonprofit 
organization from a donor may include conditions at the donor’s request. 
 
Presently existing obligations or contract rights are not impaired by the bill.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 639/ Page 5 
Historic St. Mary’s City Fund 
 
Under current law, special nonlapsing State funds are automatically subject to audit during 
any examination of units of State government, as generally authorized under the State 
Government Article. The bill specifies that the Historic St. Mary’s City Fund is subject to 
audit by the Office of Legislative Audits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1042 (Delegate Crosby) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Governor’s Office;  
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services – Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon M. Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5