START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 644 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 644 
(Senator McCray) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maternal Mortality Review Program - Local Teams - Access to Records 
 
 
This bill requires a health care provider or health care facility to provide a local maternal 
mortality review team, on request of the chair, prompt access to all relevant medical records 
associated with a case under review by the Maternal Mortality Review Program (program) 
without undue delay. The bill also specifies that confidentiality of medical records 
provisions under Title 4, Subtitle 3 of the Health-General Article do not apply to a 
disclosure made to a local team. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not materially affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 74 of 2000 established Maryland’s Maternal Mortality Review 
Program. The purpose of the program is to (1) identify maternal death cases; (2) review 
medical records and other relevant data; (3) determine preventability of death; (4) develop 
recommendations for the prevention of maternal deaths; and (5) disseminate findings and 
recommendations to policymakers, health care providers, health care facilities, and the 
public. Maternal mortality reviews are conducted by a committee of clinical experts from 
across the State, the Maternal Mortality Review Committee. The program must submit an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 644/ Page 2 
annual report on findings, recommendations, and program actions to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. 
 
Local Maternal Mortality Review Teams 
 
Chapter 448 of 2019 authorized the establishment of a multidisciplinary and multiagency 
maternal mortality review team in each county to prevent maternal deaths (also known as 
a “local team”). If a local team is established, it must be convened by the local health officer 
and may include other specified representatives necessary to the work of the local team, 
recommended by the local team, and designated by the local health officer. 
 
A local team must (1) in consultation with the program, establish and implement a protocol; 
(2) meet at least annually to review specified information; (3) enter into a data use 
agreement with MDH for the receipt of information necessary to carry out the local team’s 
purpose and duties; and (4) provide specified reports to the program. 
 
A meeting of a local team must be closed to the public when discussing individual cases 
of maternal death but otherwise must be open to the public. During a public meeting, 
information may not be disclosed (1) that identifies a deceased woman or a family member, 
guardian, or caretaker of a deceased woman or (2) regarding the involvement of any agency 
with a deceased woman or a family member, guardian, or caretaker of a deceased woman. 
A violation of these provisions is a misdemeanor subject to imprisonment for up to 90 days 
and/or a fine of up to $500. 
 
Generally, the proceedings, records, and files of a local team are confidential and privileged 
and are not discoverable or admissible as evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
 
Provision of Information and Records 
 
The Secretary of Health must provide the program with information on maternal death 
cases when the records become available (including a copy of the death certificate) and 
medical information from the birth or fetal death record for any pregnancy that occurred 
within one year of the death of the woman (excluding specified information about infants). 
 
On the request of the Secretary, the program must be provided access, to the extent allowed 
by law, to all information and records maintained by specified agencies that provided 
services to a woman whose death is being reviewed by the program. 
 
Likewise, on request of the chair of a local team, the local team must be provided (1) access 
to all relevant information and records in accordance with the local team’s data use 
agreement with MDH and (2) access, to the extent allowed by law, to all information and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 644/ Page 3 
records maintained by specified agencies that provided services to a woman whose death 
is being reviewed by the local team. 
 
Access to Medical Records 
 
A health care provider or health care facility must provide the program reasonable access 
to all relevant medical records associated with a case under review by the program. The 
provisions of Title 4, Subtitle 3 of the Health-General article pertaining to the 
confidentiality of medical records do not apply to a disclosure made to the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 876 (Delegate Smith, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore 
City; Harford, Montgomery, and Talbot counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 12, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3