START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 792 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 792 
(Senator West) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Estates and Trusts - Registered Domestic Partnerships 
 
 
This bill allows for registered domestic partnerships to have the same effect as marriage 
under various provisions of the Estates and Trusts Article of the Maryland Code. Among 
other things, it establishes (1) the requirements that must be met for a domestic partnership 
to be registered with the register of wills and how the domestic partnership may be 
terminated and (2) the benefits for which the surviving partner of a registered domestic 
partnership qualifies. The bill also removes certain terms from the definition of “child” 
under the Estates and Trusts Article and alters provisions governing the distribution of an 
intestate estate (an estate not distributed by a will). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues are expected to decrease annually, as discussed 
below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Registered Domestic Partnerships 
 
 
Definitions 
 
The bill adds definitions of “domestic partnership,” “registered domestic partner,” 
“registered domestic partnership,” and “surviving registered domestic partner” to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 792/ Page 2 
Estates and Trusts Article of the Maryland Code. 
 
“Domestic partnership” is defined according to the definition of the term under the 
Health-General Article (relating to hospital visitation and medical emergencies). 
“Domestic partnership” is a relationship between two individuals who (1) are at 
least 18 years old; (2) are not related to each other by blood or marriage within four degrees 
of consanguinity under civil law rule; (3) are not married or in a civil union or domestic 
partnership with another individual; and (4) agree to be in a relationship of mutual 
interdependence in which each individual contributes to the maintenance and support of 
the other individual and the relationship, even if both individuals are not required to 
contribute equally to the relationship. 
 
“Registered domestic partner” is an individual in a registered domestic partnership, and a 
“registered domestic partnership” is a domestic partnership that is registered in accordance 
with provisions established by the bill allowing for registration of a domestic partnership 
with the register of wills. A “surviving registered domestic partner” is the registered 
domestic partner of a decedent at the time of the decedent’s death. 
 
 
Parity with “Marriage” and “Spouse” 
 
The bill alters various definitions and provisions in the Estates and Trusts Article so that, 
in many cases, a “registered domestic partnership,” and a “registered domestic partner” are 
treated the same as a marriage, and a spouse, respectively. In the following statutory 
provisions of the Estates and Trusts Article, the bill adds “registered domestic partnership” 
where the term marriage appears, and adds “registered domestic partners” where the term 
spouse appears:   
 
 
definition of a child; 
 
provisions related to intestate succession, including share of the surviving spouse, 
division among surviving issue, distribution when there is no surviving issue, and 
inheritance from a person born to or conceived by individuals who are not married; 
 
family allowance; and 
 
order of priority for letters of administration, appointing a successor personal 
representative, or appointing a special administrator, as specified. 
 
 
Declaration of Domestic Partnership 
 
Two individuals may register a domestic partnership by filing a declaration of domestic 
partnership with the register of wills in the county in which the domestic partners are 
domiciled. A declaration of domestic partnership filed with the register of wills must:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 792/ Page 3 
 
include the full name, the home address, and the age of each domestic partner; 
 
be signed directly by each party, or by another individual, at the express direction 
of the party and in the party’s presence; 
 
be signed in the physical presence of a notary public or before a notary public 
through communication technology in accordance with the Maryland Revised 
Uniform Law on Notarial Acts; and 
 
affirm under the penalty of perjury that each domestic partner is at least 18 years old, 
the sole domestic partner of the other, not married, and in a committed relationship 
with the other individual. 
 
If the declaration of domestic partnership does not meet the requirements, as stated above, 
the register of wills may refuse to register a domestic partnership. 
 
The register of wills may charge a fee of up to $25 for the filing of a declaration of domestic 
partnership and must maintain adequate records of declarations of domestic partnership, 
amendments to declarations of domestic partnership, and termination statements. A 
declaration of domestic partnership filed with a register of wills is a public record, except 
that the register must deny inspection of the part of a declaration of domestic partnership 
that contains the home address of either domestic partner. 
 
 
Termination of a Domestic Partnership 
 
A domestic partnership may be terminated by filing a declaration of termination with the 
register that must be signed by both parties or, if the declaration of termination is not signed 
by both parties, include a statement that a copy of the declaration of termination has been 
served on the nonsigning party. A declaration of termination is effective six months after 
the date of filing. 
 
If a domestic partnership has been abandoned by one of the domestic partners, the 
abandoned domestic partner may file a declaration of termination not earlier than 
six months after the abandonment. The declaration of termination must (1) include a 
statement that the filing party has not been in contact with the nonfiling party for at least 
six months preceding the date of filing and (2) if the location of the nonfiling party is 
known, include a statement that a copy of the declaration of termination has been served 
on the nonfiling party. A declaration of termination that meets these requirements is 
effective immediately. 
 
A registered domestic partnership terminates immediately on (1) certification of marriage 
of either domestic partner or (2) the death of either domestic partner. However, this 
provision may not be interpreted to terminate any rights or benefits otherwise enjoyed by 
or owed to a surviving registered domestic partner. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 792/ Page 4 
 
Surviving Partner of a Registered Domestic Partnership 
 
The surviving partner of a registered domestic partnership qualifies for the following 
benefits, as statutorily specified:  (1) the share of a surviving spouse or surviving domestic 
partner of an intestate decedent; (2) the family allowance for a surviving spouse or 
surviving registered domestic partner of an intestate decedent; (3) priority of appointment 
as the personal representative for a surviving spouse, surviving registered domestic partner, 
and children of an intestate decedent; and (4) the inheritance tax exemption established by 
the bill (discussed below). However, the surviving partner of a registered domestic 
partnership is not entitled to elect to take an elective share of the estate under §3-403 of the 
Estates and Trusts Article. 
 
 
Recognition of Domestic Partnerships in Other Jurisdictions 
 
If the laws of another jurisdiction establishing a relationship other than marriage are 
substantially similar to the requirements under the bill, the relationship established by the 
other jurisdiction must be recognized as a registered domestic partnership in the State. The 
register must establish, update, and maintain a certified list of jurisdictions with laws of 
domestic partnership that are substantially similar, as specified. If the register has not 
certified that the laws of another jurisdiction are substantially similar to the requirements, 
as specified, but the laws of that jurisdiction establish a relationship, regardless of the term 
or phrase used by the jurisdiction, that has the rights and responsibilities of marriage, the 
relationship must be recognized by the register as a registered domestic partnership in the 
State and the register must include that jurisdiction in the certified list. The register must 
broadly construe the term “substantially similar” to maximize the recognition of 
relationships from other jurisdictions as registered domestic partnerships in the State. 
 
 
Inheritance Tax Exemption 
 
The bill adds to an existing exemption from the inheritance tax for the receipt of an interest 
in a joint primary residence that (1) at the time of death was held in joint tenancy by the 
decedent and the domestic partner and (2) passes from decedent to or for the use of the 
domestic partner. The bill adds that for a registered domestic partnership, the inheritance 
tax does not apply to the receipt of property that passes from the decedent to or for the use 
of the domestic partner of the decedent. 
 
Definition of “Child” 
 
The bill modifies the definition of “child” in the Estates and Trusts Article to no longer use 
the terms “legitimate” and “illegitimate.” The bill also eliminates any effect of a marriage 
ceremony, if the marriage is invalid, in determining a parent-child relationship. The bill 
modifies the definition of a child so that the phrase “child born to parents” is replaced by 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 792/ Page 5 
the phrase “child born to or conceived by individuals”; and the term “father” is replaced 
by “parent.” Also, the bill adds a manner in which a child can be considered to be the child 
of an individual who did not give birth to the child if the individual is not married to or in 
a registered domestic partnership with the child’s mother – if the child’s mother identifies 
the individual as the other biological parent of the child and the individual agrees. 
 
Share of a Surviving Spouse or Registered Domestic Partner 
 
The bill – in addition to altering provisions governing the share of a surviving spouse of an 
intestate estate so that a surviving registered domestic partner is entitled to the same share 
as a surviving spouse – also alters the provisions so that the share of a surviving spouse or 
registered domestic partner is the entire intestate estate under more circumstances, 
repealing provisions that require the share of the surviving spouse to be the 
first $40,000 plus one-half of the residue of the estate in circumstances where:   
 
 
there is no surviving minor child but there is surviving issue who are the surviving 
issue of the surviving spouse; and 
 
there is no surviving issue but a surviving parent, and the surviving spouse and the 
decedent had been married for less than five years. 
 
The bill also increases the share of the surviving spouse (also applicable to a registered 
domestic partner under the bill) if there is no surviving minor child, but there is surviving 
issue who are not the issue of the surviving spouse (or registered domestic partner), so that 
the share is $100,000 (instead of $40,000) plus one-half the residue. The bill does not alter 
the share of the surviving spouse (or registered domestic partner) if there is a surviving 
minor child, which is one-half. 
 
Distribution of the Net Intestate Estate 
 
The bill alters provisions governing the distribution of the net intestate estate when there 
is no surviving issue, surviving spouse, or registered domestic partner by removing 
great-grandparents’ entitlement to distribution of the net estate if there is no surviving 
parent or issue of a parent or surviving grandparent or issue of a grandparent; this leaves 
stepchildren next in line after surviving grandparents, or issue of a grandparent, to receive 
distribution of the net estate if there is no surviving blood relative entitled to inherit the net 
estate under the provisions. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Effect of Marriage under the Estates and Trusts Article 
 
Marriage has importance in the distribution of an intestate estate under the Estates and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 792/ Page 6 
Trusts Article and the determination of who is considered a child of a decedent for purposes 
of distribution of an intestate estate. Any part of the net estate of a decedent not effectively 
disposed of by the decedent’s will is distributed by the personal representative to the heirs 
of the decedent in accordance with statutory provisions. A surviving spouse of a decedent 
receives a defined share of the net intestate estate:   
 
 
if there is a surviving minor child, the share is one-half; 
 
if there is no surviving minor child, but there is surviving issue (living lineal 
descendants), the share is the first $40,000 plus one-half of the residue; 
 
if there is no surviving issue but a surviving parent, and the surviving spouse and 
the decedent had been married for less than five years, the share is the 
first $40,000 plus one-half of the residue; 
 
if there is no surviving issue but a surviving parent, and the surviving spouse and 
the decedent had been married for at least five years, the share is the whole estate; 
and 
 
if there is no surviving issue or parent, the share is the whole estate. 
 
The surviving spouse is also entitled to receive an allowance from the estate of $10,000 for 
personal use. 
 
The net estate, exclusive of the share of the surviving spouse, or the entire net estate if there 
is no surviving spouse, is divided equally among any surviving issue (living lineal 
descendants). If there is no surviving issue, the estate is distributed to surviving parents or 
issue of parents if neither parent survives, and if none, then surviving grandparents, and so 
on. 
 
A person who meets the definition of a child of a decedent according to specified provisions 
is considered a lineal descendant. Those provisions refer to legitimate children, adopted 
children, and illegitimate children, and whether a person is considered a child of another 
can depend on the marriage status of the parent at the time the child was born or conceived 
(or on whether the parent had participated in a marriage ceremony, even if the marriage 
was invalid). 
 
A surviving spouse also has the option of electing to take an elective share of an estate (in 
place of property or other benefits that would have passed to the surviving spouse under a 
will) of (1) if there is surviving issue, one-third of the value of the estate subject to election, 
reduced by the value of specified spousal benefits or (2) if there is no surviving issue, 
one-half of the value of the estate subject to election, reduced by the value of specified 
spousal benefits. (The bill expressly does not provide this option of electing to take an 
elective share, to a surviving registered domestic partner). 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 792/ Page 7 
“Domestic Partnership” under the Health-General Article 
 
“Domestic partnership” is defined under the Health-General Article for purposes of 
hospital visitation and medical emergencies. A hospital, related institution, or residential 
treatment center must allow a patient’s or resident’s domestic partner, the children of the 
patient’s or resident’s domestic partner, and the domestic partner of the patient’s or 
resident’s parent or child to visit, except under specified circumstances. In case of a medical 
emergency, two adults must be treated as domestic partners if one of the adults, in good 
faith, tells the emergency medical provider or hospital personnel that the adults are in a 
mutually interdependent relationship, for the purposes of (1) allowing one adult to 
accompany the ill or injured adult being transported to a hospital in an emergency vehicle 
and (2) visitation with the ill or injured adult admitted to a hospital on an emergency basis 
on the same basis as a member of the ill or injured adult’s immediate family. 
 
Inheritance Tax 
 
The Maryland inheritance tax is applied to the receipt of property from a decedent’s estate 
and is 10% of the clear value of the property. There are various exemptions from the 
inheritance tax, including property that passes from a decedent to a grandparent, parent, 
spouse, child (or lineal descendent of a child), sibling, or spouse or surviving spouse of a 
child of a decedent (or a spouse or surviving spouse of a lineal descendant of a child of the 
decedent). 
 
A limited inheritance tax exemption exists for a domestic partner, who is an individual with 
whom another individual has established a domestic partnership, as defined under the 
Health–General Article. If the domestic partner of a decedent provides an affidavit, as 
specified, or any two of the proofs of domestic partnership, as specified, the inheritance 
tax does not apply to the receipt of an interest in a joint primary residence that (1) at the 
time of death was held in joint tenancy by the decedent and the domestic partner and 
(2) passes from the decedent to or for the use of the domestic partner. The clear value of 
all other property, outside of this exemption, passing to a domestic partner is subject to the 
10% inheritance tax. 
 
Registers of Wills 
 
In general, the registers of wills in each of the State’s 24 jurisdictions are responsible for 
the administration of estates by providing proper forms and direction, assisting, and 
advising any person who requests assistance in the preparation of any form for 
administrative probate, admitting wills to probate and issuing letters of administration, 
auditing accounts, and maintaining accurate records of all estate matters. The registers also 
serve as clerks of the orphans’ courts. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 792/ Page 8 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues are expected to decrease due to the bill’s 
inheritance tax exemption for property that passes from a decedent to or for the use of the 
domestic partner of the decedent. This decrease is partially offset by the $25 fee charged 
by registers of wills under the bill to register a domestic partnership. Registers of wills’ 
salaries and office expenses are paid from fees and inheritance tax revenues collected by 
the registers, with the remainder of the fees and inheritance tax revenues deposited into the 
State general fund. The extent of any decrease cannot be reliably estimated and depends 
on the number of domestic partnerships that are registered pursuant to the bill, the amount 
of property that qualifies for the exemption, and the timing of when inheritance tax would 
have otherwise been paid on that property in the absence of the bill. 
 
For context, in its June 2022 inheritance and estate tax comparative revenue summary, the 
Comptroller reported receiving $76.9 million in inheritance tax revenues in fiscal 2022. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 755 (Delegate Cardin) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8