START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 226

Chapter 226

(Senate Bill 708)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Youth Camps, Development Organizations, and Programs
– Criminal History Records Checks

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to apply to the Criminal
Justice Information System Central Repository for criminal history records checks
for certain youth camp applicants; requiring that the Department issue a written
determination to a youth camp as to whether the results of a criminal history check
would be the basis for prohibiting the hiring of an applicant within a certain time
period; repealing the authority of youth development organizations and programs to
request from the Department a determination of whether the results of a criminal
history records check would prohibit the hiring of a job applicant; and generally
relating to youth camps, development organizations, and programs and criminal
history records checks.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 14–403.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 14–407
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

14–403.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “APPLICANT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS SEEKING TO
BECOME A YOUTH CAMP OWNER, OPERATOR, EMPLOYEE, OR VOLUNTEER WHO WILL
HAVE ACCESS TO A CAMPER.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 226 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “CENTRAL REPOSITORY” MEANS THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
INFORMATION SYSTEM CENTRAL REPOSITORY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL APPLY TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY FOR
AN APPLICANT’S:

(1) STATE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK; AND

(2) NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

(C) AS PART OF THE APPLICATION FOR A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS
CHECK, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY:

(1) A COMPLETE SET OF THE APPLICANT’S LEGIBLE FINGERPRINTS
TAKEN IN A FORMAT APPROVED BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY
AND THE DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION;

(2) THE FEE AUTHORIZED UNDER § 10–221(B)(7) OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE FOR ACCESS TO MARYLAND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS;
AND

(3) THE MANDATORY PROCESSING FEE REQUIRED BY THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION FOR A NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

(D) IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 10–201 THROUGH 10–229 OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE, THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY SHALL FORWARD TO THE
APPLICANT AND THE DEPARTMENT THE APPLICANT’S CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD
INFORMATION.

(E) INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY UNDER
THIS SECTION:

(1) IS CONFIDENTIAL;

(2) MAY NOT BE REDISSEMINATED; AND

(3) MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE PERSONNEL SCREENING
PROCEDURES AUTHORIZED BY THIS SUBTITLE.

(F) THE SUBJECT OF A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK UNDER THIS
SECTION MAY CONTEST THE CONTENTS OF THE PRINTED STATEMENT ISSUED BY

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 226

THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AS PROVIDED IN § 10–223 OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

(G) IF CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION IS REPORTED TO THE
CENTRAL REPOSITORY AFTER THE DATE OF THE INITIAL CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK, THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY SHALL PROVIDE TO THE
DEPARTMENT REVISED CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION FOR THE
APPLICANT.

14–407.

[(a) In this section, “youth development organization or program” means an
organization or a program that provides activities for minors.]

[(b)] (A) The Department shall:

(1) Investigate complaints received regarding [the] A youth camp; and

(2) Require appropriate training, including knowledge of outdoor camping,
for a camp inspector.

[(c)] (B) (1) Before a youth camp [or youth development organization or
program] makes a formal offer of employment to a job applicant, the operator of the youth
camp [or youth development organization or program] may request from the Department
a determination as to whether the results of a [federal] NATIONAL OR STATE criminal
history records check would be the basis for prohibiting the hiring of the applicant.

(2) On WITHIN 3 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER receipt of a request from the
operator of a youth camp [or youth development organization or program] under paragraph
(1) of this subsection, the Department shall issue a written determination to the youth
camp [or youth development organization or program] as to whether the results of a
[federal] NATIONAL OR STATE criminal history records check would be the basis for
prohibiting the hiring of the applicant.

(3) A determination issued by the Department under paragraph (2) of this
subsection is binding on the Department and the youth camp [or youth development
organization or program] unless the applicant:

(i) Has subsequently been convicted of a crime;

(ii) Has pending criminal charges; or

(iii) Had previously undisclosed criminal convictions.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 226 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) The Department may set a reasonable fee to cover the cost of a criminal
history records check required under this subsection.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4