START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 33

Chapter 33

(Senate Bill 714)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Certified Interior Designers – Sunset Extension

FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board of Certified Interior Designers in
accordance with the provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law)
by extending to a certain date the termination provisions relating to certain
statutory and regulatory authority of the Board; and generally relating to the State
Board of Certified Interior Designers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 8–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 8–602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

8–201.

There is a State Board of Certified Interior Designers in the Department.

8–602.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
be of no effect after July 1, [2024] 2034.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1