START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

Chapter 763

(Senate Bill 760)

AN ACT concerning

Security Guard Agencies, Security Guard Employers, and Security Guards –
Standards and Certifications

FOR the purpose of requiring an individual who provides security guard services to the
individual’s employer to be certified as a security guard, subject to a certain exception;
regulating certain security guard employers; altering the certification and renewal
standards for security guards; requiring the Maryland Police Training and
Standards Commission to identify or establish certain training programs for the
certification of security guards; requiring security guards to complete certain
security training programs; and generally relating to the regulation of security guard
agencies, security guard employers, and security guards.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 19–101, 19–401, 19–402, 19–404.1, 19–407, 19–408, and 19–504
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 19–412 through 19–414
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

19–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Central Repository” means the Criminal Justice Information System Central
Repository of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services.

(c) “Certification card” means a card issued by the Secretary under § 19–405 of
this title to an individual certified as a security guard.

(d) “Firm” means a partnership or corporation.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) “Firm member” means a partner of a partnership or an officer or director of a
corporation.

(f) “License” means, unless the context requires otherwise, a license issued by the
Secretary to conduct a business to provide security guard services.

(g) “Licensed security guard agency” means a person who is licensed by the
Secretary to conduct a business that provides security guard services.

(h) “POLICE OFFICER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–101 OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

(I) “Representative member” means a firm member who is appointed under §
19–302(b) of this title to act on behalf of the firm.

[(i)] (J) “Secretary”, unless the context requires otherwise, means the Secretary
of State Police.

[(j)] (K) “Security guard” means an individual who [provides security guard
services to any person on behalf of a security guard agency], regardless of whether the
individual is described as a security guard, watchman, or private patrolman or by other
title:

(1) (I) IS AN EMPLOYEE OF A SECURITY GUARD AGENCY; AND

(II) PROVIDES SECURITY GUARD SERVICES TO ANOTHER
PERSON ON BEHALF OF THE SECURITY GUARD AGENCY; OR

(2) (I) IS AN EMPLOYEE OF A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER; AND

(II) PROVIDES SECURITY GUARD SERVICES TO THE SECURITY
GUARD EMPLOYER.

[(k)] (L) (1) “Security guard agency” means a person who conducts a business
that provides security guard services.

(2) “Security guard agency” does not include:

(I) a person that is primarily engaged in the business of owning,
maintaining, or otherwise managing property; OR

(II) A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

(M) (1) “SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER” MEANS A PERSON WHO EMPLOYS
SECURITY GUARDS ONLY TO PROVIDE SECURITY GUARD SERVICES TO THE PERSON.

(2) “SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A SECURITY
GUARD AGENCY.

[(l)] (N) “Security guard services” includes any activity that is performed for
compensation as a security guard to protect any individual or property, except the activities
of an individual while performing as:

(1) a marine guard or ship watchman, regardless of whether the guard or
watchman is stationed aboard a ship or on a pier; ~~or~~

(2) a special police officer appointed and while performing under Title 3,
Subtitle 3 of the Public Safety Article or § 16–16 of the Code of Public Local Laws of
Baltimore City; OR

(3) AN UNARMED EMPLOYEE OF A BAR, TAVERN, OR RESTAURANT.

19–401.

(a) Except as provided under subsection (b) of this section, a licensed security
guard agency may provide an individual for hire as a security guard only if the individual
is certified by the Secretary as a security guard.

(b) A licensed security guard agency may provide an uncertified individual for
hire as a security guard if:

(1) (i) the security guard agency has submitted to the Secretary the
application of the individual for certification as a security guard, fingerprint cards, and
records fee as required under § 19–402(b) of this subtitle; and

(ii) the Secretary has not disapproved the application; or

(2) the individual has obtained and currently possesses certification by the
Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission as a police officer.

(C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A
SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER MAY EMPLOY A SECURITY GUARD TO PROVIDE
SECURITY GUARD SERVICES ONLY IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS CERTIFIED BY THE
SECRETARY AS A SECURITY GUARD.

(D) A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER MAY EMPLOY AN UNCERTIFIED
SECURITY GUARD TO PROVIDE SECURITY GUARD SERVICES FOR THE SECURITY
GUARD EMPLOYER IF:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) (I) THE SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER HAS SUBMITTED TO THE
SECRETARY THE APPLICATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL FOR CERTIFICATION AS A
SECURITY GUARD, FINGERPRINT CARDS, AND RECORDS FEE AS REQUIRED UNDER §
19–402(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) THE SECRETARY HAS NOT DISAPPROVED THE
APPLICATION; OR

(2) THE INDIVIDUAL HAS OBTAINED AND CURRENTLY POSSESSES
CERTIFICATION BY THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS
COMMISSION AS A POLICE OFFICER.

(E) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT PROHIBIT A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER
FROM HIRING SECURITY GUARDS FROM A LICENSED SECURITY GUARD AGENCY.

19–402.

(a) To qualify for certification as a security guard, an individual shall:

(1) meet the standards set by the Secretary;

(2) be an employee of or an applicant for employment with a licensed
security guard agency OR A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER;

(3) be of good moral character and reputation;

(4) submit to the licensed security guard agency OR THE SECURITY
GUARD EMPLOYER, for forwarding to the Secretary:

(i) a sworn application on the form the Secretary provides;

(ii) the fingerprints required under § 19–304(c) of this title; [and]

(iii) a nonrefundable application fee of $15; [and]

(IV) A DECLARATION UNDER THE PENALTIES OF PERJURY
STATING WHETHER:

1. THE INDIVIDUAL HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF:

A. A DISQUALIFYING CRIME, UNDER § 5–101 OF THE
PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE; OR

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

B. A CRIME OF VIOLENCE, UNDER § 14–101 OF THE
CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

2. IF CURRENTLY OR FORMERLY EMPLOYED AS A
POLICE OFFICER, THE INDIVIDUAL HAS HAD ANY FORMAL FINDINGS BY A COURT,
HEARING BOARD, OR OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY OF UNLAWFUL OR EXCESSIVE
USE OF FORCE OR OF MAKING A FALSE STATEMENT DURING THE INDIVIDUAL’S
EMPLOYMENT WITH THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; AND

3. THE INDIVIDUAL PLANS TO CARRY A HANDGUN IN THE
COURSE OF PROVIDING SECURITY GUARD SERVICES; AND

(V) A COPY OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S PERMIT TO CARRY A
HANDGUN UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE IF THE
~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~INDICATES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~PLANS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CARRY~~ ~~A~~ ~~HANDGUN~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
COURSE OF PROVIDING SECURITY GUARD SERVICES; AND

(VI) DOCUMENTATION THAT THE INDIVIDUAL HAS EITHER:

1. SATISFACTORILY COMPLETED 12 HOURS OF INITIAL
SECURITY TRAINING THAT IS APPROVED BY THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND
STANDARDS COMMISSION UNDER § 19–412 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

2. BEEN EMPLOYED AS A POLICE OFFICER IN THE 3
YEARS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE APPLICATION;

(5) pay to the licensed security guard agency OR THE SECURITY GUARD
EMPLOYER, for forwarding to the Secretary, the fees authorized under § 19–304(c) of this
title; AND

(6) BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD.

(b) On receipt from an applicant for certification as a security guard, a licensed
security guard agency OR SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER shall forward to the Secretary
the applicant’s application form, fingerprint cards, and criminal history records check fees.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
APPLICANT FOR CERTIFICATION AS A SECURITY GUARD SHALL COMPLETE 12 HOURS
OF INITIAL SECURITY TRAINING THAT IS APPROVED BY THE MARYLAND POLICE
TRAINING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION UNDER § 19–412 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) AN APPLICANT FOR CERTIFICATION MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO
COMPLETE THE TRAINING SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF
THE APPLICANT:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) HAS BEEN EMPLOYED AS A POLICE OFFICER IN THE 3 YEARS
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE APPLICATION; AND

(II) PROVIDES SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION WITH THE
APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION AS A SECURITY GUARD IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (A)(4)(VI)2 (A)(4)(V)2 OF THIS SECTION.

19–404.1.

(a) By regulation, the Secretary shall stagger the terms of the certifications.

(b) Unless a certification is renewed for a 3–year term as provided in this section,
the certification expires on the date the Secretary sets.

(c) At least 90 days before a certification expires, the applicant shall mail to the
Secretary:

(1) a renewal application form;

(2) the amount of the renewal fee; and

(3) the amount of any late fee, as determined by the Secretary.

(d) An individual periodically may renew the certification for an additional
3–year term, if the individual:

(1) otherwise is entitled to be certified;

(2) pays to the Secretary:

(i) a renewal fee of $10;

(ii) payment for the cost of a fingerprint card record check by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation; and

(iii) any late fee required under this subtitle; [and]

(3) (I) SATISFACTORILY COMPLETES 10 8 HOURS OF CONTINUING
SECURITY TRAINING THAT IS APPROVED BY THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND
STANDARDS COMMISSION UNDER § 19–412 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) SUBMITS TO THE SECRETARY SUPPORTING
DOCUMENTATION THAT DEMONSTRATES COMPLETION OF THE TRAINING; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

(4) submits to the Secretary a renewal application on the form that the
Secretary provides.

(e) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, if a complete application for
renewal of certification as required under this subtitle is not received by the Secretary on
or before the first business day of the next calendar month immediately following the
renewal date, the Secretary shall assess a late fee of $5 per day until the application is
received by the Secretary.

(2) (i) The Secretary may not charge a late fee under paragraph (1) of
this subsection if the applicant did not make timely renewal because of incapacity,
hospitalization, being called to active military duty, or other hardship.

(ii) The total amount of late fees assessed against an applicant under
this subsection may not exceed $150.

(3) The Secretary may not certify any applicant under this subtitle if the
applicant has outstanding late fee obligations.

(f) (1) The Secretary shall renew the certification of each individual who
meets the requirements of this section.

(2) Within 5 days after the Secretary refuses to renew the certification of
an individual as a security guard, the Secretary shall send written notice of the refusal to
the individual who submitted the renewal application.

(G) AT LEAST 90 DAYS BEFORE A CERTIFICATION EXPIRES, THE LICENSED
SECURITY GUARD AGENCY OR SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER SHALL SUBMIT A
DECLARATION TO THE SECRETARY UNDER THE PENALTIES OF PERJURY STATING
WHETHER IT KNOWS ~~OR~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~REASON~~ ~~TO~~ ~~KNOW~~ THAT A CERTIFIED SECURITY GUARD
WHO PROVIDES SECURITY GUARD SERVICES ON THE SECURITY GUARD AGENCY’S
BEHALF OR FOR THE SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER NO LONGER SATISFIES ALL OF
THE CRITERIA FOR CERTIFICATION UNDER § 19–402 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

19–407.

(a) Whenever a security guard is in uniform, the security guard may wear a badge
that is:

(1) of a design approved by the Secretary; and

(2) issued by the licensed security guard agency OR THE SECURITY
GUARD EMPLOYER that employs the security guard.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) Whenever a security guard is in uniform, the security guard shall clearly
display and wear the clearance card issued by the Secretary which identifies the security
guard.

19–408.

(A) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 19–410 of this subtitle, the Secretary
may deny certification as a security guard to any applicant, reprimand or fine any
individual certified as a security guard, or suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the
certification of an individual:

(1) for any applicable ground under § 19–313 of this title;

(2) if the applicant or individual fraudulently or deceptively obtains or
attempts to obtain certification as a security guard for the applicant or individual or for
another;

(3) if the applicant or individual fails to maintain the standards set by the
Secretary for certification as a security guard; or

(4) if, under the laws of the United States or of any state, the applicant or
individual pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or is convicted of:

(i) a felony; or

(ii) a misdemeanor that is directly related to the fitness and
qualification of the applicant or individual to be certified as a security guard.

(B) SUBJECT TO THE HEARING PROVISIONS OF § 19–410 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
THE SECRETARY SHALL DENY, REVOKE, OR REFUSE TO RENEW THE CERTIFICATION
OF A SECURITY GUARD WHO:

(1) HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF:

(I) A DISQUALIFYING CRIME UNDER § 5–101 OF THE PUBLIC
SAFETY ARTICLE; OR

(II) A CRIME OF VIOLENCE UNDER § 14–101 OF THE CRIMINAL
LAW ARTICLE;

(2) HAS HAD ANY FORMAL FINDINGS BY A COURT, HEARING BOARD,
THE SECRETARY, OR OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY OF:

(I) UNLAWFUL OR EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE; OR OF

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

(II) MAKING A FALSE STATEMENT DURING THE SECURITY
GUARD’S EMPLOYMENT AS A POLICE OFFICER WITH A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;
OR

(3) HAS NOT SATISFACTORILY COMPLETED THE REQUIRED
CONTINUING SECURITY TRAINING UNDER § 19–404.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) (1) A LICENSED SECURITY GUARD AGENCY OR SECURITY GUARD
EMPLOYER SHALL NOTIFY THE SECRETARY WITHIN 48 HOURS IF IT KNOWS OR HAS
~~REASON~~ ~~TO~~ ~~KNOW~~ THAT AN INDIVIDUAL WHO PROVIDES SECURITY GUARD SERVICES
ON ITS BEHALF OR FOR IT HAS BEEN ARRESTED FOR A CRIME OF VIOLENCE UNDER
§ 14–101 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR A DISQUALIFYING CRIME UNDER §
5–101 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

(2) SUBJECT TO § 10–226(C)(2) OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE SECRETARY MAY IMPOSE AN EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF THE
CERTIFICATION OF A SECURITY GUARD WHO HAS BEEN ARRESTED FOR AN OFFENSE
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

19–412.

(A) THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION
SHALL IDENTIFY INITIAL AND CONTINUING TRAINING PROGRAMS FOR SECURITY
GUARD CERTIFICATION AND RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATION, AS REQUIRED IN §§
19–402 AND 19–404.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) THE TRAINING PROGRAMS UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL INCLUDE TRAINING ON THE FOLLOWING:

(1) RELEVANT CRIMINAL LAW;

(2) THE APPROPRIATE USE OF FORCE;

(3) THE USE OF ALTERNATIVES TO FORCE;

(4) THE USE OF DE–ESCALATION TECHNIQUES; AND

(5) PROMOTING APPROPRIATE INTERACTIONS WITH INDIVIDUALS
WHO:

(I) ARE UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE;

(II) HAVE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH OR OTHER DISABILITIES; OR

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) ARE IN CRISIS.

(C) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE TRAINING
PROGRAMS IDENTIFIED BY THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS
COMMISSION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL SATISFY THE
FOLLOWING TRAINING REQUIREMENTS:

(1) THE 12–HOUR INITIAL TRAINING REQUIREMENT UNDER § 19–402
OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) THE 10–HOUR 8–HOUR CONTINUING SECURITY TRAINING UNDER
§ 19–404.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) IF THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION IS
UNABLE TO IDENTIFY AN INITIAL OR CONTINUING TRAINING PROGRAM UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH AN INITIAL
OR CONTINUING TRAINING PROGRAM THAT MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) THE MARYLAND POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION
SHALL PROMINENTLY PUBLISH THE LIST OF THE PROGRAMS IDENTIFIED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION OR ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION ON THE COMMISSION’S WEBSITE.

19–413.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A SECURITY GUARD
MUST HOLD A VALID PERMIT TO CARRY A HANDGUN UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 3 OF
THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE BEFORE CARRYING A HANDGUN WHILE PROVIDING
SECURITY GUARD SERVICES.

(B) A SECURITY GUARD MAY NOT CARRY A HANDGUN WHILE PROVIDING
SECURITY GUARD SERVICES UNTIL:

(1) RECEIVING APPROVAL TO CARRY A HANDGUN FROM THE
LICENSED SECURITY GUARD AGENCY OR SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER;

(2) NOTIFYING THE SECRETARY OF THE INTENT OF THE SECURITY
GUARD TO CARRY A HANDGUN WHILE PROVIDING SECURITY GUARD SERVICES; AND

(3) THE SECRETARY CONFIRMS THAT THE SECURITY GUARD HAS A
VALID PERMIT TO CARRY A HANDGUN UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE PUBLIC

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

SAFETY ARTICLE AND HAS NOT BEEN CONVICTED OF A DISQUALIFYING CRIME
UNDER § 5–101 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

19–414.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “USE OF FORCE” MEANS:

(I) ANY PHYSICAL STRIKING OF AN INDIVIDUAL;

(II) ANY SIGNIFICANT PHYSICAL CONTACT THAT RESTRICTS
THE MOVEMENT OF AN INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING CONTROL TECHNIQUES; OR

(III) THE DETAINMENT OF AN INDIVIDUAL WITHOUT THE
INDIVIDUAL’S CONSENT.

(2) “USE OF FORCE” INCLUDES:

(I) THE DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM;

(II) THE DISCHARGE OF PEPPER MACE, AS DEFINED IN § 4–101
OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

(III) THE USE OF AN ELECTRONIC CONTROL DEVICE, AS DEFINED
IN § 4–109 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

(3) “USE OF FORCE” DOES NOT INCLUDE MERE PRESENCE, VERBAL
COMMANDS, OR ESCORTING AN INDIVIDUAL WITH MINIMAL RESISTANCE.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A SECURITY
GUARD SHALL REPORT ANY USE OF FORCE AGAINST A PERSON WHILE PROVIDING
SECURITY GUARD SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE LICENSED SECURITY GUARD
AGENCY OR FOR THE SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~END~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SHIFT~~ ~~OF~~
~~THE~~ ~~SECURITY~~ ~~GUARD~~ TO THE SECURITY GUARD AGENCY OR THE SECURITY GUARD
EMPLOYER WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER THE USE OF FORCE ON A FORM PROVIDED BY
THE SECRETARY.

(2) A SECURITY GUARD IS NOT REQUIRED TO REPORT ANY USE OF
FORCE AGAINST A PERSON ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~END~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SHIFT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SECURITY~~ ~~GUARD~~
WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER THE USE OF FORCE IF THE SECURITY GUARD IS SERIOUSLY
INJURED OR DISABLED.

(B) (C) (1) A LICENSED SECURITY GUARD AGENCY OR SECURITY
GUARD EMPLOYER SHALL, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, REPORT ANY USE OF FORCE BY A SECURITY GUARD WHILE PROVIDING
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECURITY GUARD SERVICES ON ITS BEHALF OR FOR IT TO THE SECRETARY WITHIN
48 HOURS AFTER RECEIVING THE FORM COMPLETED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF
THIS SECTION.

(2) THE USE OF FORCE REPORT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE TYPE OF ENCOUNTER;

(II) THE TYPE OF FORCE USED;

(III) THE LOCATION OF THE INCIDENT WHERE FORCE WAS USED;

(IV) WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM FORCE WAS
USED WAS ARRESTED AND, IF KNOWN, WHAT CHARGES THE INDIVIDUAL RECEIVED;

(V) WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM FORCE WAS
USED REQUESTED OR REQUIRED MEDICAL CARE;

(VI) WHETHER THE SECURITY GUARD REQUESTED OR
REQUIRED MEDICAL CARE; AND

(VII) DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION ABOUT ANY INDIVIDUALS
AGAINST WHOM FORCE WAS USED AND ANY SECURITY GUARD INVOLVED IN THE
INCIDENT, INCLUDING RACE, ETHNICITY, GENDER, AND AGE; AND

(VIII) THE FORM COMPLETED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF THIS
SECTION.

19–504.

(a) (1) A security guard agency OR SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER that
employs five or more individuals as security guards shall:

[(1)] (I) maintain commercial general liability insurance, including
errors and omissions and completed operations with a $1,000,000 total aggregate
minimum; and

[(2)] (II) submit proof of the required insurance to the Secretary.

(2) A SECURITY GUARD AGENCY OR SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER
THAT EMPLOYS FEWER THAN FIVE INDIVIDUALS AS SECURITY GUARDS SHALL:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

(I) MAINTAIN COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE,
INCLUDING ERRORS AND OMISSIONS AND COMPLETED OPERATIONS WITH A
$500,000 TOTAL AGGREGATE MINIMUM; AND

(II) SUBMIT PROOF OF THE REQUIRED INSURANCE TO THE
SECRETARY.

(b) (1) If an applicant for a license OR A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER
intends to employ [five] ONE or more individuals as security guards, the applicant shall
submit proof of the liability insurance required under subsection (a) of this section to the
Secretary with the license application.

(2) (I) The Secretary may not issue a license to an applicant to whom
the insurance requirements of this section would apply unless the applicant submits proof
of the insurance.

(II) THE SECRETARY MAY NOT AUTHORIZE THE CERTIFICATION
OF A SECURITY GUARD FOR A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER UNLESS THE SECURITY
GUARD EMPLOYER SUBMITS PROOF OF APPLICABLE INSURANCE UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(c) If the insurance required for a security guard agency OR SECURITY GUARD
EMPLOYER under this section is canceled, forfeited, or otherwise terminated, both the
security guard agency OR THE SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER and the insurer shall notify
the Secretary.

(d) If a security guard agency fails to maintain the liability insurance required
under this section, the license of the security guard agency:

(1) is suspended automatically;

(2) shall remain suspended until the agency complies with the
requirements; and

(3) may not be reinstated until the agency submits proof of the required
insurance to the Secretary.

(E) IF A SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER FAILS TO MAINTAIN THE LIABILITY
INSURANCE REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION, THE SECRETARY MAY PROHIBIT A
SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER FROM EMPLOYING A CERTIFIED SECURITY GUARD
UNTIL THE SECURITY GUARD EMPLOYER:

(1) COMPLIES WITH THE APPLICABLE INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION; AND

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 763 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) SUBMITS PROOF OF THE REQUIRED INSURANCE TO THE
SECRETARY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14