START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 143

Chapter 143

(Senate Bill 719)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – State Fuel Security Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the State Fuel Security Program to be administered and
enforced by the Maryland Energy Administration ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~management~~ ~~and~~
~~distribution~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~energy~~ ~~resources~~ ~~during~~ ~~an~~ ~~energy~~ ~~emergency;~~ ~~establishing~~
~~fuel~~ ~~percentages~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program;~~ ~~designating~~ ~~certain~~ ~~activities~~ ~~for~~ ~~which~~ ~~an~~
~~assignment~~ ~~of~~ ~~fuel~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~issued~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~during~~ ~~an~~ ~~energy~~ ~~emergency~~
~~and~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Administration~~ ~~to~~ ~~set~~ ~~priorities~~ ~~for~~ ~~fuel~~ ~~assignments~~ ~~under~~
~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~entity~~ ~~to~~ ~~designate~~ ~~a~~ ~~representative~~ ~~to~~ ~~act~~
~~on~~ ~~behalf~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~entity~~ ~~and~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~an~~ ~~assignment~~ ~~issued~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~during~~
~~an~~ ~~energy~~ ~~emergency~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~honored~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~entity;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~an~~ ~~appeals~~ ~~process~~ ~~for~~
~~the~~ ~~issuance~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~assignment~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Administration;~~ authorizing the
Administration, in coordination with the Department of Emergency Management
and the Department of Information Technology, to collect, store, and disseminate
certain energy–related data for a certain purpose and subject to certain
requirements; requiring certain entities to provide the Administration with certain
information under certain circumstances; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~to~~ ~~bring~~
~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~civil~~ ~~suit~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ and generally relating to the State
Fuel Security Program.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 14–501 through ~~14–511~~ 14–505 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 5.
State Fuel Security Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

SUBTITLE 5. STATE FUEL SECURITY PROGRAM.

14–501.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 143 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) “ADMINISTRATION” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENERGY
ADMINISTRATION.

(C) “ASSIGNMENT” MEANS A WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION BY THE
ADMINISTRATION THAT ORDERS A SPECIFIED SUPPLIER TO SUPPLY STATE FUEL
SECURITY PRODUCTS TO A SPECIFIED PURCHASER.

(D) (C) “DIRECTOR” MEANS THE DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION.

(E) “ENERGY EMERGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 14–301 OF THIS
~~TITLE.~~

(F) (D) “PERSON” INCLUDES A FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT OR AN AGENCY OR INSTRUMENTALITY OF A FEDERAL, STATE, OR
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.

(G) (E) “PRIME SUPPLIER” MEANS A SUPPLIER THAT MAKES THE FIRST
SALE INTO THE STATE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM OF A STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT
THAT IS INTENDED FOR CONSUMPTION IN THE STATE.

(H) (F) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE STATE FUEL SECURITY PROGRAM.

(I) (G) “STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT” MEANS A PRODUCT TO WHICH
THE PROGRAM APPLIES.

(J) “STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUME” MEANS THE STATE FUEL SECURITY
PERCENTAGE LEVEL FOR A PARTICULAR STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT APPLIED
TO A PARTICULAR PRIME SUPPLIER’S ESTIMATED PART OF ITS TOTAL SUPPLY FOR
A PARTICULAR TIME PERIOD THAT WILL BE SOLD INTO THE STATE DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM FOR CONSUMPTION IN THE STATE.

(K) (H) “SUPPLIER” MEANS A BUSINESS ENTITY OR A PART OR
SUBSIDIARY OF A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT SUPPLIES, SELLS, TRANSFERS, OR
OTHERWISE FURNISHES, INCLUDING BY CONSIGNMENT, A STATE FUEL SECURITY
PRODUCT TO CONSUMERS OR WHOLESALE PURCHASER–RESELLERS.

(L) (I)“WHOLESALE PURCHASER–RESELLER” MEANS A BUSINESS ENTITY
THAT:

(1) PURCHASES, RECEIVES THROUGH TRANSFER, OR OTHERWISE
OBTAINS, INCLUDING BY CONSIGNMENT, A STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 143

(2) RESELLS OR OTHERWISE TRANSFERS THE STATE FUEL SECURITY
PRODUCT TO OTHER PURCHASERS WITHOUT SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGING ITS FORM.

14–502.

(A) THERE IS A STATE FUEL SECURITY PROGRAM.

(B) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL MAINTAIN PLANS AND PROCEDURES TO
CARRY OUT THE PROGRAM FOR USE DURING AN ENERGY EMERGENCY.

(C) THE DIRECTOR SHALL ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE THE PROGRAM.

(D) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THIS SUBTITLE.

14–503.

(A) (1) THE PROGRAM APPLIES TO:

(I) (1) MOTOR GASOLINE;

(II) (2) MIDDLE DISTILLATE;

~~(III)~~ (3) PROPANE;

(IV) (4) RESIDUAL FUEL OIL, EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(V) (5) AVIATION GASOLINE.

(2) (B) THE PROGRAM DOES NOT APPLY TO RESIDUAL FUEL OIL
THAT IS USED:

(I) (1) IN AN ELECTRIC GENERATING STATION; OR

(II) (2) AS BUNKER FUEL FOR MARINE SHIPPING.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
~~DIRECTOR:~~

(I) SHALL DETERMINE THE APPROPRIATE STATE FUEL
SECURITY PERCENTAGE LEVEL FOR EACH STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 143 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) MAY REVIEW AND REVISE THE STATE FUEL SECURITY
PERCENTAGE LEVELS AS THE DIRECTOR CONSIDERS APPROPRIATE.

(2) A STATE FUEL SECURITY PERCENTAGE LEVEL MAY NOT EXCEED:

(I) 5% FOR MOTOR GASOLINE;

(II) 4% FOR MIDDLE DISTILLATES;

(III) 3% FOR PROPANE;

(IV) 3% FOR RESIDUAL FUEL OIL; AND

(V) 2% FOR AVIATION GASOLINE.

~~14–504.~~

(A) DURING AN ENERGY EMERGENCY, THE ADMINISTRATION MAY ISSUE AN
ASSIGNMENT OF STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT THROUGH THE PROGRAM TO A
PERSON IF THE PERSON IS ENGAGED IN:

(1) AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION FOR THE COMMERCIAL
PRODUCTION OF FOOD, INCLUDING:

~~(I)~~ ~~FARMING;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~RANCHING;~~

~~(III)~~ ~~DAIRYING;~~

(IV) FISHING; AND

(V) RELATED SUPPORT SERVICES;

(2) CARGO FREIGHT AND MAIL HAULING BY TRUCKS AND MAIL
~~CARRIERS;~~

(3) THE OPERATION OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CONGREGATE CARE
~~FACILITIES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~LODGE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~ ~~WHOSE~~ ~~PLACES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~LODGING~~ ~~ARE~~
RENDERED UNINHABITABLE DUE TO THE ENERGY EMERGENCY;

(4) EMERGENCY SERVICES, INCLUDING:

(I) LAW ENFORCEMENT;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 143

(II) FIRE FIGHTING;

(III) EMERGENCY ROAD SERVICES; AND

(IV) EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES;

(5) THE PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, AND DISTRIBUTION OF ENERGY
~~RESOURCES,~~ ~~INCLUDING:~~

(I) SOLAR ENERGY;

(II) FUEL PRODUCED FROM ORGANIC MATERIAL, INCLUDING
WOOD, WASTES, PETROLEUM, COAL, AND NATURAL GAS;

(III) GEOTHERMAL ENERGY;

(IV) NUCLEAR ENERGY; AND

(V) ELECTRICAL ENERGY, OTHER THAN ELECTRICAL ENERGY
PRODUCED USING PETROLEUM–BASED FUELS;

(6) PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION SERVICES, OR THE OPERATION OF
FACILITIES NECESSARY TO SUPPORT PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION SERVICES,
~~INCLUDING:~~

(I) PUBLICLY OR PRIVATELY OWNED AIR AND SURFACE
OPERATIONS FOR TRANSPORTING THE PUBLIC;

(II) BUS TRANSPORTATION OF PUPILS TO AND FROM
SCHOOL–SPONSORED ACTIVITIES; AND

(III) VANPOOL OPERATIONS, AS DEFINED IN § 11–175.1 OF THE
~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~ARTICLE;~~

(7) RESIDENTIAL SPACE HEATING AND FOOD PREPARATION;

(8) SANITATION SERVICES, INCLUDING THE COLLECTION AND
~~DISPOSAL~~ ~~OF~~ ~~SOLID~~ ~~WASTES~~ ~~BY~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~ENTITIES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~
MAINTENANCE, OPERATION, AND REPAIR OF LIQUID PURIFICATION AND WASTE
~~FACILITIES;~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 143 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(9) THE OPERATION OF PROGRAMS TO PROVIDE ESSENTIAL HEALTH
~~AND~~ ~~WELFARE~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~BY~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~NONPROFIT~~ ~~SOCIAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~
~~AGENCIES;~~

(10) SPACE HEATING FOR MEDICAL AND NURSING BUILDINGS; AND

(11) TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES, INCLUDING THE EMERGENCY
OR ESSENTIAL INSTALLATION, REPAIR, OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF VOICE,
DATA, TELEGRAPH, VIDEO, AND SIMILAR COMMUNICATION SERVICES TO THE
PUBLIC BY A COMMUNICATIONS COMMON CARRIER.

(B) IF STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUMES ARE NOT SUFFICIENT TO SATISFY
~~ALL~~ ~~REQUESTS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ASSIGNMENTS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ACTIVITIES~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~SUBSECTION~~
(A) OF THIS SECTION, THE ADMINISTRATION MAY SET PRIORITIES FOR MAKING
~~ASSIGNMENTS.~~

~~14–505.~~

(A) (1) EACH PRIME SUPPLIER SHALL DESIGNATE A REPRESENTATIVE
~~WITH~~ ~~FULL~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ACT~~ ~~ON~~ ~~BEHALF~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRIME~~ ~~SUPPLIER~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~RESPECT~~
TO ASSIGNMENTS AND APPLICATIONS FOR ASSIGNMENTS.

(2) TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT FEASIBLE, THE ADMINISTRATION
~~SHALL~~ ~~CONSULT~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REPRESENTATIVE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~PRIME~~ ~~SUPPLIER~~ ~~BEFORE~~
ISSUING AN ASSIGNMENT THAT AFFECTS THE AMOUNT OF STATE FUEL SECURITY
PRODUCT TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PRIME SUPPLIER.

(B) (1) DURING AN ENERGY EMERGENCY, A PERSON ENGAGED IN AN
ACTIVITY DESCRIBED IN § 14–504 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY REQUEST AN ASSIGNMENT
~~BY~~ ~~SUBMITTING~~ ~~AN~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~FORM~~ ~~DETERMINED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
~~ADMINISTRATION.~~

(2) ON APPROVAL OF AN APPLICATION, THE ADMINISTRATION
~~SHALL:~~

(I) ISSUE AN ASSIGNMENT TO THE APPLICANT; AND

(II) PROVIDE A COPY OF THE ASSIGNMENT TO THE DESIGNATED
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PRIME SUPPLIER.

(3) AN ASSIGNMENT IS EFFECTIVE ON ISSUANCE AND CONSTITUTES
AN ENCUMBRANCE ON THE PRIME SUPPLIER’S STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUMES FOR

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 143

~~THE~~ ~~MONTH~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ISSUANCE~~ ~~REGARDLESS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ACTUAL~~ ~~DATE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~DELIVERY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT TO THE APPLICANT.

(4) AN ASSIGNMENT EXPIRES AUTOMATICALLY UNLESS THE
APPLICANT PRESENTS IT TO A SUPPLIER WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER ISSUANCE.

(C) (1) ON PRESENTATION OF AN ASSIGNMENT, THE SUPPLIER SHALL
SUPPLY TO THE APPLICANT THE ASSIGNED AMOUNT OF THE STATE FUEL SECURITY
~~PRODUCT.~~

(2) A DESIGNATED WHOLESALE PURCHASER–RESELLER OF A PRIME
~~SUPPLIER:~~

(I) SHALL HONOR ASSIGNMENTS ON PRESENTATION; AND

(II) MAY NOT DELAY DELIVERY WHILE CONFIRMING THE
ASSIGNMENT WITH THE PRIME SUPPLIER.

(D) (1) IF A SUPPLIER OTHER THAN A PRIME SUPPLIER SUPPLIES A
STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT IN ACCORDANCE WITH AN ASSIGNMENT, THE
~~SUPPLIER~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~RECEIVE~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~SUPPLIER~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EQUIVALENT~~ ~~VOLUME~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT.

(2) THE VOLUME OF A STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT RECEIVED BY
A SUPPLIER FROM ITS SUPPLIER UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY
~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~CONSIDERED~~ ~~PART~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ALLOCATION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WOULD~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~HAVE~~
BEEN SUPPLIED TO THE SUPPLIER DURING THE SAME PERIOD.

(E) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY DIRECT THAT A WHOLESALE
PURCHASER–RESELLER BE SUPPLIED UNDER THE PROGRAM SO THAT THE
WHOLESALE PURCHASER–RESELLER IS ABLE TO SUPPLY INDIVIDUAL CONSUMERS
WHO WOULD OTHERWISE BE ELIGIBLE FOR AN ASSIGNMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

~~14–506.~~

(A) AN APPLICANT OR A SUPPLIER MAY APPEAL TO THE DIRECTOR A
DECISION BY THE ADMINISTRATION ON AN APPLICATION FOR AN ASSIGNMENT.

(B) AN APPEAL UNDER THIS SECTION:

(1) IS NOT SUBJECT TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT; AND

(2) SHALL BE RESOLVED INFORMALLY, EXPEDITIOUSLY, AND
~~INEXPENSIVELY.~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 143 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE DECISION OF THE DIRECTOR IS THE FINAL AGENCY DECISION FOR
PURPOSES OF JUDICIAL REVIEW.

~~14–507.~~

(A) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY ALLOW THE RELEASE OF ALL OR PART OF A
PRIME SUPPLIER’S STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUME INTO THE PRIME SUPPLIER’S
NORMAL STATEWIDE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.

(B) (1) DURING AN ENERGY EMERGENCY, THE GOVERNOR BY EXECUTIVE
ORDER MAY DESIGNATE CERTAIN GEOGRAPHIC AREAS IN THE STATE AS SUFFERING
FROM AN INTRASTATE SUPPLY IMBALANCE.

(2) AT ANY TIME DURING AN ENERGY EMERGENCY, THE
ADMINISTRATION BY WRITTEN ORDER MAY REQUIRE A PRIME SUPPLIER TO
RELEASE ALL OR PART OF ITS STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUME INTO AN AREA
DESIGNATED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION THROUGH ITS NORMAL
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.

(3) AN ORDER ISSUED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) IS EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY ON RECEIPT BY THE
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PRIME SUPPLIER; AND

(II) CONSTITUTES AN ENCUMBRANCE ON THE PRIME
SUPPLIER’S STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUME FOR THE MONTH OF ISSUANCE
REGARDLESS OF THE ACTUAL DATE OF DELIVERY OF THE STATE FUEL SECURITY
~~PRODUCT.~~

~~14–508.~~

THE STATE FUEL SECURITY VOLUMES FOR A PARTICULAR MONTH:

(1) MAY NOT BE ACCUMULATED OR DEFERRED; AND

(2) SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE FROM THE STOCKS OF PRIME
SUPPLIERS DIRECTLY OR THROUGH THEIR WHOLESALE PURCHASER–RESELLERS.

~~14–509.~~

(A) WITHIN 120 DAYS AFTER THE END OF A FISCAL YEAR WHEN THE
ADMINISTRATION USES THE PROGRAM, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL REPORT TO

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 143

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, SUBJECT TO § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, ON THE PROGRAM.

(B) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE A
DESCRIPTION OF THE NUMBER AND TYPES OF APPLICATIONS FOR EACH STATE FUEL
SECURITY PRODUCT RECEIVED AND APPROVED BY THE ADMINISTRATION DURING
THAT FISCAL YEAR.

~~14–510.~~ 14–504.

(A) TO CARRY OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
ADMINISTRATION:

(1) MAY COLLECT ENERGY–RELATED DATA IN ORDER TO INFORM
EVALUATIONS AND DECISIONS REGARDING ENERGY BY THE ADMINISTRATION,
STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES, AND, SUBJECT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE PUBLIC;

(2) MAY MAINTAIN UP–TO–DATE REPORTS ON THE SUPPLY, DEMAND,
AND PRICE OF VARIOUS ENERGY RESOURCES, INCLUDING:

(I) STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCTS;

(I) (II) WHOLESALE ELECTRICITY, INCLUDING ELECTRICITY
GENERATED FROM:

1. NUCLEAR GENERATION;

2. SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC TECHNOLOGY; AND

3. WIND, INCLUDING OFFSHORE WIND;

~~(II)~~ (III) COAL;

(III) (IV) NATURAL GAS; AND

(IV) PROPANE; AND

(V) PETROLEUM; AND

(3) WHEN FEASIBLE, SHALL PROVIDE AN ANALYSIS OF THE
AVAILABILITY OF VARIOUS ENERGY RESOURCES, INCLUDING A FORECAST OF THE
FUTURE DEMAND FOR AND AVAILABILITY OF THOSE RESOURCES; AND

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 143 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT TO DEVELOP AN INFORMATION DISTRIBUTION PLAN TO
DISSEMINATE ENERGY–RELATED INFORMATION TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC AND
RELEVANT STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

(B) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TO ENSURE THAT DATA COLLECTED
UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION IS TRANSMITTED AND HELD SECURELY.

(2) (I) DATA DISSEMINATED TO THE PUBLIC UNDER SUBSECTION
(A)(4) (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT CREATE A COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE FOR
OR DISADVANTAGE TO THE PERSON WHO SUPPLIED THE ENERGY–RELATED DATA.

(II) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL MAINTAIN THE
CONFIDENTIALITY OF ALL DATA THAT MAY CREATE A COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE OR
DISADVANTAGE THAT IS UNKNOWN TO COMPETITORS.

(III) IF THE DATA COLLECTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IS STOLEN,
BREACHED, COMPROMISED, OR OTHERWISE RELEASED IN A MANNER OTHER THAN
THAT AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION, THE
ADMINISTRATION SHALL INFORM ALL PARTIES THAT PROVIDED THE DATA WITHIN
72 HOURS AFTER LEARNING OF THE RELEASE.

(C) IN MAINTAINING THE REPORTS DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF
THIS SECTION, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL USE DATA AVAILABLE FROM EXISTING
STATE AND FEDERAL SOURCES TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE.

(D) IN ORDER TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, THE
ADMINISTRATION MAY REQUIRE A PRIME SUPPLIER, SUPPLIER, OR WHOLESALE
PURCHASER–RESELLER TO PROVIDE NECESSARY INFORMATION IN A FORM
DETERMINED BY THE ADMINISTRATION.

~~14–511.~~ 14–505.

(A) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY VIOLATE OR KNOWINGLY
~~PARTICIPATE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~RULE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~REGULATION~~
ADOPTED UNDER IT.

(2) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SUBSECTION IS GUILTY OF A
~~MISDEMEANOR~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ON~~ ~~CONVICTION~~ ~~IS~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~IMPRISONMENT~~ ~~NOT~~
EXCEEDING 6 MONTHS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 OR BOTH.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 143

A PERSON WHO VIOLATES A PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE OR A REGULATION
ADOPTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IS SUBJECT TO:

(1) FOR A FIRST VIOLATION, AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY NOT
EXCEEDING $1,000; AND

(2) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION, AN ADMINISTRATIVE
PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING $5,000.

(B) (1) IN ADDITION TO ANY PENALTY ASSESSED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION, IF THE DIRECTOR FINDS THAT A SUPPLIER HAS REFUSED TO
SUPPLY A STATE FUEL SECURITY PRODUCT AS REQUIRED BY AN ASSIGNMENT
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE DIRECTOR MAY REFER THE MATTER TO THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL FOR CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.

(2) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY SUE FOR AND A COURT MAY
GRANT IMPOSITION OF A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING $10,000 PER
OCCURRENCE PER DAY, APPROPRIATE EQUITABLE RELIEF, OR BOTH.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11