START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 756 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 756 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Access to Counsel in Evictions - Funding 
 
 
This bill extends, through fiscal 2027, a requirement for (1) the Office of the Comptroller 
to distribute $14.0 million annually from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to the 
Access to Counsel in Evictions (ACE) Special Fund and (2) the Governor to include in the 
annual budget bill for each associated fiscal year an appropriation of $14.0 million from 
the ACE Special Fund to the Maryland Legal Services Corporation (MLSC).  The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $14.0 million annually in FY 2025 
through 2027, reflecting the distribution of proceeds from unclaimed property to the 
ACE Special Fund. Special fund revenues to the ACE Special Fund increase 
correspondingly. Special fund expenditures increase by $14.0 million in FY 2025 through 
2027, reflecting the bill’s mandated appropriation each year. This bill continues a 
mandated distribution and related mandated appropriation in FY 2025 through 2027.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($14.0) 
($14.0) 
($14.0) 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$14.0 
$14.0 
$14.0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$14.0 
$14.0 
$14.0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($14.0) 
($14.0) 
($14.0) 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 756/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 746 of 2021 established the ACE Special Fund, a special, 
nonlapsing fund that is administered by MLSC. The fund is authorized to be used for 
specified purposes related to the Access to Counsel in Evictions Program (also 
administered by MLSC), which was created to organize and direct services and resources 
in order to provide individuals meeting certain criteria with access to legal representation 
in specified judicial or administrative proceedings to evict or terminate a tenancy or 
housing subsidy. Chapter 746 further required that access to legal representation be phased 
in over time as MLSC determines appropriate, with the goal of full implementation before 
October 1, 2025. Chapter 746 did not include a funding mechanism for this legal 
representation, and access to legal representation under its provisions is subject to the 
availability of funding. 
 
Chapters 20 and 21 of 2022 altered the funding sources of the ACE Special Fund to include 
funds received by the Consumer Protection Division in the Office of the Attorney General 
(OAG) from any final settlement, agreement, or judgment related to an investigation or 
enforcement action of the Maryland Consumer Protection Act for an unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice regarding residential rental property. The Acts exclude from the 
fund any restitution and costs incurred by OAG to bring the action.  
 
Additional funding was also provided under Chapter 40, which required, for fiscal 2024 
only, the Comptroller to distribute $14.0 million from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund 
to the ACE Special Fund. It also required the Governor include in the annual budget bill 
for fiscal 2024 an appropriation of $14.0 million from the ACE Special Fund to MLSC. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill extends an annual distribution of $14.0 million from 
unclaimed property funds to the ACE Special Fund through fiscal 2027. Accordingly, 
special fund revenues for the ACE Special Fund increase by $14.0 million annually in 
fiscal 2025 through 2027, reflecting that revenue distribution. Because net proceeds from 
unclaimed property are distributed to the general fund (after administrative costs and 
certain required distributions are made), general fund revenues correspondingly decrease. 
The bill also requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill (through 
fiscal 2027) an appropriation of $14.0 million from the ACE Special Fund to MLSC. 
Accordingly, ACE Special Fund expenditures correspondingly increase by $14.0 million 
in fiscal 2025 through 2027. Identical funding mechanisms were established for fiscal 2024 
only by Chapter 40. 
 
The Office of the Comptroller advises that in fiscal 2022, $146.8 million was transferred 
from the Unclaimed Property Fund to the general fund after refunds to proper owners and 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 756/ Page 3 
other associated administrative/operating costs. In addition, the Comptroller advises that 
the balance of the Unclaimed Property Fund in fiscal 2022 was $2.19 billion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1050 (Delegate Taylor, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2023 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3