START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 722 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 722 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation – Mandatory Retirement Age – 
Repeal 
 
   
This departmental bill repeals the mandatory retirement age of 70 years for the Director of 
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) and a county supervisor of 
assessments. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is not expected to affect State operations or finances.     
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SDAT conducts the assessment of all property in the State. The Director 
of SDAT is appointed by the Governor. The director must be an individual who has 
executive ability and who is trained and experienced in the tax field. After reaching 
70 years of age, an individual may not continue to hold the office of director.  
 
The department operates field offices in each county and Baltimore City. The supervisor 
of each county’s assessment team is appointed by the Director of SDAT from a list of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 722/ Page 2 
qualified applicants submitted by the local subdivision. A county supervisor of assessments 
may not continue to hold the position after reaching 70 years of age. 
 
Background:  The bill allows the department to retain talented personnel regardless of the 
age of the employee. The department advises that the ability to retain talent, regardless of 
age, is critical to its mission of retaining diverse fields of employees.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s 
counties; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; State Retirement Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 722/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation – Mandatory 
Retirement Age – Repeal 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 722 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Department of Assessments and Taxation 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 3