START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 717 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 717 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Stationary Engineers - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Stationary 
Engineers within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by 10 years to July 1, 2034. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained from 
FY 2025 through 2034. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached).  The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with 
this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Stationary Engineers was established in 
2005 to create “a licensing program to ensure that qualified individuals provide stationary 
engineer services to (1) protect the public; (2) provide for the safe operation of power 
plants, plants of machinery, and boilers; and (3) promote high professional standards.”  
Under statute, “[p]rovide stationary engineer services means to oversee the operation of a 
power plant, plant of machinery, or boiler, each generating pressure of more than 15 psi 
and operating at 30 or more horsepower,” but “does not include overseeing the operation 
of a heating boiler.”   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 717/ Page 2 
The board may deny a license to an applicant, revoke or suspend a license, issue a 
reprimand, and impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for any violation of the stationary 
engineers licensing statute or regulations. Other than licensing, the primary function of the 
board is investigating violations of the stationary engineer licensing code.  
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation 
Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. 
However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by 
legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was not asked to 
conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested 
reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last three 
years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2