START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 721 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 721 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Commerce) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Income Tax - Credit for Federal Security Clearance Costs - Alterations 
 
   
This departmental bill reauthorizes the employer security clearance costs tax credit from 
tax year 2023 through tax year 2027 for an individual or corporation with up to 
500 employees. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and 
beyond.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $1.5 million annually from FY 2025 
through 2028. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by $0.2 million to 
$0.3 million annually and Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues decrease 
by $0.1 million annually from FY 2025 through 2028. There is a similar revenue effect in  
FY 2029. General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by $50,000 in 
FY 2024 only. 
    
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
SF Revenue 
$0 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
GF Expenditure 
$0.1 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0.0 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
$0.0 
Net Effect 
($0.1) 
($1.8) 
($1.8) 
($1.8) 
($1.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease by $36,400 to $51,400 annually from 
FY 2025 through 2028. Local income tax revenues increase minimally from FY 2025 
through 2028 due to taxpayers adding back the amount of credits claimed against the 
personal income tax. Local expenditures are not affected.      
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 721/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Commerce has determined that this bill has a 
meaningful impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.)     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapter 478 of 2012 established the Employer Security 
Clearance Costs Tax Credit program. The program allows a tax credit against the State 
income tax for certain security clearance administrative expenses and for the construction 
and equipment costs to construct or renovate a sensitive compartmented information 
facility (SCIF) located in the State. The program originally applied to tax years 2013 
through 2016. Chapter 240 of 2017 extended the program duration through tax year 2021. 
 
Commerce is authorized to award a maximum of $2.0 million in total credits each year. If 
the amount of credits claimed in each year exceeds the maximum aggregate limit, the value 
of the credit is reduced based on the total amount of excess credits claimed.  
 
The amount of expenses that qualify for the credit are equal to (1) 100% of eligible security 
clearance administrative expenses, not to exceed $200,000; (2) if the individual or 
corporation is a small business, 100% of eligible rental payments, not to exceed $200,000; 
and (3) 50% of eligible costs incurred to construct or renovate each SCIF, not to exceed 
$200,000. If a company constructs and/or renovates multiple SCIFs, the total amount of 
aggregate expenditures that qualify for the credit is limited to $500,000. If the total amount 
of the credit exceeds the tax liability imposed in the year, the excess can be carried forward 
to future tax years until the full amount of the excess is used.   
 
An individual or corporation may either file an amended income tax return for the taxable 
year in which the costs were incurred or claim the credit in any subsequent taxable year. 
Businesses claiming the credit are required to add back to Maryland adjusted gross income 
or Maryland modified income the amount of expenses claimed under the credit. 
 
The credit has been oversubscribed in recent years:  the percentage of qualified costs that 
received the tax credit was 54% in tax year 2018 (64 recipients) and 46% in tax year 2019 
(81 recipients). Just over half of the credits were awarded to businesses with fewer than 
50 employees in both years. Most of the credit amounts provided each year cover eligible 
security clearance administrative expenses. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill reauthorizes the employer security clearance costs tax credit 
from tax year 2023 through tax year 2027 for an individual or corporation that employs up 
to 500 employees. Commerce can award a maximum of $2.0 million in credits annually in 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 721/ Page 3 
those years. Before claiming the tax credit, Commerce must certify the amount of expenses 
incurred by the business. These expenses are certified by December 15 of the calendar year 
following the end of the taxable year in which the qualifying expenses occurred. A business 
may then either file an amended return to claim the credit for the taxable year in which the 
costs were incurred or claim the credit for a subsequent taxable year. 
 
As a result, State revenues decrease by $1.8 million to $1.9 million annually from 
fiscal 2025 through 2028, as shown in Exhibit 1. Most revenue losses each year are general 
funds. Revenues decrease by similar amounts in fiscal 2029 as well, prior to the tax credit 
expiring.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Projected Effect on State Revenues 
Fiscal 2025-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
State Revenues 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
HEIF 
(0.1) 
(0.1) 
(0.1) 
(0.1) 
TTF 
(0.2) 
(0.3) 
(0.3) 
(0.2) 
Total 
($1.8) 
($1.9) 
($1.9) 
($1.8) 
 
HEIF:  Higher Education Investment Fund 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services  
 
 
The estimated revenue loss due to the extension of the credit is based on the following facts 
and assumptions:  
 
 
the maximum amount of credits will be awarded in each tax year, even with the 
limitation on business size in the bill;  
 
75% of credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, with the remaining 
amount claimed against the personal income tax;  
 
businesses have enough tax liability to claim the full credit; 
 
credits are applied to the taxable year in which the costs were incurred; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 721/ Page 4 
 
any credit claimed is added back to Maryland adjusted gross income or Maryland 
modified income. 
 
It is estimated that general fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
$50,000 in fiscal 2024 for one-time changes to the Comptroller’s tax systems. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 721/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax - Credit for Federal Security Clearance Costs - 
Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 721 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Siers 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The proposed legislation will extend the Maryland Employer Security Clearance Costs Tax 
Credit from tax year ending 2022 through 2027. This tax credit provides three ways for 
companies to receive a credit: 
 
1. A credit towards administrative expenses related to obtaining and maintaining 
employee security clearances, 
2. A credit towards the cost of constructing or renovating a SCIF (sensitive 
compartmented information facility), and 
3. A credit towards the first-year leasing costs for small businesses doing 
security-based contract work. 
 
Currently, the program provides companies with $2 million annually in tax credits spread 
across the three programs. Most of the assistance is provided to cover administrative 
expenses related to obtaining and maintaining employee security clearances.  
 
The majority of the assistance is provided to small businesses within Maryland. In tax 
year 2019, the most recent tax year for which data is available, a total of 81 companies 
received assistance through this tax credit. Of these 81 companies, 57% had fewer than 
50 employees and 79% had fewer than 100 employees. In tax year 2018, 53% of companies 
who received assistance had fewer than 50 employees and 81% had fewer than 
100 employees. If the tax credit is extended for another five years, it is likely that most of 
this assistance will continue to benefit small businesses in Maryland. 

END OF PAGE 5