START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 783 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 783 
(Senator Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Preservation and Reuse of Historic Complexes Study and Alterations to the 
Income Tax Credit for Catalytic Revitalization Projects 
 
 
This bill makes various alterations to the catalytic revitalization project tax credit. 
Specifically, the bill (1) authorizes the Secretary of Housing and Community Development 
to issue multiple final tax credit certificates for a project that is to be completed in phases 
if specified requirements are met and (2) specifies the circumstances under which an initial 
tax credit certificate may be transferred. The bill also requires the Smart Growth 
Subcabinet to study and make recommendations about an implementation plan to address 
the preservation and reuse of historic complexes in the State; a report of its findings and 
recommendations must be submitted to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
December 31, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill potentially accelerates the timing of credits claimed against the State 
income tax, as discussed below; any related impact on State revenues cannot be reliably 
predicted but may be significant in a given year. The Smart Growth Subcabinet can 
complete the required study and report with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues are potentially affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 783/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Catalytic Revitalization Project Tax Credit Alterations  
 
The Secretary of Housing and Community Development may issue multiple final tax credit 
certificates for a project that is issued an initial tax credit certificate if:  
 
 
the project has been determined by the Secretary to be in phases;  
 
a phase of the project has been completed; 
 
a final tax credit certificate is not issued for more than 20% of the project’s eligible 
expenses to date; and  
 
a final tax credit certificate is not issued that would exceed the aggregated limit of 
a project’s tax credit.  
 
The original recipient of an initial tax credit may transfer the initial tax credit certificate to 
one or more other individuals, nonprofit organizations, or business entities; the transfer 
need not involve a transfer of the catalytic revitalization project, as specified. However, an 
initial tax credit certificate may not be transferred (1) to another person without the express 
written consent of the original recipient or (2) as part of the involuntary transfer of the real 
property ownership interest in an entity that owns the real property without the prior written 
consent of the original recipient of the certificate and the Secretary of Housing and 
Community Development.  
 
Smart Growth Subcabinet Study, Recommendations, and Related Report 
 
In conducting the mandated study and making recommendations, the subcabinet must  
(1) evaluate relevant studies and publications; (2) analyze the economic impact of the 
implementation plan; (3) identify regulatory and policy issues for the implementation plan; 
and (4) solicit input from interested parties, including government agencies and relevant 
public and private organizations.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Catalytic Revitalization Project Tax Credit 
 
Chapter 332 of 2021 established a refundable credit against the State income tax equal to 
20% of the rehabilitation and new construction costs incurred for a qualified catalytic 
revitalization project in the State. The credit is administered by the Department of Housing 
and Community Development. “Catalytic revitalization project” means the substantial 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 783/ Page 3 
rehabilitation of a property in the State (1) that was formerly owned by the State or federal 
government; (2) the rehabilitation of which will foster economic, housing, and community 
development within the community in which the property is located; and  
(3) that is out of service and was formerly used as a college or university, K-12 school, 
hospital, mental health facility, or military facility or installation. For purposes of 
calculating the credit, new construction costs must be related to the construction of new 
structures that connect, expand, or integrate the existing structures to be rehabilitated and 
may not exceed 50% of the total costs of the catalytic revitalization project. 
 
The Secretary of Housing and Community Development may not award an initial credit 
certificate for more than one catalytic revitalization project within a two-year period and 
may not issue tax credit certificates totaling more than $15.0 million for any project. A 
final tax credit certificate is issued upon completion of a catalytic revitalization project for 
which an initial tax credit certificate has been issued. (Under the bill, the Secretary may 
issue a final tax credit upon completion of a phase of the catalytic revitalization project, as 
specified.) 
 
An individual, nonprofit organization, or business entity awarded a tax credit certificate 
must claim the credit over the course of five consecutive tax years beginning with the tax 
year in which the catalytic revitalization project is completed. Any unclaimed amount may 
be transferred, by written instrument, in whole or in part, to any individual, nonprofit 
organization, or business entity, as specified. The Comptroller or the Secretary of Housing 
and Community Development may not recapture a tax credit if (1) the catalytic 
revitalization project is transferred, in whole or in part, by fee simple transfer of real 
property or by transfer of an ownership interest in the entity that owns the project to a new 
owner and (2) the Secretary has issued a final tax credit certificate for the catalytic 
revitalization project.  
 
The Secretary may not issue additional tax credit certificates on or after January 1, 2031. 
After this termination date, previously issued tax credit certificates may continue to be 
claimed, refunded, carried forward, or transferred in accordance with existing provisions. 
 
Smart Growth Subcabinet  
 
The Smart Growth Subcabinet, comprised of the Special Secretary of Smart Growth and 
the secretaries of specified State agencies (including the Secretary of Planning) and staffed 
by the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP), works to promote smart growth policy 
in the State. The subcabinet must: 
 
 
provide a forum for discussion of interdepartmental issues relating to activities that 
affect growth, development, neighborhood conservation, and resource management;  
 
work together to promote the understanding of smart growth;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 783/ Page 4 
 
work together to create, enhance, support, and revitalize sustainable communities;  
 
meet at least biannually with county and municipal elected leaders and planning 
officials to discuss local government issues relating to activities that affect smart 
growth, development, neighborhood conservation, and resource management; 
 
make recommendations to specified State agencies;  
 
evaluate and report annually to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
implementation of the State's smart growth policy; and  
 
perform other duties assigned by the Governor. 
 
Study on the Adaptive Reuse of Historic Properties 
 
Chapter 334 of 2019 required the Secretary of Planning to contract with a consultant to 
conduct a study on the adaptive reuse of historic properties located within the State that are 
or were owned by the State or the federal government. Among other things, the report must 
identify key success factors and primary obstacles to the preservation and redevelopment 
of historic properties, in addition to develop a historic resource package of existing, new, 
and altered enticements, programs, and resources that could be applied to support projects. 
The report was submitted to the General Assembly on January 28, 2020. 
 
Identification, Protection, and Use of Historic Properties 
 
The Maryland Historical Trust (MHT), an agency within MDP, must compile a Maryland 
Inventory of Historic Properties that consists of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and 
other objects of known or potential value to the prehistory, history, upland and underwater 
archeology, architecture, engineering, and culture of the State. That inventory may be 
viewed and searched here. 
 
In cooperation with MHT and subject to available resources, each State unit must 
(1) establish a program to identify, document, and nominate to MHT each property owned 
or controlled by the State unit that appears to qualify for the National Register of Historic 
Places; (2) ensure that no property listed in or eligible to be sold in the Historic Register is 
inadvertently transferred, sold, demolished, destroyed, substantially altered, or allowed to 
deteriorate significantly; and (3) use any available historic buildings under its control to 
the extent prudent and practicable before acquiring, constructing, or leasing a building to 
carry out its responsibilities. If it is prudent, practicable, and in the State’s interest to do so, 
a State unit that transfers a surplus property listed in or eligible to be listed in the Historic 
Register must ensure that the transfer provides for the preservation or enhancement of the 
property. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, the bill authorizes, beginning  
October 1, 2023, the Secretary of Housing and Community Development to issue multiple 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 783/ Page 5 
final tax credit certificates for a project that is to be completed in phases if specified 
requirements are met. The Secretary may not issue a final tax credit that exceeds 20% of a 
project’s eligible expenses to date or that would exceed the aggregated limit of a project’s 
tax credit. Thus, while it is assumed that the change does not affect the overall amount of 
tax credits claimed, to the extent the Secretary issues multiple final tax credit certificates 
for multi-phase projects, the bill potentially (1) accelerates the timing of when credit is 
claimed against the State income tax and (2) extends the period of time over which total 
credit is claimed. Any related impact on general fund revenues cannot be reliably predicted 
but may be significant in a given year. To the extent the bill affects the timing of credit 
claimed against the corporate income tax, Higher Education Investment Fund revenues, 
Transportation Trust Fund revenues and expenditures, and local highway user revenues are 
also affected.  
 
Otherwise, the bill’s provisions relating to the transfer of initial tax credit certificates are 
not expected to materially affect State finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State 
Treasurer’s Office; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General 
Services; Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
Enrolled - April 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 27, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder, 
Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5