START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 742 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 742 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Economic Matters 
 
Vehicle Laws - Manufacturers and Dealers - Allocation of Vehicles 
 
 
This bill requires that any system operated by a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch 
or its affiliate for the allocation of new vehicles to dealers be reasonable and fair for all 
dealers. Upon written request by a dealer, a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch or 
its affiliate must disclose the method by which new vehicles are allocated to dealers of the 
same line make. In any dispute over compliance with the bill’s requirements, a 
manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch or its affiliate has the burden of proving its 
compliance. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is responsible for regulating 
businesses that manufacture, distribute, sell, lease, deliver, and title motor vehicles in the 
State. Generally, to operate in one of these businesses, a person must first obtain a license 
from MVA and pay any applicable license fee. State law includes other requirements for 
persons and individuals working in the motor vehicle industry; for example, manufacturers, 
distributors, and factory branches must always act in good faith (i.e., maintaining honesty 
in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade) 
when doing business. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 742/ Page 2 
State law does not explicitly regulate the allocation of new vehicles to dealers by 
manufacturers, distributors, and factory branches. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business vehicle dealers may benefit from the bill’s 
requirement that any system operated by a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch or 
its affiliate for the allocation of new vehicles be reasonable and fair for all dealers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2