START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 773 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 773 
(Senator Lam) 
Budget and Taxation 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Procurement - Liquidated Damages - Policies and Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires (1) the Board of Public Works (BPW), by January 1, 2024, to publish a 
model policy concerning the inclusion and use of liquidated damages provisions in 
procurement contracts and (2) each unit of State government, including a unit otherwise 
exempt from State procurement law, to adopt a written policy that is substantially similar 
to the model policy by July 1, 2024. Each procurement unit must also obtain specified 
approval related to decisions not to (1) include liquidated damages provisions in contracts 
or (2) pursue damages in the event of a breach of contract (in which case specified written 
documentation must also be maintained). The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  BPW and procuring agencies can implement the bill with existing resources. 
No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Liquidated damages” is defined as damages in an amount designated by 
the parties to a contract that the injured party is eligible to collect as compensation for a 
specific breach of the contract. 
 
All of the bill’s provisions apply to State procurement units that are otherwise exempt from 
certain provisions of State procurement law. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 773/ Page 2 
The model policy developed by BPW must be developed in consultation with the 
Procurement Improvement Council and include:   
 
 
guidance on when to include liquidated damages provisions in procurement 
contracts; 
 
guidance for drafting liquidated damages provisions, including recommended 
methods for calculating the amount to be assessed; 
 
a draft plan for responding to deficiencies in a contractor’s performance that may 
trigger a liquidated damages provision; and 
 
examples of liquidated damages provisions that may be used. 
 
In adopting a similar policy, a primary procurement unit may establish a policy that applies 
to procurements under its control. 
 
If a procurement unit decides not to include a liquidated damages clause in a specific 
contract, it must obtain the approval of the head of the unit. 
 
For procurements valued at $5.0 million or more, if a procurement unit decides not to 
pursue liquidated damages in the event of a breach, the unit must obtain the approval of 
the head of the unit and maintain documentation on the reason the unit decided not to 
pursue liquidated damages. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Procurement Exemptions 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and Baltimore City Community College are 
exempt from most provisions of State procurement law. In addition, the following agencies 
are exempted in whole or in part from most State procurement law. 
 
 
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland; 
 
Maryland State Arts Council; 
 
Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority; 
 
Department of Commerce; 
 
Maryland Food Center Authority; 
 
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission; 
 
Maryland State Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities; 
 
Maryland Historical Trust; 
 
Rural Maryland Council; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 773/ Page 3 
 
Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
 
Maryland Health Insurance Plan; 
 
Maryland Energy Administration; 
 
Maryland Developmental Disabilities Administration; 
 
Department of General Services (DGS), for historic preservation; 
 
Department of Natural Resources, for conservation service opportunities; 
 
Maryland State Archives; 
 
Maryland Stadium Authority; 
 
State Retirement and Pension System; 
 
College Savings Plan of Maryland; and 
 
Chesapeake Bay Trust. 
 
Liquidated Damages 
 
Each State procurement contract must include a clause or clauses covering liquidated 
damages, as appropriate. DGS advises that (1) for construction contracts, liquidated 
damages are required unless the agency head determines otherwise and (2) determinations 
for other contracts are made on a contract-by-contract basis by a procurement officer in 
consultation with the Office of the Attorney General.  
 
In addition, with respect to State procurement, liquidated damages may be collected for 
specified violations of:   
 
 
the Minority Business Enterprise program; 
 
the State’s prevailing wage requirements; and 
 
the State’s Living Wage law. 
 
Primary Procurement Units 
 
In general, BPW may control procurement by units of the Executive Branch, except for 
procurements related to roads, bridges, and highways. BPW may delegate its authority; it 
has delegated much of its authority as described below. However, most construction and 
services contracts with a value of at least $200,000 require final approval from BPW. 
 
The State Treasurer controls procurements by other agencies for insurance and banking 
services; DGS controls most other procurements, including those for construction, 
services, commodities, construction-related services, and information technology. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 773/ Page 4 
Primary procurement units are those units that can conduct their own procurements without 
the approval of any other unit. They are:   
 
 
the State Treasurer; 
 
DGS; 
 
Maryland Department of Transportation; 
 
USM; 
 
Maryland Port Administration; 
 
MSU; and 
 
SMCM. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Commerce; 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4