START OF PAGE 1
 
  
  SB 720 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 720 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Horse Racing - Extension of Maryland Horse Racing Act and Establishment of 
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the Maryland Horse Racing Act and 
Maryland Racing Commission by 10 years to July 1, 2034, subject to the evaluation and 
reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The bill also 
establishes a Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority and a Maryland 
Racing Operations Fund. The bill’s provisions regarding the Maryland Thoroughbred 
Racetrack Operating Authority and the Maryland Racing Operations Fund take 
effect June 1, 2023, and terminate June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for the Maryland Racing Operations Fund increase 
by at least $15.0 million in FY 2023 due to a redirection of funding in the FY 2023 capital 
budget. Expenditures from the fund may increase for staffing the new authority and a 
required study in FY 2024. Special fund revenues and expenditures for the Maryland 
Racing Commission are maintained from FY 2025 through 2034. 
  
Local Effect:  There is no material impact on local government finances. Even so, the bill 
ensures the maximum amount of funding previously authorized for transfer to the  
City of Bowie is provided, with most of it required to be used for remediation costs of the 
Bowie Race Course Training Center. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 720/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority is 
established as a body politic and corporate and is an instrumentality of the State, with the 
stated purpose of maintaining the State as a best-in-class thoroughbred racing venue. To 
that end, the authority may: 
 
 
study and make any recommendations that the authority finds are in the best 
interests of thoroughbred racing in the State; 
 
in coordination with other State entities, develop new and existing horse racing and 
training facilities in the State; 
 
take specified actions (as discussed below), but only in accordance with an 
executive order or a determination of the Maryland Racing Commission, and subject 
to specified review and comment, that a thoroughbred racing licensee – for any 
reason other than weather, an act of God, or other circumstances beyond the control 
of the licensee – is unable to support the minimum number of live racing days; 
 
enter into any agreements, leases, partnerships, or contracts necessary to support 
and sustain Maryland thoroughbred racing and pari-mutuel wagering activity and 
ensure compliance with Maryland Racing Commission rules and regulations; 
 
authorize or create a separate body, entity, or holding company to carry out any 
provisions of the bill; 
 
adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of the bill; and 
 
make any other recommendations the authority deems necessary. 
 
The Legislative Policy Committee must first review and comment on an executive order 
or determination of the Maryland Racing Commission related to a thoroughbred racing 
licensee being unable to support the minimum number of live racing days. The bill allows 
for the authority, under such an order or determination, to manage and oversee day-to-day 
thoroughbred horse racing operations, live racing days, and assets in the State and, in 
coordination with the Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO), acquire 
property or contractual interests, as specified. Under such circumstances, the Maryland 
Racing Commission may issue a license and live racing days to the authority. 
 
The bill specifies the membership of the authority and authorizes the hiring of an 
executive director as well as the employment or retention of staff as deemed necessary or 
advisable, including consultants, engineers, architects, accountants, financial experts, 
construction experts and personnel, superintendents, managers, and other professional 
personnel. Subject to the approval of the authority and pursuant to its approved budget, the 
executive director must determine the compensation of all staff that the authority employs 
or retains. The Attorney General is the legal advisor to the authority and, with the approval 
of the Attorney General, the authority may retain any additional legal counsel as necessary. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 720/ Page 3 
The authority may use various powers to operate as necessary, including (1) accepting 
loans, grants, or assistance of any kind from the federal or State government, a local 
government, a college or university, or a private source; (2) entering into contracts and 
other legal instruments; (3) retaining, employing, or hiring an independent firm for the 
purpose of operating and managing live horse racing in the State; (4) creating, owning, 
controlling, or being a member of a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or 
other entity, whether operated for profit or not for profit; and (5) assisting with the 
advertising and promotion of horse racing interests. The authority is exempt from State and 
local taxes. 
 
The bill also establishes the Maryland Racing Operations Fund as a special, nonlapsing 
fund administered by the authority, to assist the authority in financing the acquisition, 
construction, rehabilitation, or other capital or operating expenses for thoroughbred 
racetracks in the State. The fund consists of (1) money distributed to the fund from the 
existing Racing and Community Development Financing Fund (Financing Fund), as 
authorized by the bill; (2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (3) interest 
earnings of the fund; and (4) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund and 
expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. 
 
Under current law, the owner of the Bowie Race Course Training Center must convey the 
training center property to the City of Bowie by December 31, 2023. The bill delays that 
conveyance date to December 31, 2024. In addition, the bill alters provisions of 
Chapter 590 of 2020 by (1) requiring the transfer of $1.5 million from the Facilities Fund, 
rather than an amount between $1.0 million and $1.5 million, to the City of Bowie for 
remediation costs of the property, subject to certain limitations, and (2) allowing up to 
$100,000 of those funds to be utilized for engineering design and environmental analysis 
prior to the acquisition of the property. 
 
The fiscal 2023 capital budget (Chapter 344 of 2022) directed $5.0 million in funding to 
Pimlico Race Course demolition and $10.0 million in funding to the acquisition, planning, 
design, construction, repair, renovation, reconstruction, site improvement, and capital 
equipping of backstretch housing facilities at Laurel Park. The bill redirects these funds to 
the Maryland Racing Operations Fund for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, or 
other capital or operating expenditures for thoroughbred racetracks. 
 
The Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority must report to the  
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Appropriations Committee, and the 
House Ways and Means Committee by December 1, 2023, on (1) the feasibility of 
establishing at least two alternative thoroughbred training facilities in the State; 
(2) thoroughbred racing industry models and recommendations regarding operating 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 720/ Page 4 
models in the State; and (3) the progress of the Pimlico and Laurel Park racing facility 
redevelopment plans under Chapter 590. 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
Maryland Racing Commission 
 
The Maryland Racing Commission is responsible for the regulation of horse racing in the 
State. The commission seeks to protect and promote the public interest in all matters 
pertaining to horse racing and wagering. The commission has established pari-mutuel 
betting as the only legal system of wagering on horse races on racetracks over which the 
commission has jurisdiction. Pari-mutuel betting is a system of betting in which those who 
successfully bet on horses that finish in specified positions share the mutuel pool. The 
commission is responsible for regulating, with few exceptions, the conduct of all 
pari-mutuel betting and other aspects of horse racing in the State. It does so with guidance 
from two advisory committees. 
 
The commission is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. The Maryland-Bred Race 
Fund Advisory Committee and Standardbred Race Fund Advisory Committee are both 
under the jurisdiction of the commission and are also subject to MPEA. Under MPEA, 
these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and 
Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, 
OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. 
The commission and its two advisory committees are scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; 
OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior to the commission’s termination. 
Accordingly, the commission has requested reauthorizing legislation, which encompasses 
the advisory committees. 
 
Racing and Community Development Act of 2020 
 
Chapter 590 (The Racing and Community Development Act of 2020) provided for the 
redevelopment of Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore City and Laurel Park in Anne Arundel 
County, as well as for the conveyance of the Bowie Race Course Training Center. 
 
Chapter 590 authorized the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA), subject to the approval 
of the Board of Public Works (BPW), to issue up to $375.0 million in bonds to finance 
planning, design, and construction and related expenses for construction management, 
professional fees, and contingencies in connection with racing facilities. MSA must enter 
into agreements with project entities or local entities for planning, design, and construction 
of the racing and community development projects at a racing facility site. In addition, 
MSA must provide to the fiscal committees of the General Assembly specified financing 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 720/ Page 5 
plans at least 45 days before seeking approval of BPW for each bond issue or other 
borrowing. The financing plan or plans must provide for at least $180.0 million in 
anticipated project costs at the Pimlico site and $155.0 million in anticipated project costs 
at the Laurel Park site. Debt issued for the redevelopment projects is a limited obligation 
of MSA and is not an obligation or debt of the State. MSA may enter into agreements with 
project entities for the construction of the projects during the periods of planning, design, 
and construction of the facilities. Before the issuance of any bonds to finance 
improvements to a racing facility, MSA may pay for any costs for administration, 
overhead, and operations of MSA or costs of engineering, architectural, and other design 
professionals from the Facilities Fund. Chapter 590 specified the requirements for and the 
contents of long-term agreements for management and operations at the Pimlico and Laurel 
Park racing facility sites. 
 
Chapter 590 provided for the financing of the racing facility redevelopment projects and 
for the payment of debt service for bonds issued by MSA. The Act established the Racing 
and Community Development Financing Fund (Financing Fund) and the aforementioned 
Facilities Fund. The Financing Fund is a revolving fund established for implementing 
racing and community development projects and for the payment of debt service expenses 
incurred by MSA, or otherwise approved by MSA, concerning those projects; the fund 
consists of proceeds from the sale of bonds and money paid to the fund from the 
State Lottery Fund. The Facilities Fund is a revolving fund established for implementing 
racing and community development projects and to pay specified expenses incurred by 
MSA; the fund consists of specified monies, fund transfers, and the unencumbered fund 
balances allocated to thoroughbred tracks and Rosecroft Raceway under the Racetrack 
Facility Renewal Account as of June 30, 2020. Chapter 590 required that between 
$1.0 million and $1.5 million from the Facilities Fund be transferred to the City of Bowie 
for remediation costs at the Bowie Race Course Training Center, provided a specified 
agreement between the City of Bowie and Bowie State University has been executed. In 
addition, $2.0 million of the money transferred to the Facilities Fund may be used to 
reimburse racing licensee costs attributable to maintaining ongoing year-round racing 
operations, ensuring the continued running of the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico during 
construction, and other expenses relating to the Bowie Race Course Training Center. 
 
Chapter 590 also required that, by December 31, 2023, the owner of the Bowie Race Course 
Training Center must convey the training center property to the City of Bowie “as is,” with 
all defects that may exist, whether known or unknown, and without any express or implied 
warranty, guarantee by, or recourse against the conveyor of the property. Chapter 590 
specifies permissible uses for certain portions of the transferred property. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 720/ Page 6 
Chapter 61 of 2022 
 
Among various provisions, Chapter 61 of 2022 required MSA to provide two reports, by 
September 30, 2022, and January 1, 2023, to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, 
the House Appropriations Committee, and the House Ways and Means Committee on the 
progress of the Pimlico and Laurel Park racing facility redevelopment plans under 
Chapter 590. In addition, the Act required MEDCO to report, by September 1, 2022, to 
those committees on an evaluation of the feasibility, limitations, costs, and potential 
benefits related to the acquisition of the Laurel Park racing facility site by a government or 
nonprofit entity to ensure the redevelopment and construction of facilities at the 
Laurel Park site. Finally, the Act required the mile thoroughbred licensees, the Maryland 
Thoroughbred Horsemen’s Association, and the Maryland Horse Breeders Association to 
report by September 30, 2022, to the same committees on the status of the Maryland 
thoroughbred racing operations. These reports can also be found on the DLS website. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not mandate funding for the authority but does redirect 
$15.0 million provided in the fiscal 2023 capital budget for specified uses at Pimlico Race 
Course and Laurel Park to the Maryland Racing Operations Fund for various capital 
expenditures for thoroughbred racetracks. In addition, the bill authorizes MSA to transfer 
money from the Facilities Fund to the Maryland Racing Operations Fund. This analysis 
assumes the funding for costs related to Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority staff 
and the required study come from these sources beginning in fiscal 2024. However, actual 
expenditures under the bill will vary depending on any amounts transferred to the Maryland 
Racing Operations Fund and the amount of discretionary funding, if any, provided in the 
State budget each year. As of February 1, 2023, there is approximately $53.0 million in the 
Facilities Fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 720/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2023 
 
Revised - Other - June 8, 2023 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 720/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Horse Racing – Extension of Maryland Horse Racing Act and 
Establishment of Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority 
 
BILL NUMBER:   
SB 720 
 
PREPARED BY:  
J. Michael Hopkins 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
  
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
_____ WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 8