START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 781 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 781 
(Senator Hester, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Offshore Wind Energy - State Goals and Procurement (Promoting Offshore 
Wind Energy Resources Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to request that 
PJM Interconnection conduct an analysis of specified offshore wind transmission system 
expansion options. PSC must issue, or request that PJM issue, competitive solicitations for 
proposals for related projects. PSC must evaluate the proposals and must ask PJM to assist 
with the evaluation. PSC may then accept one or more proposals, subject to specified 
criteria. The Department of General Services (DGS) must issue a procurement and may 
enter into at least one long-term power purchase agreement (PPA) for up to 5.0 million 
megawatt-hours annually of offshore wind energy and associated renewable energy credits 
(RECs) from one or more qualified offshore wind projects. Round 1 and Round 2 offshore 
wind developers may apply to PSC for a full or partial exemption from the requirement to 
pass along certain federal benefits to ratepayers. Related findings, declarations, and intent 
of the General Assembly are specified. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023. Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by 
$0.6 million in FY 2024, by $1.4 million to $1.5 million in FY 2025 through 2027, and by 
$0.5 million in FY 2028. Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments 
imposed on public service companies. General fund expenditures for DGS increase by 
$0.2 million in FY 2024; future years reflect annualization and the elimination of one-time 
costs. The effect on State expenditures for electricity is unknown but could be significant. 
The effects on other State agencies are discussed below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$0.6 
$1.4 
$1.4 
$1.5 
$0.5 
GF Expenditure 
$0.2 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
SF Expenditure 
$0.6 
$1.4 
$1.4 
$1.5 
$0.5 
Net Effect 
($0.2) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 781/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The effect on local government expenditures for electricity is unknown but 
could be significant. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
General Assembly Findings 
 
The General Assembly finds and declares that:   
 
 
the State has a goal of reaching 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind energy capacity 
by 2031 and anticipates the issuance of sufficient wind energy leases in the 
central Atlantic region to satisfy that goal; 
 
offshore wind can provide clean energy at the scale needed to help achieve the 
State’s economywide net-zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction targets 
established in Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act);  
 
it is in the public interest to upgrade and expand the transmission system to 
accommodate the buildout of at least 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind energy from 
qualified offshore wind projects serving the State by 2031; and 
 
it is in the public interest of the State to maximize opportunities for obtaining and 
using federal funds for offshore wind and related transmission projects through the 
inclusion of specified labor standards and goals, domestic content requirements, and 
other provisions to align State law with provisions of the federal Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 and the federal Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. 
 
Transmission System Expansion Study and Solicitations for Related Proposals 
 
 
Expansion Study 
 
To meet the goals of the State Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) and the goal 
established under the bill of upgrading and expanding the transmission system to 
accommodate the buildout of at least 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind capacity, PSC, in 
consultation with the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA), must request that 
PJM Interconnection conduct an analysis of transmission system upgrade and expansion 
options that take into consideration both onshore and offshore infrastructure. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 781/ Page 3 
PSC must consult with other states served by PJM to evaluate regional transmission 
cooperation that could help achieve the State’s renewable energy and offshore wind energy 
goals with greater efficiency. PSC must also work with PJM to ensure that the requested 
analysis includes an analysis of certain solutions, including one that uses an open-access 
collector transmission system to allow for the interconnection of multiple qualified 
offshore wind projects at a single substation. PSC may also consult with owners of 
transmission facilities in the State to gather relevant technical information. 
 
PSC may enter into any necessary agreements with PJM for transmission planning to 
initiate the PJM analysis or assist with the solicitation of proposals for offshore wind 
transmission projects (as discussed further below). 
 
PSC must submit a status update on the analysis to the General Assembly by July 1, 2024, 
but is not required to submit a final update or analysis. 
 
 
Transmission Project Solicitations 
 
By July 1, 2025, PSC must issue, or request that PJM issue, one or more competitive 
solicitations for proposals for open access offshore wind transmission facilities and 
complementary onshore transmission upgrades and expansions, subject to specified 
requirements. PSC may issue, or request that PJM issue, further solicitations after that date 
if PSC determines that it is necessary. 
 
In developing criteria for selecting a proposal, PSC:   
 
 
must consider the transmission system expansion analysis described above, 
including a consideration of potential interconnection points; 
 
must evaluate the potential for cooperating with other states in the PJM region to 
maximize consumer benefits that will best achieve the State’s renewable energy and 
offshore wind energy goals; and 
 
may consult with MEA, electric companies, transmission facility owners, and other 
states or entities designated by those states in developing or coordinating equivalent 
standards for the approval of transmission projects under the bill that will facilitate 
the integration of multiple offshore wind energy projects and potential multistate 
offshore wind transmission projects. 
 
PSC must include, or work with PJM to include, specifications in the solicitation that 
require proposals to (1) allow future transmission lines to connect in a meshed manner and 
share landing points; (2) consider other onshore and offshore clean energy generation and 
storage facilities; (3) incorporate community benefit agreements (which are altered by the 
bill for new offshore wind projects, as specified); (4) address the siting, environmental, and 
socioeconomic information required to be considered by an applicant for a Certificate of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 781/ Page 4 
Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN), including opportunities for public engagement 
and comment with units of State and local government and the general public; 
(5) demonstrate net benefits to ratepayers in the State when compared to an alternative 
baseline scenario under which 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind capacity is connected to 
the grid without the proposed transmission project; and (6) ensure a competitive bidding 
process by redacting proprietary information provided to PSC or PJM. 
 
The solicitation process must include a prequalification process, separate the review, 
analysis, and selection of the proposals, and promote competition among prequalified 
entities. 
 
Each proposal should maximize access to and be consistent with the terms of specified 
federal funding programs, and PSC may modify, or request that PJM modify, a solicitation 
for proposals at any time in order to satisfy eligibility criteria for those programs. PSC may 
evaluate, or request that PJM evaluate, proposals that include (1) upgrading the existing 
transmission grid; (2) extending the existing transmission grid onshore and offshore to be 
closer to offshore wind energy locations; (3) interconnecting between offshore substations; 
(4) adding energy storage; and (5) the use of high voltage direct current converter 
technology to support potential weaknesses in the transmission grid. 
 
In selecting a proposal, PSC must take into consideration the total amount of new 
transmission infrastructure needed to (1) maintain electric system reliability; (2) achieve 
the State’s offshore wind, renewable energy, and decarbonization goals; (3) obtain 
demonstrable benefits to the consumer and environment; and (4) foster economic 
development and job creation in the State. PSC may select one or more proposals that 
include various funding mechanisms, including federal funding, cost sharing among states, 
or a combination thereof. 
 
PSC must request that PJM assist with the evaluation of each proposal. Generally, by 
December 1, 2027, after notice, one or more hearings to receive public comment, and an 
evidentiary hearing, PSC must, by order, select one or more proposals. The project must 
demonstrate net benefits to ratepayers in the State when compared to a baseline scenario 
under which 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind capacity is connected to the grid without 
the proposed transmission project. PSC may adopt conditions for the construction and 
operation of the facilities and consider any conditions proposed by the Power Plant 
Research Program in the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The requirement to 
obtain a CPCN does not apply to a selected proposal, although the project is still subject to 
all other relevant requirements for the siting and construction of transmission lines. Instead, 
an order selecting a proposal constitutes authorization by PSC to construct and operate the 
facilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 781/ Page 5 
After PSC selects one or more proposals, PSC must work with MEA, one or more 
transmission developers, transmission facility owners, PJM, the Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, and any other states that voluntarily participate to facilitate the development 
of the proposal or proposals and the construction of the proposed offshore wind project or 
projects. 
 
PSC must carry out the above requirements by obtaining information through request, 
cooperation, subpoena, or any other legal method from transmission owners, PJM, or any 
other entity. PSC is also explicitly authorized to retain consultants. 
 
If PSC finds that none of the proposals under the bill adequately support the bill’s goals or 
demonstrate net benefits to ratepayers in the State when compared to the alternative 
baseline scenario described above, then PSC may end the solicitation process without 
selecting a proposal. If no proposal has been selected by December 1, 2027, PSC must 
submit a statement of determination to the Governor and the General Assembly explaining 
PSC’s determination and recommending a path forward to achieve the transmission 
expansion goal. 
 
Procurement and Potential Power Purchase Agreement for Offshore Wind Energy 
 
DGS, in consultation with PSC, must issue a competitive sealed procurement solicitation 
and may enter into at least one contract for a PPA to procure up to 
5.0 million megawatt-hours annually of offshore wind energy and associated RECs from 
one or more qualified offshore wind projects, as those terms are defined. Each PPA must 
have a minimum term of 20 years. The bill includes additional detail as to the 
administrative timing. Specifically, the State must:   
 
 
issue a procurement for offshore wind energy by July 31, 2024; 
 
provide a minimum procurement submission process window of 180 days; and 
 
award contracts in a timely manner. 
 
The State may enter into a contract or contracts for the procurement by September 1, 2025, 
although the State may modify that date if an unforeseen circumstance adversely affects 
the procurement process.  
 
When issuing the procurement, DGS must take into consideration (1) the social cost of 
GHG emissions, as defined; (2) the State’s climate commitments; and (3) the State’s 
commitments related to qualified offshore wind projects.  
 
The evaluation criteria for bids must include (1) comparing the social cost of GHG 
emissions for offshore wind with the social cost of GHG emissions for nonrenewable 
power purchased from wholesale electric markets administered by PJM and (2) the extent 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 781/ Page 6 
to which an applicant’s proposal provides for financial and technical assistance to support 
monitoring and mitigation of wildlife and habitat impacts associated with the proposed 
project. 
 
Each agreement entered into under the bill must include a community benefit agreement, 
as defined for qualified offshore wind projects, domestic content preferences, and a 
description of initial plans and commitments to environmental and natural resources 
mitigation, as specified. Any contractor providing operations and maintenance services for 
the related offshore wind project under an agreement with DGS must submit an attestation 
to DGS that the contractor has entered into a labor peace agreement, as specified. 
 
DGS must identify the amount of energy necessary to meet the State’s energy needs. The 
State must use the energy procured under the bill to meet the State’s energy needs and retire 
the associated RECs to meet its obligations under the State’s RPS and the Climate 
Solutions Now Act; however, the bill specifies that the State is exempt from annual RPS 
requirements if DGS procures 100% of the State’s energy needs from the PPA. After those 
requirements have been met, the State must offer for sale any energy or RECs remaining 
on the competitive wholesale power market operated by PJM, through bilateral sales to 
credit-worthy counterparties, or into REC markets. 
 
Nothing in the bill related to this procurement may be construed to prevent the procurement 
of new offshore wind energy generation in accordance with the current or any future 
solicitation schedule. 
 
Reporting Requirement on Offshore Wind Projects 
 
By December 31, 2024, and annually thereafter, PSC must submit a report to the 
General Assembly on the information collected under PSC’s supplier diversity program 
regarding offshore wind developers, as specified. 
 
Funding Intent Language 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that (1) four full-time positions be created in PSC 
that will focus only on implementing the transmission planning provisions in the bill and 
(2) notwithstanding any other provision of law, for fiscal 2025, the Governor may include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation of at least $3.5 million of additional funding to 
the PSC budget for the transmission studies and analyses required under the bill. 
 
Federal Tax Credit Remittance Exemption 
 
A developer of a Round 1 or Round 2 offshore wind project (those approved under current 
law) may apply to PSC for a full or partial exemption from the statutory requirement to 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 781/ Page 7 
pass along to ratepayers 80% of the value of any State or federal grants, rebates, tax credits, 
loan guarantees, or other similar benefits received by the project and not included in the 
application for any federal Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 grants, rebates, tax credits, or 
loan guarantees received by the project if certain labor conditions are met. 
 
A developer seeking an exemption must certify that the exemption is required to fulfill the 
developer’s obligations under an approved offshore wind renewable energy credit (OREC) 
order. PSC must establish an application process and approve, deny, or request additional 
information within 60 days of receipt of the application. PSC must consider various factors 
when evaluating the applications. If PSC approves a partial exemption, the nonexempt 
value of any federal Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 grants, rebates, tax credits, or loan 
guarantees received by the project must be passed along to ratepayers. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets and the Climate Solutions Now 
Act 
 
The Climate Solutions Now Act made broad changes to the State’s approach to reducing 
statewide GHG emissions and addressing climate change. Among other things, the Act 
accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets originally established 
under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the State to develop 
plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to (1) reduce GHG emissions by 
60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. 
The Act also established new and altered existing energy conservation requirements for 
buildings and increased and extended the EmPOWER Maryland Program. 
 
Offshore Wind 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 3 of 2013, under Maryland’s RPS, State electricity sales must include 
an amount derived from offshore wind energy beginning in 2017. The amount is set by 
PSC each year, based on the projected annual creation of ORECs by qualified offshore 
wind projects, and may not exceed 2.5% of total retail sales. Chapter 757 of 2019 bifurcated 
the application and approval process for offshore wind into “Round 1” (the process 
established by Chapter 3) and a new “Round 2” process to allow for new applications with 
different specifications. A PSC fact sheet contains relevant information on project 
approvals, costs, and timelines under the implementation of the two Acts. Combined 
capacity across all approved projects is approximately 2,000 megawatts. Based on the 
approvals, the offshore wind carve-out is approximately 13% in 2027 and later – about 
7.2 million ORECs annually. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 781/ Page 8 
Statute requires a commitment that the applicant will pass along to ratepayers, without the 
need for any subsequent PSC approval, 80% of the value of any State or federal grants, 
rebates, tax credits, loan guarantees, or other similar benefits received by the project and 
not included in the application. The approved applications included the value of investment 
tax credits (ITCs), but they were approved prior to the ITC being extended under the federal 
Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. 
 
For additional general information on Maryland’s RPS, see the Appendix – Renewable 
Energy Portfolio Standard. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Transmission System Expansion Study and Solicitations for Related Proposals 
 
PSC advises that consultant costs associated with the transmission expansion study, even 
with PJM conducting the analysis, are $500,000 in fiscal 2024. Consultant costs associated 
with the solicitation and evaluation of project proposals are $1.0 million annually in 
fiscal 2025, 2026, and 2027. PSC also requires four additional staff on an ongoing basis to 
assist with the implementation of both requirements. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $635,256 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for a 30-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one attorney, 
one regulatory economist, one engineer, and one program manager. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and $500,000 in 
consultant costs. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$115,582 
Contractual Services 
500,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    19,674 
Total FY 2024 PSC Expenditures 
$635,256 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and $1.0 million annually in 
consultant costs from fiscal 2025 through 2027. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the above estimate of four required 
positions and total study and evaluation costs of $3.5 million are generally consistent with 
the intent language specified in the bill, although study and evaluation costs begin in 
fiscal 2024 and extend through fiscal 2027, as opposed to occurring in just fiscal 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 781/ Page 9 
Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public 
service companies. 
 
Costs associated with potentially contracting for any related proposals are unknown at this 
time, but potentially significant, as discussed below. There are also operational and legal 
considerations. 
 
 
Project Evaluation and Selection Costs and Other Considerations 
 
The bill contemplates a wide range of potential transmission projects that have significant 
but unknown costs and benefits, making an assessment of the cost to the State unknowable. 
As allowed in the bill, one possibility is that PSC accepts no proposals. The bill appears to 
establish a framework for using the PJM State Agreement Approach. The terms of the 
approach can be found in the PJM operating agreement. Under the approach, State 
governmental entities authorized by their respective states, individually or jointly, may 
agree voluntarily to be responsible for the allocation of all costs of a proposed transmission 
expansion or enhancement that addresses state public policy requirements identified or 
accepted by the state(s) in the PJM region. All costs related to a state public policy project 
included in the Regional Transmission Expansion Plan to address state public policy 
requirements must be recovered from customers in a state(s) in the PJM region that agrees 
to be responsible for the projects. No such costs can be recovered from customers in a state 
that did not agree to be responsible for such cost allocation. 
 
New Jersey is currently the only state that uses the PJM State Agreement Approach, and 
they use it for planning offshore wind interconnection. Based on lessons learned 
discussions with the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities staff, implementing a State 
Agreement Approach to deliver a similar amount of offshore wind would require several 
full-time staff and additional engineering and legal consulting expenses of approximately 
$3.0 million over a three-year period. Based on the timing of the proposal solicitations, 
special fund expenditures for PSC would increase from fiscal 2025 through 2027 by about 
$4.4 million in total for the related costs (these costs are included in the estimate above). 
 
 
Other Agency Effects 
 
DNR special fund expenditures associated with project siting evaluation increase by an 
unknown amount beginning as early as fiscal 2028 if transmission projects are accepted by 
PSC, due to evaluation costs for those projects and also additional CPCNs associated with 
utility scale solar facilitated by the transmission capacity. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 781/ Page 10 
Potential Power Purchase Agreement for Offshore Wind Energy 
 
DGS advises that additional procurement staff are needed for DGS to manage and conduct 
the offshore wind energy procurement and the ongoing requirements post-procurement, if 
one or more proposals are selected. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by 
$213,905 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for a 120-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one procurement officer and one procurement manager to oversee the 
complex procurement on an ongoing basis. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$199,087 
Operating Expenses 
    14,818 
Total FY 2024 DGS Expenditures 
$213,905 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. If DGS does not enter into a 
PPA, DGS administrative costs decrease beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
The difference in State expenditures for electricity under the PPA(s) is unknown; the range 
in potential energy procurements is quite large – the State government uses roughly 
1.5 million megawatt-hours of electricity per year, although that appears to be trending 
down – and the per-unit price over the duration of the PPA is likewise unknown. One only 
needs to look at the price difference between Round 1 and Round 2 ORECs to note the 
potential for significant variation. Additionally, the net cost to the State is based on future 
non-offshore wind energy prices, which can vary above or below the PPA price, along with 
future REC prices. There is also the possibility that DGS does not enter into a PPA under 
the bill. Nevertheless, the size of the potential PPAs and their minimum 20-year duration 
means that State expenditures for electricity may be significantly affected. 
 
To be clear, net costs could be higher or lower under a PPA; the risk comes from the State 
being locked into the price in the PPA for at least two decades. 
 
Federal Tax Credit Remittance Exemption 
 
The bill allows Round 1 and Round 2 project developers to apply for a full or partial 
exemption from the statutory requirement to remit 80% of federal grants, rebates, tax 
credits, loan guarantees, or other similar benefits received under the Inflation Reduction 
Act of 2022 and not included in the project applications. Among other changes, the 
Inflation Reduction Act extended the federal ITC, which is generally a 30% credit if certain 
labor requirements are met, and created an additional 10% domestic content bonus. 
Round 1 and Round 2 projects included the federal ITC in their initial project proposals to 
PSC, but those were approved prior to the extension of the ITC, so it is unclear whether 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 781/ Page 11 
the value of the ITC is eligible for an exemption in this case. The additional 10% domestic 
content bonus is more obviously eligible for an exemption under the bill, along with any 
other grants, rebates, or loan guarantees that may be received by the project developers 
under the Act and not included in the project applications. 
 
The effect of this provision on electricity rates is unknown, but potentially significant based 
on the size of Round 1 and Round 2 projects. A developer must apply to PSC for the 
exemption and must certify that the exemption is required to fulfill the developer’s 
obligation under an approved OREC order. Therefore, the bill appears to contemplate a 
scenario where the application for a full or partial exemption is only approved by PSC if 
the project would not otherwise move forward (and other requirements are met). 
 
The assumption of whether or not the projects would proceed without the bill’s full or 
partial exemption determines the perceived effect of the provision, although in either case, 
there is no change if the exemption is denied, and electricity rates increase if the exemption 
is approved:   
 
 
There is no change from current law if PSC denies the application, because the 
projects will proceed, or not, based on existing requirements to pass along federal 
tax benefits to ratepayers. 
 
Under the assumption that the projects would not proceed without the exemption, 
the provision increases electricity costs paid by all customers, including the State, 
local governments, and small businesses, by facilitating the construction of the 
projects, thus ensuring the State’s obligation to pay for ORECs at a net cost to 
ratepayers under current law. 
 
Under the assumption that the projects would proceed whether or not the exemption 
is granted (notwithstanding a developer’s certification to the contrary in an 
application for an exemption), the provision increases electricity costs by allowing 
federal benefits to be retained by the developer and not remitted to ratepayers under 
existing statutory obligations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in the offshore wind supply chain 
benefit significantly to the extent that the bill facilitates additional offshore wind projects 
being built. The effects on small business expenditures for electricity is unknown but could 
be significant. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not address the disposition of RECs procured by 
DGS through one or more PPAs under the bill. Under current law, ORECs used by Round 1 
and Round 2 projects are distinct from generic Tier 1 RECs and are not used for RPS 
compliance in the same way. ORECs are essentially financing mechanisms that effectuate 
contracts for differences under the RPS statutory framework. Conversely, generic Tier 1 
RECs are created by eligible projects when they generate electricity, independent of a 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 781/ Page 12 
contractual commitment by the State to purchase those particular RECs. They are generally 
unbundled from the electricity and bought and sold separately in their own markets. 
Therefore, it is unclear how the RECs generated by a project facilitated through a DGS 
procurement would be treated by PSC for RPS compliance in absence of further statutory 
guidance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 793 (Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of General Services; 
Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Energy 
Administration; Office of People’s Counsel; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Congressional Research Service; PJM Interconnection, LLC; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 781/ Page 13 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and, beginning in 2023, 
new geothermal systems. Electric companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must 
submit renewable energy credits (RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity 
sales specified in statute each year or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) 
equivalent to their shortfall. Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely 
through RECs, with negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that 
was not the case in 2021. The Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for 
purposes related to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2023, the requirements are 31.9% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 6.0% from solar 
and 0.05% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which now 
escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 14.5% from 
solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 781/ Page 14 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative.  
 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a three-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the Generation 
Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by PJM 
Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water-heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; waste-to-energy; refuse-derived fuel; thermal energy from a 
thermal biomass system; and raw or treated wastewater used as a heat source or sink for 
heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from 
Tier 1 beginning in 2022.  
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $409.8 million in 2021:  $332.7 million 
for 15.2 million RECs; and $77.1 million in ACPs. Costs and RECs are shown in Exhibit 1. 
This continues a multi-year trend of increasing compliance costs and, generally, average 
REC prices.  
 
In 2021, wind (50.8%), solar (13.2%), black liquor (12.5%), small hydroelectric (8.0%), 
and municipal solid waste (6.4%) were the primary energy sources used for Tier 1 RPS 
compliance. This continues a multi-year trend of increasing reliance on wind and solar 
energy. Maryland facilities generated 5.0 million RECs in 2021:  approximately 2.9 million 
Tier 1 RECs; and 2.1 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can be used for compliance in both 
Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are geographic and energy source 
restrictions.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 781/ Page 15 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2017-2021 
 
 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021  
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar RECs 
$50.0 
$56.4 
$79.3 
$99.8  
187.3 
Tier 1 Solar RECs 
21.3 
27.4 
55.2 
122.9 
144.4 
Tier 2 RECs 
0.7 
1.0 
0.06 
0.4 
1.0 
ACPs 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$7.7 
$0.1 
$77.1 
Total 
$72.1 
$84.9 
$142.3 
$223.2  
409.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar 
$7.14  
$6.54  
$7.77 
$8.24  
$14.36 
Tier 1 Solar 
38.18  
31.91  
47.26 
66.10  
72.59 
Tier 2 
0.48  
0.66  
1.05 
1.06  
6.45 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The vast majority of ACPs in 2021 
($76.9 million out of $77.1 million in total) were due to a shortfall of solar RECs. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Related Studies Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2021, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
A supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a goal of 
100% by 2040 is due by January 1, 2024. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15