START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 110

Chapter 110

(Senate Bill 707)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Deputy State Fire Marshal – Probationary Status and Promotion

FOR the purpose of requiring a certain deputy State fire marshal to be on probation for a
certain period of time under certain circumstances; specifying the pay that a certain
deputy State fire marshal is entitled to on promotion; and generally relating to
deputy State fire marshals.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 2–403 and 2–405
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

2–403.

(a) Each police employee, including an individual who is appointed to the
Department for training before regular assignment as a police employee, shall remain in
probationary status for a period of 2 years after the date of appointment to the Department.

(b) Each civilian employee shall remain in probationary status for the period
required under Title 7, Subtitle 4 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(C) EACH DEPUTY STATE FIRE MARSHAL, INCLUDING AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
IS APPOINTED TO THE OFFICE OF THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL FOR TRAINING
BEFORE REGULAR ASSIGNMENT AS A DEPUTY STATE FIRE MARSHAL, SHALL REMAIN
IN PROBATIONARY STATUS FOR A PERIOD OF 2 YEARS AFTER THE DATE OF
APPOINTMENT TO THE OFFICE OF THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL.

2–405.

(a) (1) The Secretary shall develop a pay plan for police employees, State
Police communications operators, and State Police communications supervisors that
includes the ranks and the grades within ranks that the Secretary considers appropriate.

(2) The pay plan under this subsection:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 110 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) is subject to approval by the Secretary of Budget and
Management; and

(ii) is effective on approval by the Governor only to the extent that
sufficient money is included in the State budget.

(b) Each police employee, State Police communications operator, and State Police
communications supervisor is entitled to receive the pay rate, including any increment
based on length of service, set forth in the pay plan established under subsection (a) of this
section.

(c) (1) Each police employee is entitled to the pay rate for the next highest step
within the police employee’s rank on:

(i) each July 1, if the police employee was a police employee on July
1, 1967; or

(ii) each anniversary of the date of employment, for all other police
employees.

(2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, on
promotion a police employee OR A DEPUTY STATE FIRE MARSHAL is entitled to the pay
specified for the new rank in the same step that the police employee OR DEPUTY STATE
FIRE MARSHAL occupied before promotion.

(ii) If the step that the police employee OR DEPUTY STATE FIRE
MARSHAL occupied before promotion is higher than that held by a police employee OR
DEPUTY STATE FIRE MARSHAL who is already in the rank and has equal or higher total
service time, on promotion the police employee OR DEPUTY STATE FIRE MARSHAL is
entitled only to the pay specified for the new rank in the next lower step than the police
employee OR DEPUTY STATE FIRE MARSHAL occupied before promotion.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2