START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 705 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 705 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Vehicle Laws – Certificate of Title – Surviving Spouse 
 
 
This departmental bill prohibits the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) from charging 
a fee for the issuance of a new certificate of title to a surviving spouse when the individual 
is not listed as a joint owner of the vehicle. Ownership of the vehicle must be transferred 
in accordance with existing statutory provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by approximately 
$375,000 in FY 2024 and by $500,000 in subsequent years due to reduced titling fee 
revenues. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
($375,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($375,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the fee for each certificate of title is $100. However, the fee is 
lower for rental vehicles ($50), off-highway recreational vehicle ($35), and motor scooters 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 705/ Page 2 
or mopeds ($20). For a trailer with a gross vehicle weight of 3,000 pounds or less, the 
transfer fee is $50 if (1) the trailer is transferred to a specified family member and (2) no 
money or other valuable consideration is involved in the transfer. 
 
On the death of a joint owner of a vehicle, MVA may not charge a fee for a new certificate 
of title issued for the vehicle to another joint owner who is the surviving spouse. In addition, 
MVA may not charge a fee for a certificate of title issued for a vehicle that is transferred 
to a trust or from a trust to one or more beneficiaries in accordance with provisions of the 
Estates and Trusts Article. 
 
If the interest of an owner in a vehicle for which a certificate of title has been issued passes 
to a legatee or distributee as a result of testamentary disposition or intestate devolution, an 
application for a new certificate of title need not be made until the expiration of the last 
annual registration in the name of the deceased owner. Additionally, the certificate of title 
need not be submitted to MVA until the application for a new certificate of title is made. 
 
If the title is assigned properly by the personal representative of the deceased owner, a 
certificate of letters testamentary or of administration issued by a State court of competent 
jurisdiction is sufficient authority for MVA to transfer the title. 
 
Background:  MVA advises that the bill is intended to ease the financial burden on a 
surviving spouse when transferring ownership of the deceased spouse’s vehicle(s) into the 
surviving spouse’s name. Currently, when a surviving spouse is not listed as a joint vehicle 
owner, the individual is charged a $100 fee for a new certificate of title. Conversely, a 
surviving spouse who is listed as a joint vehicle owner with the decedent is not charged a 
fee to obtain a new title. Thus, the bill establishes a uniform fee exemption for both 
situations. However, the surviving spouse must still provide the required documentation to 
demonstrate a legal right to the vehicle. 
 
State Revenues:  MVA estimates that approximately 5,000 individuals each year are 
affected by the fee exemption established by the bill. Thus, TTF revenues decrease by 
approximately $500,000 annually ($375,000 in fiscal 2024 due to the bill’s 
October 1, 2023 effective date). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 705/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Register of Wills; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 705/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Vehicle Laws – Certificate of Title – Surviving Spouse 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB705 
 
PREPARED BY: 
MDOT MVA 
(Dept./Agency) 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
    X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
______ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 4