START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 713 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 713 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Architects - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Architects within 
the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by five years to July 1, 2028. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained from 
FY 2024 through 2028. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Architects qualifies and licenses 
individuals seeking architectural licensure. The board also issues permit to businesses 
practicing architecture. In addition, the board investigates complaints against licensees as 
well as complaints related to the unlicensed practice of architecture services. The board 
may issue a reprimand, suspend, or revoke a license or permit, and/or impose a fine. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 713/ Page 2 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation 
Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. 
However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by 
legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2023; OPEGA was not asked to 
conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested 
reauthorizing legislation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 199 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2023 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 713/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Board of Architects – Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 713 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Department of Labor 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3