START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 732 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 732 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Disabilities) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Department of Disabilities - State Coordinator for Autism Strategy and 
Maryland Commission on Disabilities - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill transfers the State Coordinator for Autism Strategy from the 
Governor’s Office of Community Initiatives (GOCI) to the Maryland Department of 
Disabilities (MDOD) and specifies that MDOD (rather than GOCI) must provide staff for 
the Advisory Stakeholder Group on Autism-Related Needs. Uncodified language requires 
the Governor, as of July 1, 2023, to transfer two positions and the associated general funds 
for the State Coordinator for Autism Strategy from the Executive Department to MDOD. 
The bill also expands the membership of the Maryland Commission on Disabilities to 
include an individual with a traumatic brain injury (TBI). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill specifies that the coordinator position is in MDOD rather than GOCI 
and requires the Governor to transfer two positions and the associated general funds from 
GOCI to MDOD in FY 2024. Thus, there is no net impact on State expenditures. Adding 
a member to the commission does not substantively change State activities or operations. 
Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDOD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small businesses. The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
(The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 732/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Coordinator for Autism Strategy  
 
Chapter 341 of 2020 established a State Coordinator for Autism Strategy in MDOD to 
(1) identify and evaluate existing services for individuals with autism and their families; 
(2) develop a strategic plan for addressing autism-related needs; (3) identify national 
benchmarks and other performance measures; and (4) monitor and evaluate the 
implementation of the strategic plan and the success of the State in addressing 
autism-related needs.  
 
Chapter 389 of 2021 moved the coordinator position from MDOD to GOCI and required 
the Governor, beginning in fiscal 2023, to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation 
to fund the coordinator position and the Advisory Stakeholder Group on Autism-Related 
Needs. Chapter 627 of 2022 requires the Governor, beginning in fiscal 2024, to include in 
the annual budget bill an amount sufficient to fund one support staff position for the 
coordinator.  
 
Maryland Commission on Disabilities 
 
The Maryland Commission on Disabilities, the advisory body for MDOD, is tasked with 
unifying and improving service delivery to people with disabilities. The commission also 
plays an instrumental role in developing the State Disabilities Plan, a comprehensive 
multi-year strategic plan that sets performance goals for all agencies that serve people with 
disabilities in Maryland.  
 
The 23-member commission includes 19 members appointed by the Governor, 
representatives from the Maryland Senate and House of Delegates, the State Coordinator 
for Autism Strategy, and a representative of the Governor’s Advisory Board for 
Telecommunications Relay. A majority of the members of the commission must be 
individuals with disabilities. Members serve three-year, staggered terms. Failure to attend 
at least 50% of the regularly scheduled meetings during any 12-month period may be 
considered a resignation. A commission member may not receive compensation but, if the 
Secretary of Disabilities approves, is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard 
State travel regulations. The commission must meet at least twice per year in meetings 
open to the public.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 732/ Page 3 
State Traumatic Brain Injury Advisory Board 
 
The State Traumatic Brain Injury Advisory Board in the Maryland Department of Health 
is charged with (1) investigating the needs of citizens with TBI; (2) identifying gaps in 
services to citizens with TBI; (3) facilitating collaboration among State agencies serving 
individuals with TBI; (4) facilitating collaboration among organizations and entities 
serving individuals with TBI; (5) encouraging and facilitating community participation in 
program implementation; and (6) issuing an annual report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly summarizing the board’s actions and containing specified 
recommendations. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill specifies that the coordinator position is in MDOD rather 
than GOCI and requires the Governor, as of July 1, 2023, to transfer two positions and the 
associated general funds for the coordinator from the Executive Department to MDOD. 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes one position and 
general funds totaling $131,275 for the coordinator position. Thus, general fund 
expenditures for MDOD increase by at least $131,275 (and correspondingly decrease for 
GOCI) in fiscal 2024. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDOD advises that adding a member with a TBI to the 
commission is intended to balance the State government disability and TBI constituent 
representation. The addition of an individual with a TBI will add additional viewpoints to 
the commission as TBI can overlap with other underrepresented groups such as the 
military, substance abuse, and domestic violence populations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 732/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - April 25, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Jamiko S. Rose 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 732/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Disabilities – State Coordinator for Autism Strategy and 
Maryland Commission on Disabilities – Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 732  
 
PREPARED BY: 
Elizabeth Hall, Director of Interagency Affairs  
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
x 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
The proposed legislation, Department of Disabilities – Maryland Commission on Disabilities – 
Membership will have no economic impact on Maryland small businesses.  

END OF PAGE 5