START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 723 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 723 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Budget and Taxation 
Economic Matters 
 
Corporations and Associations - Electronic Copies Fee - Repeal 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals a $1 per-page fee for electronic copies of any paper that is 
recorded or filed with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by approximately $57,500 in FY 2024 and 
by $76,700 on an annualized basis beginning in FY 2025. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($57,500) 
($76,700) 
($76,700) 
($76,700) 
($76,700) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($57,500) 
($76,700) 
($76,700) 
($76,700) 
($76,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Assessments and Taxation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SDAT is required to charge a $1 fee for a duplicate of the following 
certificates filed with the department (when the duplicate is issued at the same time as the 
original): 
 
 
a certificate of status of a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited 
liability partnership, or limited liability company of this State or of a foreign 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 723/ Page 2 
corporation, foreign partnership, foreign limited partnership, foreign limited 
liability partnership, or foreign limited liability company; 
 
a certified list of the charter papers of a corporation of this State or any certificates 
of a limited partnership, limited liability partnership, or a limited liability company 
of this State recorded or filed with the department; 
 
a certificate of compliance by a foreign corporation, foreign limited partnership, 
foreign limited liability partnership, or foreign limited liability company with 
requirements of law in respect of qualification or registration; 
 
a certificate of withdrawal of registration or qualification; and 
 
a certificate of any paper recorded or filed in the department’s office. 
 
In addition, SDAT must charge a $1 per-page fee for a copy of any other paper recorded 
or filed with the department. 
 
Background:  SDAT advises that the $1 per-page fee for copies of paperwork recorded 
and filed with the department was created before there was an option to download 
documents from the department’s webpage. The fee was established to assist in offsetting 
the cost of paper, ink, and staff time required to make physical copies of departmental 
records. Now each time an electronic document is requested, SDAT is able to automatically 
deliver the document to the customer at no cost to the department. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by approximately $57,500 in 
fiscal 2024 and by $76,700 on an annualized basis beginning in fiscal 2025. The estimate 
is based on the following: 
 
 
SDAT collects approximately $1,100 per week in $1 per-page fees from new filings 
submitted through Maryland Business Express; and 
 
SDAT collects approximately $750 per week in $1 per-page fees from online copy 
requests. This estimate is projected to be reduced by half when a scanning project 
is completed which will make more documents available through Maryland 
Business Express. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 723/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 723/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Corporations and Associations – Electronic Copies Fee – Repeal 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 723 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Department of Assessments and Taxation 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4