START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 715 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 715 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Foresters - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Foresters within 
the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by 10 years to July 1, 2035.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained from 
FY 2026 through 2035. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Foresters licenses and regulates foresters 
to ensure the appropriate use of natural and timber resources, watershed protection, and the 
preservation of ecological systems and wildlife habitats. It has the authority to investigate 
complaints against licensed foresters and deny, suspend, or revoke a license and reprimand 
a licensee for specified offenses. Instead of or in addition to suspending or revoking a 
license, the board may impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for each violation.  
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 715/ Page 2 
Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. 
However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by 
legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; OPEGA was not asked to 
conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested 
reauthorizing legislation.  
   
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 18, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 715/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: State Board of Foresters – Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER: SB 715 
 
PREPARED BY: Christopher Dorsey, Executive Director 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 3