START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 760 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 760 
(Senator Carter) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Economic Matters 
 
Security Guard Agencies, Security Guard Employers, and Security Guards – 
Standards and Certifications 
 
 
This bill prohibits a “security guard employer” from employing a security guard to provide 
security guard services unless the security guard is certified. The bill also establishes or 
alters training, liability insurance, notification, and recertification requirements for 
certified security guards. The Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission 
(MPTSC) must identify or establish training programs for certified security guards. 
Security guard agencies and employers must report use of force incidents by a 
security guard to the Secretary of State Police. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $476,900 in FY 2024 for the 
Department of State Police (DSP) for staff and one-time technical systems upgrades. 
Out-years reflect annualization, inflation, and termination of one-time costs. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
476,900 
129,500 
135,200 
141,300 
148,900 
Net Effect 
($476,900) 
($129,500) 
($135,200) 
($141,300) 
($148,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 760/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
The bill establishes that a “security guard employer” means a person who employs security 
guards only to provide security guard services to the person, as distinguished from 
“a security guard agency” in current law, which conducts a business that provides security 
guard services to a third party. Under current law, security guard agencies must be licensed 
by DSP, but the bill does not require licensure of security guard employers. The bill 
expands the definition of “security guard” to include individuals employed by security 
guard employers. 
 
Under current law, “security guard services” includes any activity that is performed for 
compensation as a security guard to protect any individual or property, except for activities 
of an individual while performing as a marine guard or ship watchmen, or as a special 
police officer, as specified. The bill specifies that “security guard services” also do not 
include activities performed by an unarmed employee of a bar, tavern, or restaurant. 
 
Certification of Security Guards 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, a licensed security guard agency 
may provide an individual for hire as a security guard only if the individual is certified by 
the Secretary of State Police as a security guard. A licensed security guard agency may 
provide an uncertified individual for hire as a security guard if (1) the security guard agency 
has submitted to the Secretary of State Police the application of the individual for 
certification as a security guard, fingerprint cards, and records fee, and the Secretary of 
State Police has not disapproved the application or (2) the individual has obtained and 
currently possesses certification by MPTSC as a police officer. 
 
Under the bill, the same requirements and exceptions apply to security guard employers. 
However, the bill’s requirements do not prohibit a security guard employer from hiring 
security guards from a licensed security guard agency. 
 
Qualifications and Requirements for Security Guards 
 
Under current law, to qualify for certification as a security guard, an individual must meet 
specified criteria, including meeting the standards set by the Secretary of State Police, 
being an employee or an applicant for employment with a licensed security guard agency, 
and submitting to the licensed security guard agency specified information and fees. Under 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 760/ Page 3 
the bill, the specified requirements are expanded to include being an employee or applicant 
of a security guard employer and being at least 18 years old. 
 
The bill further expands the requirements for security guard certification to include:  
 
 
submission of a declaration under the penalties of perjury stating whether (1) the 
individual has been convicted of a disqualifying crime regarding controlled 
dangerous substances, or a crime of violence; (2) if currently or formerly employed 
as a police officer, the individual has had any formal findings by a court, hearing 
board, or other governmental entity of unlawful or excessive use of force or making 
a false statement during the individual’s employment with the law enforcement 
agency; and (3) the individual plans to carry a handgun in the course of providing 
security guard services; and 
 
documentation that the individual has either (1) completed 12 hours of initial 
security training that is approved by MPTSC or (2) been employed as a police 
officer in the three years immediately preceding the application. 
 
Certifications and Renewals 
 
Under current law, by regulation, the Secretary of State Police must stagger the terms of 
the certifications. Unless a certification is renewed for a three-year term, the certification 
expires on the date the Secretary of State Police sets. At least 90 days before a certification 
expires, the applicant must mail to the Secretary of State Police a renewal application form, 
the amount of the renewal fee, and the amount of any late fee, as determined by the 
Secretary of State Police. An individual periodically may renew the certification for an 
additional three-year term, if the individual otherwise is entitled to be certified, pays to the 
Secretary of State Police specified fees, and submits to the Secretary of State Police a 
renewal application on a specified form. 
 
The bill adds a requirement that applicants for recertification satisfactorily complete 
8 hours of continuing security training that is approved by MPTSC and submit to the 
Secretary of State Police supporting documentation that demonstrates the completion of 
the training. 
 
In addition, the bill requires, at least 90 days before a certification expires, the licensed 
security guard agency or security guard employer to submit a declaration to the Secretary 
of State Police under the penalties of perjury stating whether it knows that a certified 
security guard who provides security guard services on the security guard’s agency’s 
behalf or for a security guard employer no longer satisfies all of the criteria for certification, 
as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 760/ Page 4 
Grounds for Denials, Reprimands, Suspensions, and Revocations 
 
Under current law, subject to specified provisions regarding hearings, the Secretary of State 
Police may deny certification as a security guard to any applicant; reprimand or fine any 
individual certified as a security guard; or suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the 
certification of an individual for specified offenses. 
 
Under the bill, subject to similar provisions under current law, the Secretary of State Police 
must deny, revoke, or refuse to renew the certification of a security guard who (1) has been 
convicted of specified controlled dangerous substances crimes or a crime of violence; 
(2) has had any formal findings by a court, hearing board, or other governmental entity of 
unlawful or excessive use of force or of making a false statement during the security 
guard’s employment as a police officer with a law enforcement agency; or (3) has not 
satisfactorily completed the required continuing security training, as specified. 
 
Also under the bill, a licensed security guard agency or security guard employer must notify 
the Secretary of State Police within 48 hours if it knows that an individual who provides 
security guard services on its behalf or for it has been arrested for a crime of violence or a 
disqualifying crime related to controlled dangerous substances. Subject to provisions under 
the Administrative Procedure Act related to licenses, the Secretary of State Police may 
impose an emergency suspension of the certification of a security guard who has been 
arrested for specified offenses. 
 
Continuing Training Programs 
 
The bill establishes that MPTSC must identify initial and continuing training programs for 
security guard certification and renewal of certification. The training programs must 
include training on (1) relevant criminal law; (2) the appropriate use of force; (3) the use 
of alternatives to force; (4) the use of de-escalation techniques; and (5) promoting 
appropriate interactions with individuals who are under 18 years of age, have behavioral 
health or other disabilities, or are in crisis. 
 
If MPTSC is unable to identify an initial or continuing training program that meet the bill’s 
requirements, MPTSC must establish an initial or continuing training program that meets 
those requirements. MPTSC must prominently publish the list of those programs. 
 
Handgun Permits for Security Guards 
 
The bill establishes that a security guard must hold a valid permit to carry a handgun, as 
required under current law, before carrying a handgun while providing security guard 
services. A security guard may not carry a handgun while providing security guard services 
until (1) receiving approval to carry a handgun from the licensed security guard agency or 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 760/ Page 5 
security guard employer; (2) notifying the Secretary of State Police of the intent of the 
security guard to carry a handgun while providing security guard services; and (3) the 
Secretary of State Police confirms that the security guard has a valid permit to carry a 
handgun and has not been convicted of a disqualifying crime, as specified. 
 
Use of Force by Security Guards 
 
The bill establishes that a security guard must report any use of force against a person while 
providing security guard services on behalf of the licensed security guard agency or for the 
security guard employer to the security guard agency or the security guard employer within 
48 hours after the use of force on a form provided by the Secretary of State Police. A 
security guard is not required to report any use of force against a person within 48 hours 
after the use of force if the security guard is seriously injured or disabled. “Use of force” 
includes (1) the discharge of a firearm; (2) the discharge of pepper mace; and (3) the use 
of an electric control device, as specified. “Use of force” does not include mere presence, 
verbal commands, or escorting an individual with minimal resistance. 
 
The bill also establishes that a licensed security guard agency or security guard employer 
must report any use of force by a security guard while providing security guard services on 
its behalf or for it to the Secretary of State Police within 48 hours after receiving the form, 
as specified. The use of force report must include specified information, including the type 
of encounter, the type of forced used, and the location of the incident where force was used. 
 
Agency Responsible for Acts of Employees 
 
Under current law, a security guard agency that employees five or more individuals as 
security guards must (1) maintain commercial general liability insurance, including errors 
and omissions and completed operations with a $1.0 million total aggregate minimum and 
(2) submit proof of the required insurance to the Secretary of State Police. Under the bill, 
security guard employers are subject to the same general liability insurance requirements 
as a security guard agency; the bill adds conforming language to this effect. 
 
The bill adds a requirement for security guard agencies and employers to maintain general 
liability insurance if they employer fewer than five employees. Specifically, if they employ 
fewer than five security guards, they must (1) maintain commercial general liability 
insurance, including errors and omissions and completed operations with a $500,000 total 
aggregate minimum and (2) submit proof of the required insurance to the Secretary of State 
Police. The bill adds conforming language related to this requirement. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DSP advises that it currently oversees the certification of more than 
10,000 security guards in the State. To establish, administer, and enforce the expanded 
certification requirements, DSP requires additional staffing and resources, including 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 760/ Page 6 
funding to reprogram its electronic licensing system. Under one interpretation, DSP can 
receive reports related to use of force by security guards with existing resources. An 
alternative interpretation is discussed below. 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $476,942 in fiscal 2024, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
two administrative specialists to implement and oversee the expansion of registration 
requirements for security guards. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs (including technical systems upgrades), and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$97,124 
One-time Technical Systems Upgrades 
365,000 
Operating Expenses 
    14,818 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$476,942 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and termination of one-time 
costs. 
 
As noted above, this analysis assumes that DSP can receive reports related to use of force 
by security guards with existing resources because the bill does not authorize or require the 
department to investigate the reports. If the bill is interpreted to require DSP to investigate 
those reports, general fund expenditures increase further, potentially by an additional 
$250,000. This represents the cost for two State Troopers to investigate use of force 
incidents, including the purchase of two vehicles to enable the investigators to conduct 
field work as part of their investigations. 
 
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services advises that MPTSC can 
establish the required training programs with existing resources because it has existing 
training programs that can be easily adapted to this purpose. 
 
The Department of General Services directly employs security guards but advises that the 
bill is not anticipated to materially affect department operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that employs security guards directly must 
comply with the bill’s requirements and is subject to additional oversight. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 760/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1055 (Delegates Embry and Amprey) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of General Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 23, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7