START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 54

Chapter 54

(Senate Bill 731)

AN ACT concerning

State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care Program Professionals
– Sunset Extension

FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care
Program Professionals in accordance with the provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act (sunset law) by extending to a certain date the termination provisions
relating to the statutory and regulatory authority of the Board; and generally
relating to the State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care Program
Professionals.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 20–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 20–502
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

20–201.

There is a State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care Program
Professionals in the Department.

20–502.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the MARYLAND
Program Evaluation Act, this title and all rules and regulations adopted under this title
shall terminate and be of no effect after July 1, [2024] 2027 2025.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 54 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, April 11, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2