START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 225

Chapter 225

(Senate Bill 732)

AN ACT concerning

Department of Disabilities – State Coordinator for Autism Strategy and
Maryland Commission on Disabilities – ~~Membership~~ Alterations

FOR the purpose of transferring the State Coordinator for Autism Strategy to the
Department of Disabilities; altering the staffing of the Advisory Stakeholder Group
on Autism–Related Needs; altering the membership of the Maryland Commission on
Disabilities; and generally relating to the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~on~~ Department of
Disabilities.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 7–111(a)(1), 7–112(d), and 7–120
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

7–111.

(a) (1) There is a State Coordinator for Autism Strategy in the [Governor’s
Office of Community Initiatives] DEPARTMENT.

7–112.

(d) The [Governor’s Office of Community Initiatives] DEPARTMENT shall
provide staff for the Advisory Stakeholder Group on Autism–Related Needs.

7–120.

(a) The Commission consists of:

(1) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

(i) one individual with a physical disability;

(ii) one individual who has experienced mental illness;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 225 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) ONE INDIVIDUAL WITH A TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY;

[(iii)] (IV) two individuals with a developmental disability, including
one with an intellectual disability;

[(iv)] (V) one individual who is blind;

[(v)] (VI) one individual who is deaf or hard of hearing;

[(vi)] (VII) one parent or foster parent of a child with a disability;

[(vii)] (VIII) four members of the general public who have disabilities;

[(viii)] (IX) three representatives from statewide disability advocacy
organizations;

[(ix)] (X) one representative from the home health care industry;

[(x)] (XI) one representative from a statewide organization of
providers of services and support for individuals with disabilities;

[(xi)] (XII) one representative from the Alliance of Local Commissions
on Disability; and

[(xii)] (XIII) two representatives from the Board, one of whom shall be
selected by the Secretary and one of whom shall be the Secretary of Budget and
Management or the designee of the Secretary of Budget and Management;

(2) one representative from the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the
President of the Senate;

(3) one representative from the Maryland House of Delegates, appointed
by the Speaker of the House;

(4) the State Coordinator for Autism Strategy; and

(5) one representative from the Governor’s Advisory Board for
Telecommunications Relay, appointed by the chair of the Board.

(b) In making the appointments required under subsection (a)(1) of this section,
the Governor shall appoint members from among:

(1) the geographic regions of the State; and

(2) diverse backgrounds.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 225

(c) A majority of the members shall be individuals with disabilities.

(d) (1) The term of a member is 3 years.

(2) The terms of the members are staggered as required by the terms
provided for the members of the Commission on October 1, 2007.

(3) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
appointed and qualifies.

(4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(5) A member may not serve more than two consecutive 3–year terms.

(e) A member who fails to attend at least 50% of the regularly scheduled meetings
of the Commission during any 12–month period shall be considered to have resigned.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, as of July 1, 2023, the
Governor shall transfer two positions and the associated general funds for the State
Coordinator for Autism Strategy from the Executive Department to the Department of
Disabilities as specified under Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3