START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 173

Chapter 173

(Senate Bill 783)

AN ACT concerning

~~Historic~~ ~~Properties~~ ~~Disposition~~ ~~and~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Team~~ Preservation and Reuse
of Historic Complexes Study and ~~Extension~~ ~~of~~ Alterations to the Income Tax
Credit for Catalytic Revitalization Projects

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Properties~~ ~~Disposition~~ ~~and~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Team~~
~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Development;~~ ~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~membership,~~ ~~duties,~~ ~~and~~ ~~staffing~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Team;~~ ~~extending~~ ~~the~~ ~~sunset~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~income~~
~~tax~~ ~~credit~~ ~~for~~ ~~catalytic~~ ~~revitalization~~ ~~projects;~~ allowing multiple final tax certificates
to be issued for a catalytic revitalization project in certain circumstances; requiring
the Smart Growth Subcabinet to study Maryland’s historic complexes and make
recommendations about an implementation plan to address the preservation and
reuse of historic complexes in the State; and generally relating to the disposition and
preservation of historic properties by the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section ~~1–101(a)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(d),~~ 6–901, ~~and~~ ~~6–902(a)~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section ~~2–201~~ 6–902(a), ~~6–903(a)(1),~~ ~~and~~ ~~6–905~~ and 6–903(a)(1) and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section ~~5–101~~ ~~through~~ ~~5–105~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~title~~ ~~“Title~~ ~~5.~~ ~~Historic~~ ~~Properties~~
~~Disposition~~ ~~and~~ ~~Preservation~~ ~~Team”~~ 6–902(c) and 6–903(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

~~1–101.~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 173 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~Division~~ ~~I~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~
~~indicated.~~

~~(d)~~ ~~“Department”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~
~~Development.~~

~~2–201.~~

~~The~~ ~~Department~~ ~~consists~~ ~~of:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~Credit~~ ~~Assurance;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~Development~~ ~~Finance;~~

(3) THE HISTORIC PROPERTIES DISPOSITION AND PRESERVATION
~~TEAM;~~

(4) the Division of Neighborhood Revitalization;

[(4)] (5) the Community Development Administration;

[(5)] (6) the Community Legacy Program;

[(6)] (7) the Housing Finance Review Committee;

[(7)] (8) the Lead Hazard Advisory Committee;

[(8)] (9) the Maryland Housing Fund;

[(9)] (10) the Neighborhood Business Development Program; and

[(10)] (11) any other governmental unit that under law is a part of the
~~Department.~~

TITLE 5. HISTORIC PROPERTIES DISPOSITION AND PRESERVATION TEAM.

~~5–101.~~

(A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “HISTORIC PROPERTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5A–301 OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 173

(C) “PRESERVATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5A–301 OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(D) “TEAM” MEANS THE HISTORIC PROPERTIES DISPOSITION AND
PRESERVATION TEAM OF THE DEPARTMENT.

(E) “UNIT” MEANS A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

~~5–102.~~

(A) THERE IS A HISTORIC PROPERTIES DISPOSITION AND PRESERVATION
TEAM WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) (1) THE TEAM CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:

(I) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
~~DEVELOPMENT;~~

(II) THE SECRETARY OF GENERAL SERVICES;

(III) THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE;

(IV) THE SECRETARY OF THE ENVIRONMENT;

(V) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH;

(VI) THE SECRETARY OF LABOR;

(VII) THE SECRETARY OF NATURAL RESOURCES; AND

(VIII) THE SECRETARY OF PLANNING.

(2) THE COCHAIRS MAY APPOINT THE HEAD OF A UNIT THAT IS NOT
LISTED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION AS AN EX OFFICIO MEMBER OF THE
TEAM AFTER A REVIEW OF THE UNIT’S OWNERSHIP OF STATE HISTORIC
~~PROPERTIES.~~

(3) AN EX OFFICIO MEMBER MAY DESIGNATE A DEPUTY SECRETARY
FROM THE MEMBER’S UNIT TO ACT IN THE MEMBER’S ABSENCE.

(C) A MEMBER OF THE TEAM:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE TEAM;
~~BUT~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 173 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(D) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, OR
THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE, AND THE SECRETARY OF GENERAL SERVICES, OR
THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE, SHALL COCHAIR THE TEAM.

(E) (1) A MAJORITY OF THE AUTHORIZED MEMBERSHIP OF THE TEAM IS
A QUORUM.

(2) THE TEAM SHALL SET THE TIMES AND PLACES OF ITS MEETINGS.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF TO THE TEAM, INCLUDING A
DIRECTOR TO OVERSEE THE ACTIVITIES OF THE TEAM.

~~5–103.~~

(A) (1) THE PURPOSE OF THE TEAM IS TO ENSURE THAT HISTORIC
PROPERTIES OWNED BY THE STATE THAT ARE HELD FOR DISPOSITION AND
~~REDEVELOPMENT~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~PROPERLY~~ ~~MAINTAINED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~MANAGED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SUCCESSFULLY~~
TRANSFERRED ON DISPOSITION.

(2) AMONG ITS OTHER DUTIES AND POWERS ESTABLISHED UNDER
THIS SECTION, THE TEAM IS RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPLEMENTING
RECOMMENDATIONS 2, 4, AND 5 OF THE REPORT “ADVANCING THE PRESERVATION
AND REUSE OF MARYLAND’S HISTORIC COMPLEXES: CHALLENGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES”, PREPARED FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND ISSUED
~~JANUARY~~ ~~28,~~ ~~2020.~~

~~(B)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TEAM~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) IDENTIFY AND MAINTAIN INFORMATION ON STATE–OWNED
HISTORIC PROPERTIES;

(2) SUPPORT THE MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES BY THE
~~UNIT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~POSSESSION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~BEFORE~~ ~~DISPOSITION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HISTORIC~~
PROPERTY BY THE STATE;

(3) EVALUATE, BEFORE DISPOSITION OF A HISTORIC PROPERTY
OWNED BY THE STATE:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 173

(I) ENVIRONMENTAL AND HISTORIC REMEDIATION
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE HISTORIC PROPERTY; AND

(II) ZONING OPTIONS FOR SUBSEQUENT USES ON DIVESTMENT;

(4) FACILITATE, BEFORE DISPOSITION OF A HISTORIC PROPERTY
OWNED BY THE STATE:

(I) SITE AND BUILDING ASSESSMENTS; AND

(II) PROJECTS NECESSARY FOR THE STABILIZATION OR
PRESERVATION OF THE HISTORIC PROPERTY;

(5) CONSULT WITH THE UNIT IN POSSESSION OF THE STATE–OWNED
~~HISTORIC~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~DEVELOP~~ ~~A~~ ~~PLAN~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PRESERVATION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~DISPOSITION~~ ~~OF~~
THE HISTORIC PROPERTY THAT INCLUDES:

(I) A MULTIDISCIPLINARY REVIEW OF THE POTENTIAL USES
FOR THE PROPERTY AND THE FACTORS AFFECTING THESE USES, INCLUDING
~~ENVIRONMENTAL~~ ~~REVIEWS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ASSESSMENTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMMERCIAL~~ ~~VALUE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
PROPERTY; AND

(II) A DETERMINATION OF WHETHER THE PROPERTY IS
SUITABLE FOR USE OR REDEVELOPMENT AS AFFORDABLE HOUSING, AS REQUIRED
UNDER § 2–203(B) OF THIS DIVISION I;

(6) IDENTIFY AND MAKE AVAILABLE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND
NONMONETARY RESOURCES FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, THE STATE,
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS, AND PRIVATE ENTITIES TO FACILITATE THE SUCCESSFUL
DISPOSITION OF STATE–OWNED HISTORIC PROPERTIES; AND

(7) MEET REGULARLY TO ADDRESS ISSUES RELATED TO ITS PURPOSE
AS IDENTIFIED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) THE TEAM, THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT, MAY EXECUTE CONTRACTS
FOR THE PRESERVATION WORK IDENTIFIED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO AUTHORIZE A
DISPOSITION PLAN FOR STATE–OWNED HISTORIC PROPERTY IF THE DISPOSITION
~~WOULD:~~

(1) VIOLATE ANY COVENANT OR APPLICABLE FEDERAL LAW;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 173 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IN THE OPINION OF THE STATE TREASURER, ADVERSELY AFFECT
THE TAX–EXEMPT STATUS OF AN OUTSTANDING STATE BOND, THE PROCEEDS OF
WHICH WERE ALLOCATED TO PURCHASE OR IMPROVE THE PROPERTY; OR

(3) SUPERSEDE THE RIGHT OF A PERSON FROM WHOM REAL
PROPERTY WAS ACQUIRED OR THE PERSON’S SUCCESSOR IN INTEREST TO
REACQUIRE THE PROPERTY UNDER § 8–309 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

(E) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, THE TEAM SHALL REPORT TO THE
GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) THE ACTIVITIES OF THE TEAM IN THE PRIOR FISCAL YEAR; AND

(2) RECOMMENDATIONS, INCLUDING LEGISLATION, TO ASSIST THE
TEAM IN CARRYING OUT THE PURPOSE AND PERFORMING THE DUTIES UNDER THIS
~~SECTION.~~

~~5–104.~~

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, THE TEAM SHALL COMPILE A
SUMMARY OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES OWNED BY THE STATE.

(B) THE SUMMARY OF STATE–OWNED HISTORIC PROPERTIES REQUIRED
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) IDENTIFY PROPERTIES THAT ARE ELIGIBLE FOR DISPOSITION;

(2) BE UPDATED REGULARLY BY THE TEAM; AND

(3) BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.

(C) THE SUMMARY OF STATE–OWNED HISTORIC PROPERTIES MAY BE
INTEGRATED WITH LISTS OR RECORDS OF STATE PROPERTY, INCLUDING THE LIST
REQUIRED UNDER § 2–203(B)(2) OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~5–105.~~

AT THE DIRECTION OF THE TEAM, THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT
REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS TITLE.

6–901.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 173

In this subtitle, “catalytic revitalization project” means the substantial rehabilitation
of a property in the State:

(1) that was formerly owned by the State or the federal government;

(2) the rehabilitation of which will foster economic, housing, and
community development within the community in which the property is located; and

(3) that is out of service and was formerly used as a college or university,
K–12 school, hospital, mental health facility, or military facility or installation.

6–902.

(a) An individual, a nonprofit organization, or a business entity may claim a tax
credit in an amount equal to 20% of the amount stated in the final tax credit certificate
issued by the Secretary under § 6–903 of this subtitle for 5 consecutive taxable years
beginning with the taxable year in which ~~the~~ ~~catalytic~~ ~~revitalization~~ ~~project~~ ~~is~~ ~~completed.~~
A FINAL TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED.

(C) THE SECRETARY MAY ISSUE MULTIPLE FINAL TAX CREDIT
CERTIFICATES FOR A PROJECT THAT IS ISSUED AN INITIAL TAX CERTIFICATE UNDER
THIS SECTION IF:

(1) THE PROJECT HAS BEEN DETERMINED BY THE SECRETARY TO BE
IN PHASES;

(2) A PHASE OF THE PROJECT HAS BEEN COMPLETED;

(3) A FINAL TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE IS NOT ISSUED FOR MORE THAN
20% OF THE PROJECT’S ELIGIBLE EXPENSES TO DATE; AND

(4) A FINAL TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE IS NOT ISSUED THAT WOULD
EXCEED THE AGGREGATED LIMIT OF A PROJECT’S CREDIT.

6–903.

(a) (1) Subject to the limitations of paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection
and subsection (b) of this section, on application by an individual, a nonprofit organization,
or a business entity, the Secretary shall issue:

(i) an initial tax credit certificate in an amount equal to 20% of the
individual’s, nonprofit organization’s, or business entity’s estimated new construction costs
and rehabilitation costs for the project; and

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 173 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) on completion of the catalytic revitalization project OR A PHASE
OF THE CATALYTIC REVITALIZATION PROJECT, a final tax credit certificate in an
amount equal to 20% of the individual’s, nonprofit organization’s, or business entity’s actual
new construction costs and rehabilitation costs for the project.

(E) (1) THE ORIGINAL RECIPIENT OF AN INITIAL TAX CREDIT ISSUED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION MAY TRANSFER THE INITIAL TAX CREDIT
CERTIFICATE TO ONE OR MORE OTHER INDIVIDUALS, NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS,
OR BUSINESS ENTITIES.

(2) THE TRANSFER OF AN INITIAL TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION NEED NOT INVOLVE A TRANSFER OF THE
CATALYTIC REVITALIZATION PROJECT, WHETHER BY FEE SIMPLE TRANSFER OF REAL
PROPERTY OR A TRANSFER OF A PORTION OR ALL OF THE OWNERSHIP INTEREST
THAT THE ORIGINAL RECIPIENT HOLDS IN THE ENTITY THAT OWNS THE REAL
PROPERTY TO A NEW OWNER OR OWNERS.

(3) AN INITIAL TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE ISSUED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THIS SECTION MAY NOT:

(I) BE TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER PERSON WITHOUT THE
EXPRESS WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE ORIGINAL RECIPIENT; OR

(II) BE TRANSFERRED AS PART OF THE INVOLUNTARY
TRANSFER OF THE REAL PROPERTY OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN AN ENTITY THAT OWNS
THE REAL PROPERTY WITHOUT THE PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE ORIGINAL
RECIPIENT OF THE CERTIFICATE AND THE SECRETARY.

[(e)] (F) (1) The amount of the tax credit STATED IN THE FINAL TAX CREDIT
CERTIFICATE THAT IS allowed, but not claimed, under this subtitle may be transferred, by
written instrument, in whole or in part, to any individual, nonprofit organization, or
business entity.

(2) For the taxable year of any transfer under this subsection, the transferee
under paragraph (1) of this subsection may apply the tax credit against the total tax
otherwise payable by the transferee in that taxable year.

(3) If the tax credit exceeds the total tax otherwise payable by the transferee
in any taxable year, the transferee:

(i) may claim a refund in the amount of the excess;

(ii) may carry forward and apply the excess credit for succeeding
taxable years until the full amount of the credit is used; or

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 173

(iii) may transfer the remainder of the tax credit to an individual, a
nonprofit organization, or a business entity in accordance with paragraph (1) of this
subsection.

~~6–905.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~Subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~credit~~ ~~authorized~~
under it shall terminate January 1, [2031] 2035.

~~(b)~~ ~~After~~ ~~the~~ ~~termination~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~Secretary~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~issue~~ ~~any~~ ~~additional~~ ~~tax~~ ~~credit~~ ~~certificates~~ ~~under~~
~~§~~ ~~6–903~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~tax~~ ~~credit~~ ~~certificates~~ ~~issued~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~claimed,~~ ~~refunded,~~ ~~carried~~ ~~forward,~~
~~or~~ ~~transferred~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§§~~ ~~6–902~~ ~~and~~ ~~6–903~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Smart Growth Subcabinet established under § 9–1406 of the State
Government Article shall study and make recommendations about an implementation plan
to address the preservation and reuse of historic complexes in the State.

(b) In conducting the study and making the recommendations, the Smart Growth
Subcabinet shall:

(1) evaluate relevant studies and publications;

(2) analyze the economic impact of the implementation plan;

(3) identify regulatory and policy issues for the implementation plan; and

(4) solicit input from interested parties including:

(i) government agencies; and

(ii) relevant public and private organizations.

(c) On or before December 31, 2023, the Smart Growth Subcabinet shall report
its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 173 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10