START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 708 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 708 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Health) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Public Health - Youth Camps, Development Organizations, and Programs - 
Criminal History Records Checks 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to apply to the 
Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository for State and national criminal 
history records checks (CHRC) for individuals seeking to become a youth camp owner, 
operator, employee, or volunteer who will have access to a camper. Within three business 
days after receiving a request from the operator of a youth camp, MDH must issue a written 
determination to the youth camp whether the results would provide a basis for prohibiting 
the hiring of the applicant. The bill also repeals the definition of – and eliminates references 
to – a “youth development organization or program” and makes other conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by an estimated $172,000 in 
FY 2024, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and elimination of 
one-time costs. MDH general fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in FY 2024 due to existing authority to charge a fee to cover the cost of CHRCs. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$172,000 
$182,100 
$189,800 
$197,900 
$207,200 
Net Effect 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 708/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDH must screen an individual who is seeking to become a youth camp 
owner, operator, employee, or volunteer who will have access to a camper by obtaining a 
State and national CHRC for that individual from the Central Repository. To obtain a 
CHRC, a complete set of an applicant’s legible fingerprints must be sent to the Central 
Repository, along with the required State and national fees. 
 
The Central Repository must forward the applicant’s criminal history record information 
to MDH and the applicant. The information received from the Central Repository (1) is 
confidential; (2) may not be redisseminated; and (3) may be used only for screening 
prospective youth camp personnel. An applicant may contest the contents of the printed 
statement containing their criminal history record information issued by the Central 
Repository. 
 
If criminal history record information is reported to the Central Repository after the date 
of an applicant’s initial CHRC, the Central Repository must provide MDH with the 
applicant’s revised criminal history record information. 
 
Current Law:  MDH is responsible for monitoring, inspecting, and certifying youth camps 
in the State. “Youth camp” means any day camp, residential camp, travel camp, or trip 
camp that (1) accommodates at least seven campers who are unrelated to the person 
operating the camp; (2) provides primarily recreational activities or has a substantial 
outdoor recreational component; (3) has permanent buildings, temporary buildings, or no 
buildings; and (4) operates on owned or leased private property or facilities or public 
property or facilities. 
 
State regulations require that a youth camp personnel administrator have a completed 
national and State CHRC and a Child Protective Services background clearance on file 
with the employer. A youth camp operator may not employ an individual who, as reported 
on or after October 1, 2005, has received a conviction, a probation before judgment (PBJ) 
disposition, a not criminally responsible (NCR) disposition, or a pending charge for the 
commission or attempted commission of specified crimes and offenses, including (1) a 
crime involving a child, cruelty to animals, domestic violence, or a weapon or firearm 
violation; (2) a sex offense; (3) a violent crime classified as a felony; (4) abduction or 
kidnapping; (5) abuse of a child or an adult; (6) confinement of an unattended child; 
(7) manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing a controlled dangerous substance (CDS), or 
possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense a CDS; (8) perjury; 
(9) pornography; or (10) reckless endangerment. 
 
If, as reported on or after October 1, 2005, an individual has been identified as responsible 
for child abuse or neglect or received a conviction, a PBJ disposition, an NCR disposition, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 708/ Page 3 
or a pending charge for the commission or attempted commission of a crime or offense that 
is not specified above, the operator must assess, on the basis of specified factors, the 
individual’s suitability for employment. Specifically, the operator must consider:   
 
 
the job position at the camp for which the individual is applying or for which the 
individual is currently employed; 
 
the nature and seriousness of the incident, crime, or offense; 
 
the period of time that has elapsed since the incident, crime, or offense, and the age 
of the individual at the time the incident, crime, or offense occurred; 
 
the individual’s probation or parole status; and 
 
any other information that the camp considers pertinent. 
 
Chapter 186 of 2022 specifies that the operator of a youth camp or youth development 
organization or program, prior to making a formal offer of employment to a job applicant, 
may request that MDH provide a determination as to whether the results of a federal 
CHRC would be the basis for prohibiting the hiring of the applicant. On receipt of a request, 
MDH must issue a written determination to the youth camp (or youth development 
organization or program) as to whether the results of a federal CHRC would be the basis 
for prohibiting the hiring of the applicant. A determination issued by MDH is binding 
unless the applicant has subsequently been convicted of a crime, has pending criminal 
charges, or has previously undisclosed criminal convictions. MDH may set a reasonable 
fee to cover the cost of a CHRC. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Expenditures 
 
MDH estimates that approximately 18,000 camp staff are hired annually in the State. Based 
on this estimate, it is assumed that MDH must handle CHRCs for at least 18,000 applicants 
annually under the bill. MDH advises that a regular administrator and regular office clerk 
are needed, respectively, to oversee the CHRC process and the hiring, supervision, and 
training of seasonal contractual staff. According to MDH, temporary contractual 
employees are needed during each summer camp season (March through August) to assist 
the department in vetting CHRCs for youth camp employment applicants. DLS concurs 
with MDH regarding the necessity of temporary contractual staff but advises that a regular 
administrator should have the capacity to handle both the administration of the 
CHRC process and the management of temporary contractual staff. 
 
Accordingly, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $172,030 in fiscal 2024, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one regular, full-time administrator to oversee the CHRC process for youth camps, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 708/ Page 4 
two temporary contractual staff for four months the first fiscal year (but six months 
annually thereafter) to assist MDH in vetting CHRCs during the summer camp season, and 
six additional temporary contractual staff for three months each year (April through June) 
to assist in vetting CHRCs during the peak hiring period for summer camps (and ensure 
that MDH can provide written determinations within three business days). The estimate 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
To the extent that MDH requires additional staff to handle the bill’s requirements, general 
fund expenditures increase further. 
 
Regular Position 
1.0 
Contractual Positions 
8.0 
Regular Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$62,802 
Contractual Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
63,054 
Operating Expenses 
    46,174 
Total FY 2024 State Expenditures 
$172,030 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with 
annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
DLS notes that personnel costs (for one half-time (50%) regular administrator and 
five temporary contractual staff) were accounted for in the fiscal and policy note for 
Chapter 186. However, MDH advises that it was not provided any funding or positions 
based on that legislation. Thus, DLS assumes that MDH requires additional personnel 
under this bill. 
 
Revenues 
 
MDH is authorized under current law to set a reasonable fee to cover the cost of a 
CHRC for youth camp applicants. Thus, beginning in fiscal 2024, MDH general fund 
revenues increase to the extent the department sets and collects a fee. DLS advises that, 
assuming MDH receives 18,000 applications for CHRCs annually, a fee of $10.00 per 
applicant would cover projected MDH expenditures in fiscal 2024 and 2025. A fee of 
$11.00 would cover costs in fiscal 2026 and 2027, and a fee of $12.00 would cover costs 
in fiscal 2028. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the bill requires MDH to issue a written determination 
regarding the hiring of an applicant within three days of receiving a request from a youth 
camp, this analysis assumes that MDH must issue a written determination within 
three business days of receiving the results of the applicant’s CHRC. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 708/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - April 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 4, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 708/ Page 6 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Health - Youth Camps, Development Organizations, and Programs -
Criminal History Records Checks 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB708 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA – Environmental Health Bureau 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Currently, MDH is not involved in the background check process, other than for the personnel 
administrators. The additional staffing would allow MDH to review and process background 
checks once the agency receives legal authorization to receive background checks. 
 
MDH estimates 18,000 youth camp staff are hired annually who require background checks, based 
on information from the camping community. There is no better way of estimating the number, 
because to date, MDH has not been involved in the background check process except as it pertains 
to the personnel administrators for each camp. 
 
MDH estimates it will need 10 full-time temporary emergency staff (Office Clerk II) for 
six months around each camp season. In addition, MDH will need a 1.0 FTE Administrator I and 
1.0 FTE Office Clerk II to design and oversee the criminal history record check process, as well 
as to hire, supervise, and train the Office Clerks each year. MDH anticipates that a determination 
for returning staff will take less time, however MDH anticipates increases in the overall number 
of camps and camp staff year after year in Maryland. 
 
The salary and fringe for State Fiscal Year 2023 is $218,547 with associated operating costs of 
$94,270 and Salesforce licenses at $18,000. The total cost to MDH for State Fiscal Year 2023 is 
$330,817. 

END OF PAGE 6