START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 718 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 718 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Environment) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Voluntary Cleanup Program - Determination and Recordation Deadlines 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the timeframe within which the Maryland Department of 
the Environment (MDE) must make certain determinations related to the Voluntary 
Cleanup Program (VCP). It also modifies provisions related to the recordation of 
determinations and certificates of completion by specifying that a program participant must 
provide written evidence that the determination or certificate of completion was presented 
for recordation in the land records of the local jurisdiction within 60 days of receiving the 
determination or certificate. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. By providing 
more time to review VCP applications and make determinations, the bill may ease the 
administrative burden on MDE but is not anticipated to reduce the need for staff. Any 
impact to other State agencies (as program applicants) is similarly anticipated to be 
operational. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
Any impact to local governments (as program applicants) is anticipated to be operational. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MDE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 718/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  VCP was established in 1997 and provides State oversight 
for the voluntary cleanup of properties contaminated by hazardous substances. 
 
Under current law, VCP provides owners or purchasers of a contaminated site liability 
relief if cleanup goals are met. Eligible parties that want to participate must submit an 
application describing a proposed voluntary cleanup project that specifies the proposed 
cleanup criteria for a contaminated site and the future use of the site. Under current law, 
MDE must notify an applicant within 45 days whether the application is approved, denied, 
incomplete, or that a “no further requirements” determination (NFRD) has been issued 
stating that there are no further requirements related to the investigation of controlled 
hazardous substances at the property. The bill increases the timeframe for an MDE 
determination from 45 to 60 days. Under current law, if an NFRD is issued, the program 
participant must record the determination in the land records of the local jurisdiction within  
30 days of receiving the determination. The bill requires the program participant to provide 
written evidence to MDE that the determination was presented for recordation within 
60 days. 
 
Under current law, after MDE approves an application, the participant must develop a 
response action plan on cleanup activities, and MDE must notify the applicant within 
75 days if the plan has been approved or rejected. If a response action plan is rejected, there 
is a further process for modifications. The response action plan approval letter must state 
that no further action is required on the property other than the actions described in the plan 
and that the participant will receive a certificate of completion once the plan is carried out. 
 
Under current law, once notified of a project’s completion, MDE must determine if the 
response action plan has been completed satisfactorily within 30 days. The bill increases 
the timeframe for determination from 30 to 60 days. Under current law, an NFRD or 
certificate of completion conditioned on the permissible use of the property must be 
recorded by the participant in the land records of the local jurisdiction within 30 days or 
the determination or certificate is void. The bill requires the program participant to provide 
written evidence to MDE that the certificate of completion was presented for recordation 
within 60 days. 
 
Background:  According to MDE, the average number of VCP applications received in a 
year is somewhat cyclical, but has generally increased since 2010, a trend that MDE 
anticipates will continue. In fiscal 2022, 71 applications were received. MDE advises that 
VCP applications are hundreds to thousands of pages long and that site closure 
requirements for participants have become more detailed as sites have become more 
complex. MDE also advises that the VCP participant population has become more diverse, 
with increased interest from both in- and out-of-state applicants. MDE notes that with an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 718/ Page 3 
increase in the number and types of developers seeking to remediate and redevelop 
contaminated sites through VCP, MDE staff and program participants are finding it 
difficult to comply with the existing statutory deadlines. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 718/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Voluntary Cleanup Program – Determinations and Recordation Deadlines 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 718 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Erica Chapman 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
 This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The proposed increase in the allowed time to record NFRDs and COCs conditioned on certain uses 
in county land records may decrease a small business’ fiscal and operational burden associated 
with requesting the reissuance of the documents by MDE and coordinating the resigning of the 
documents by multiple people and their delivery to the local land records office. Requesting the 
reissuance of these documents would not have an economic impact because a small business would 
only be charged once the $2,000 fee for issuing NFRDs and COCs conditioned on certain use. 
 

END OF PAGE 4