START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 724 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 724 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health Insurance Carriers - Requirements for Internal Grievance Process - 
Modification 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the means by which a health insurance carrier must inform a 
member, the member’s representative, or the health care provider acting on behalf of a 
member of the carrier’s adverse decision for nonemergency cases. A carrier must inform a 
member, the member’s representative, or the health care provider either orally by telephone 
(as under current law) or – with the recipient’s consent – by text, facsimile, electronic mail, 
online portal, or other expedited means. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An adverse decision is (1) a utilization review determination by a private 
review agent, a carrier, or a health care provider acting on behalf of a carrier that a proposed 
or delivered health care service covered under the member’s contract is or was not 
medically necessary, appropriate, or efficient and may result in noncoverage of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 724/ Page 2 
health care service or (2) a denial by a carrier of a request by a member for an alternative 
standard or a waiver of a standard to satisfy the requirements of a wellness program. 
 
For nonemergency cases, a carrier must document an adverse decision in writing after the 
carrier has provided oral communication of the decision to the member, the member’s 
representative, or the health care provider acting on behalf of the member. Within five days 
after making the adverse decision, the carrier must also send specified written notice to the 
member, the member’s representative, or the health care provider. 
 
Under Title 15, Subtitle 10A of the Insurance Article, consumers may appeal health 
insurance carriers’ adverse decisions and contractual coverage decisions. 
 
Background:  MIA advises that many patients, providers, and carriers do not prefer using 
the telephone as a primary means of communication. Adverse coverage determinations are 
typically communicated to the provider on behalf of the member immediately via facsimile 
or through an online provider portal. MIA further advises that consumers and providers are 
better served by expressly authorizing communication regarding adverse decisions through 
expedited electronic means. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 724/ Page 3 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Health Insurance Carriers - Requirements for Internal Grievance Process - 
Modification 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB724 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Insurance Administration 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There is no economic impact on small business associated with this proposal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3