START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 725 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 725 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Insurance - Product and Service Offerings 
 
 
This departmental bill specifies that certain provisions of insurance law do not prohibit a 
life insurer, health insurer, nonprofit health service plan, health maintenance organization 
(HMO), or property or casualty insurer from offering or providing products or services in 
conjunction with a policy at no charge or at a discounted price under certain circumstances. 
Generally, the risk of loss must be associated with risks insured against by the policy or be 
substantially related to the insurance provided under the policy, and the offer or provision 
of products or services must be available to all policyholders. An offer or provision of 
products or services may be included in an applicable contract or form or rate filing. The 
Insurance Commissioner may determine by regulation the types of products and services 
that may be offered. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and must be construed to apply 
only prospectively. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) can be 
absorbed within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MIA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 725/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Life and Health Insurers 
 
For a life insurer, health insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or HMO, products or 
services may be offered or provided (1) to educate persons regarding – or to assess, 
monitor, control, or prevent – risk of loss to persons or (2) to enhance the health of the 
insured or beneficiary. The risk of loss must be associated with risks insured against by the 
policy or be substantially related to the insurance provided under the policy, and the offer 
or provision of products or services must be available to all policyholders. 
 
An offer or provision of products or services may be included in an applicable contract or 
form or rate filing. If so, the insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or HMO may not 
discontinue the products or services during the term of the policy or contract unless 
consented to in writing by the policyholder or as the result of a uniform modification. An 
insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or HMO is not prohibited from otherwise terminating 
a contract. An insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or HMO may not increase the 
premium or deny a claim of a policyholder if the policyholder accepts, rejects, uses, or fails 
to use a product or service. 
 
A product or service offered or provided in conjunction with an insurance policy or annuity 
contract that is primarily designed to enhance financial wellness must be allowed if the 
Commissioner determines that the product or service includes an enhancement to the 
financial protection component of the insurance policy or annuity contract. 
 
Property and Casualty Insurers 
 
For a property and casualty insurer, products or services may be offered or provided to 
educate persons regarding – or to assess, monitor, control, or prevent – risk of loss to 
persons or property if the risk of loss is associated with risks insured against by the policy 
and the offer or provision of products or services is available to all policyholders. 
 
A property and casualty insurer may include an offer or provision of products or services 
in an applicable contract or form or rate filing. A property and casualty insurer may not 
increase the premium or deny a claim of a policyholder if the policyholder accepts, rejects, 
uses, or fails to use a product or service. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 725/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Life and Health Insurers 
 
Generally, a person, including an HMO, may not knowingly:   
 
 
allow, make, or offer to make a contract of life insurance or health insurance or an 
annuity contract or an agreement about the contract other than as plainly expressed 
in the contract; 
 
pay, allow, or give (or offer to do so) – whether directly or indirectly – specified 
types of inducements to the insurance or annuity (specifically, a rebate of premiums 
payable on the contract, a special favor or advantage in the dividends or other 
benefits under the contract, paid employment or a contract for services of any kind, 
or any valuable consideration not specified in the contract); 
 
directly or indirectly give, sell, or purchase (or offer or agree to do so or allow as 
inducement to/in connection with the insurance or annuity) an agreement that 
promises specified types of returns, profits, or securities (or interest in securities) of 
an insurer or other corporation, association, or partnership; or 
 
offer, promise, or give any valuable consideration not specified in the contract, 
except for educational materials, promotional materials, or articles of merchandise 
that cost no more than $50. 
 
A person may not make receipt of any educational materials, promotional materials, or 
articles of merchandise contingent on the sale or purchase of insurance. 
 
Property and Casualty Insurers 
 
Except to the extent provided for in an applicable filing with the Commissioner, an insurer, 
employee or representative of an insurer, or an insurance producer may not pay, allow, 
give, or offer to pay, allow, or give directly or indirectly as an inducement to insurance or 
after insurance has become effective:   
 
 
a rebate, discount, abatement, credit, or reduction of the premium stated in the 
policy; 
 
a special favor or advantage in the dividends or other benefits to accrue on the 
policy; or 
 
any valuable consideration or other inducement not specified in the policy. 
 
An insured named in a policy or an employee of the insured may not knowingly receive or 
accept directly or indirectly a rebate, discount, abatement, credit, reduction of premium, 
special favor, advantage, valuable consideration, or inducement. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 725/ Page 4 
A person may not knowingly offer, promise, or give any valuable consideration not 
specified in the policy, except for educational materials, promotional materials, or articles 
of merchandise that cost no more than $50. A person may not make receipt of any 
educational materials, promotional materials, or articles of merchandise under this 
provision contingent on the sale or purchase of insurance. 
 
Background:  MIA advises that, in recent years, insurers have increasingly sought to offer 
certain noninsurance products and services to covered persons that are related to the 
insurance product being offered or are intended to prevent or reduce the risk of loss insured 
against (such as wearable medical devices or wireless property monitors). However, 
Maryland’s anti-rebating statutes have been interpreted to mean that such offers cannot be 
made without making the offer part of the policy or contract, which can be cumbersome to 
initiate and maintain as the technologies improve over time. The bill is intended to allow 
insurance companies to provide value-based services outside of a contract with the 
consumer without violating current anti-rebating laws. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 556 and HB 1341 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 29, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 725/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Insurance – Product and Service Offerings 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 725 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Kory Boone 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There is no economic impact on small business associated with this proposal. 

END OF PAGE 5