START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

Chapter 111

(Senate Bill 720)

AN ACT concerning

~~Maryland~~ Horse Racing ~~Act~~ – ~~Sunset~~ Extension of Maryland Horse Racing Act
and Establishment of Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority

FOR the purpose of extending the termination date of the Maryland Horse Racing Act;
establishing the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority;
establishing the Maryland Racing Operations Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund;
authorizing the Maryland Stadium Authority to transfer money from the Racing and
Community Development Facilities Fund to the Maryland Racing Operations Fund;
requiring interest earnings of the Maryland Racing Operations Fund to be credited
to the Maryland Racing Operations Fund; altering the authorized uses of certain
grants and the names of certain grantees; extending the date by which the owner of
the Bowie Race Course Training Center property must convey the property to the
City of Bowie; altering the amount and distribution of certain funds transferred to
the City of Bowie; and generally relating to the Maryland Horse Racing Act and the
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 11–1101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 11–510, 11–519(d), and 11–1102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–657.3(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–657.3(f)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Economic Development
Section 10–1001 through 10–1008 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10.
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)170. and 171.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)172. and 11–203(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 590 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2020
Section 8

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 344 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022
Section 1(3) Item DA03(B) and SA25(B)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

11–1101.

This title is the Maryland Horse Racing Act.

11–1102.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate on
July 1, [2024] 2034.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

11–510.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the Commission may not
issue a license, or award racing days, for racing at a mile track.

(b) The Commission may issue a license and award racing days only to:

(1) the Maryland Jockey Club of Baltimore City, Inc.; [and]

(2) the Laurel Racing Assoc., Inc.; AND

(3) SUBJECT TO § 10–1003(B) OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE, THE MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED RACETRACK OPERATING AUTHORITY.

11–519.

(d) (1) (i) On or before December 31, [2023] 2024, the owner of the Bowie
Race Course Training Center shall convey the Bowie Race Course Training Center property
to the City of Bowie “as is”, with all defects that may exist, whether known or unknown,
and without any express or implied warranty, guarantee by, or recourse against the
conveyor of the property.

(ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the conveyor of the
Bowie Race Course Training Center property shall be held harmless against any and all
claims and risks, now or in the future, arising directly or indirectly from, or in any way
related to, the condition of the property or conveyance, with all those claims and risks
assumed by the City of Bowie.

(2) The portion of the Bowie Race Course Training Center property
transferred to the City of Bowie that is within 100 feet of the top of the Patuxent River
bank shall be used for passive recreational activities, including hiking, wildlife viewing,
picnicking, and walking.

(3) The portion of the Bowie Race Course Training Center property
transferred to the City of Bowie not described under paragraph (2) of this subsection may:

(i) be used only for active recreational activities, including baseball,
football, soccer, and cricket; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) have only one structure that is up to 50,000 square feet
constructed on the property.

(4) On or before January 1, 2021, the City of Bowie shall enter into a joint
use agreement, including an easement, with Bowie State University for the future use of
the property described under paragraph (3) of this subsection.

(5) The City of Bowie and Bowie State University shall report to the
General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the
final terms of the joint use agreement entered into under this subsection.

Article – Economic Development

10–657.3.

(a) There is a Racing and Community Development Facilities Fund.

(f) (1) Before the issuance of any bonds authorized under this subtitle to
finance improvements to a racing facility, the Authority may:

(I) pay [for] FROM THE RACING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES FUND any costs for administration, overhead, and
operations of the Authority [or], costs of engineering, architectural, and other design
professionals [from the Racing and Community Development Facilities Fund], OR COSTS
AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBTITLE 10 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(II) TRANSFER MONEY FROM THE RACING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES FUND TO THE MARYLAND RACING OPERATIONS FUND
UNDER § 10–1008 OF THIS TITLE.

SUBTITLE 10. MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED RACETRACK OPERATING AUTHORITY.

10–1001.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “AUTHORITY” MEANS THE MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED
RACETRACK OPERATING AUTHORITY.

10–1002.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED RACETRACK OPERATING
AUTHORITY.

(B) THE AUTHORITY IS A BODY POLITIC AND CORPORATE AND IS AN
INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

(C) THE EXERCISE BY THE AUTHORITY OF A POWER UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
IS THE PERFORMANCE OF AN ESSENTIAL GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.

10–1003.

(A) THE PURPOSE OF THE AUTHORITY IS TO MAINTAIN THE STATE AS A
BEST–IN–CLASS THOROUGHBRED HORSE RACING VENUE.

(B) THE AUTHORITY MAY:

(1) STUDY AND MAKE ANY RECOMMENDATIONS THAT THE
AUTHORITY FINDS ARE IN THE BEST INTERESTS OF THOROUGHBRED RACING IN THE
STATE;

(2) IN COORDINATION WITH OTHER STATE ENTITIES, DEVELOP NEW
AND EXISTING HORSE RACING AND TRAINING FACILITIES IN THE STATE;

(3) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION AND IN
ACCORDANCE WITH AN EXECUTIVE ORDER OR A DETERMINATION OF THE STATE
RACING COMMISSION THAT A THOROUGHBRED RACING LICENSEE UNDER TITLE 11,
SUBTITLE 5 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE, FOR ANY REASON OTHER
THAN WEATHER, AN ACT OF GOD, OR OTHER CIRCUMSTANCES BEYOND THE
CONTROL OF THE LICENSEE, IS UNABLE TO SUPPORT THE MINIMUM NUMBER OF
LIVE RACING DAYS:

(I) MANAGE AND OVERSEE, IN COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE 11,
SUBTITLE 5 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE:

1. DAY–TO–DAY THOROUGHBRED HORSE RACING
OPERATIONS;

2. LIVE RACING DAYS; AND

3. ASSETS IN THE STATE; AND

(II) IN COORDINATION WITH THE MARYLAND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, ACQUIRE PROPERTY OR CONTRACTUAL INTERESTS
CONSISTENT WITH § 11–521 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE AND THE
PROCEDURES SET FORTH IN §§ 8–334 THROUGH 8–339 OF THE TRANSPORTATION
ARTICLE;

(4) ENTER INTO ANY AGREEMENTS, LEASES, PARTNERSHIPS, OR
CONTRACTS NECESSARY TO:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) SUPPORT AND SUSTAIN MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED
RACING AND PARI–MUTUEL WAGERING ACTIVITY; AND

(II) ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH STATE RACING COMMISSION
RULES AND REGULATIONS;

(5) AUTHORIZE OR CREATE A SEPARATE BODY, ENTITY, OR HOLDING
COMPANY TO CARRY OUT ANY PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(6) ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

(7) MAKE ANY OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS THE AUTHORITY DEEMS
NECESSARY.

(C) BEFORE THE AUTHORITY MAY EXERCISE THE POWERS AUTHORIZED
UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS SECTION, THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY
COMMITTEE SHALL REVIEW AND COMMENT ON THE EXECUTIVE ORDER OR
DETERMINATION OF THE STATE RACING COMMISSION DESCRIBED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS SECTION.

10–1004.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
AUTHORITY CONSISTS OF:

(I) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR
WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE:

1. ONE MEMBER FROM A LIST OF TWO INDIVIDUALS
NOMINATED BY THE MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED HORSEMEN’S ASSOCIATION;

2. ONE MEMBER FROM A LIST OF TWO INDIVIDUALS
NOMINATED BY THE MARYLAND HORSE BREEDERS ASSOCIATION; AND

3. THREE OTHER MEMBERS WHO POSSESS RELEVANT
INDUSTRY, BUSINESS, OR GOVERNMENT EXPERIENCE:

A. AT LEAST ONE OF WHOM SHALL HAVE EXPERIENCE IN
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT OR THE FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRIES; AND

B. ONE OF WHOM SHALL SERVE AS CHAIR;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

(II) THE CHAIR OR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
STADIUM AUTHORITY, OR THE DESIGNEE OF THE CHAIR OR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR;

(III) THE CHAIR OR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, OR THE DESIGNEE OF THE
CORPORATION’S BOARD OF DIRECTORS;

(IV) ONE MEMBER WHO IS NOT AN ELECTED OFFICIAL,
APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(V) ONE MEMBER WHO IS NOT AN ELECTED OFFICIAL,
APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(VI) THE FOLLOWING NONVOTING, EX OFFICIO MEMBERS,
APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

1. ONE MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY WHO RESIDES
NEAR LAUREL PARK RACE COURSE;

2. ONE MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY WHO RESIDES
NEAR PIMLICO RACE COURSE; AND

3. ONE MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY WHO RESIDES
NEAR THE BOWIE RACE COURSE TRAINING CENTER PROPERTY; AND

(VII) ONE NONVOTING, EX OFFICIO MEMBER OF THE STATE
RACING COMMISSION, DESIGNATED BY A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE
STATE RACING COMMISSION.

(2) A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE AUTHORITY MAY NOT
HAVE A DIRECT INTEREST IN THOROUGHBRED HORSE RACING AS AN OWNER,
TRAINER, OR LICENSEE.

(B) (1) THE TERM OF A MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

(2) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(3) THE TERMS OF THE INITIAL FIVE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE
GOVERNOR SHALL BE STAGGERED.

(C) (1) FIVE MEMBERS OF THE AUTHORITY ARE A QUORUM.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) ACTION BY THE AUTHORITY REQUIRES THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE
OF AT LEAST FIVE MEMBERS OF THE AUTHORITY.

(D) A MEMBER OF THE AUTHORITY:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
AUTHORITY; AND

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

10–1005.

(A) THE AUTHORITY MAY HIRE AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR WHO SERVES AS
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE AUTHORITY.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL:

(1) DIRECT AND SUPERVISE THE ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIVITIES OF
THE AUTHORITY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS REGULATIONS AND POLICIES;

(2) ATTEND ALL MEETINGS OF THE AUTHORITY;

(3) KEEP MINUTES OF ALL PROCEEDINGS OF THE AUTHORITY;

(4) APPROVE ALL ACCOUNTS FOR SALARIES, PER DIEM PAYMENTS,
AND ALL ALLOWABLE EXPENSES OF THE AUTHORITY, ITS EMPLOYEES, AND ITS
CONSULTANTS;

(5) APPROVE ALL EXPENSES INCIDENTAL TO THE OPERATION OF THE
AUTHORITY;

(6) REPORT AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE AUTHORITY ON
THE MERITS AND STATUS OF ANY PROPOSED FACILITY; AND

(7) PERFORM THE OTHER DUTIES THAT THE AUTHORITY REQUIRES
TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL SERVE AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
AUTHORITY.

(D) (1) THE AUTHORITY MAY EMPLOY OR RETAIN STAFF AS DEEMED
NECESSARY OR ADVISABLE, INCLUDING CONSULTANTS, ENGINEERS, ARCHITECTS,

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

ACCOUNTANTS, FINANCIAL EXPERTS, CONSTRUCTION EXPERTS AND PERSONNEL,
SUPERINTENDENTS, MANAGERS, AND OTHER PROFESSIONAL PERSONNEL.

(2) SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL OF THE AUTHORITY AND PURSUANT
TO ITS APPROVED BUDGET, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL DETERMINE THE
COMPENSATION OF ALL STAFF THAT THE AUTHORITY EMPLOYS OR RETAINS.

(E) (1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL IS THE LEGAL ADVISOR TO THE
AUTHORITY.

(2) WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE
AUTHORITY MAY RETAIN ANY ADDITIONAL LEGAL COUNSEL AS NECESSARY.

(F) (1) WITH RESPECT TO ANY AGREEMENTS ENTERED INTO BY THE
AUTHORITY UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE AUTHORITY IS EXEMPT FROM DIVISION II OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE AUTHORITY IS SUBJECT TO TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 AND TITLE
14, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

10–1006.

THE AUTHORITY MAY:

(1) ADOPT BYLAWS FOR THE CONDUCT OF ITS BUSINESS;

(2) ADOPT A SEAL;

(3) MAINTAIN OFFICES AT A PLACE IT DESIGNATES IN THE STATE;

(4) ACCEPT LOANS, GRANTS, OR ASSISTANCE OF ANY KIND FROM THE
FEDERAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT, A LOCAL GOVERNMENT, A COLLEGE OR
UNIVERSITY, OR A PRIVATE SOURCE;

(5) ENTER INTO CONTRACTS AND OTHER LEGAL INSTRUMENTS;

(6) RETAIN, EMPLOY, OR HIRE AN INDEPENDENT FIRM FOR THE
PURPOSE OF OPERATING AND MANAGING LIVE HORSE RACING IN THE STATE;

(7) SUE OR BE SUED;

(8) ACQUIRE, PURCHASE, HOLD, LEASE AS LESSEE, AND USE:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) A FRANCHISE, PATENT, OR LICENSE;

(II) STOCK OR OTHER FORMS OF OWNERSHIP INTERESTS IN
CORPORATIONS, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES, PARTNERSHIPS, OR OTHER
ENTITIES, WHETHER OPERATED FOR PROFIT OR NOT FOR PROFIT;

(III) ANY REAL, PERSONAL, MIXED, TANGIBLE, OR INTANGIBLE
PROPERTY; OR

(IV) AN INTEREST IN A PROPERTY LISTED UNDER THIS ITEM;

(9) SELL, LEASE AS LESSOR, TRANSFER, LICENSE, ASSIGN, OR
DISPOSE OF PROPERTY OR A PROPERTY INTEREST THAT IT ACQUIRES;

(10) FIX AND COLLECT RATES, RENTALS, FEES, ROYALTIES, AND
CHARGES FOR SERVICES AND RESOURCES IT PROVIDES OR MAKES AVAILABLE;

(11) CREATE, OWN, CONTROL, OR BE A MEMBER OF A CORPORATION,
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, PARTNERSHIP, OR OTHER ENTITY, WHETHER
OPERATED FOR PROFIT OR NOT FOR PROFIT;

(12) EXERCISE POWER USUALLY POSSESSED BY A PRIVATE
CORPORATION IN PERFORMING SIMILAR FUNCTIONS UNLESS TO DO SO WOULD
CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW;

(13) ASSIST WITH THE ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION OF HORSE
RACING INTERESTS; AND

(14) DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO CARRY OUT THE
POWERS GRANTED BY THIS SUBTITLE.

10–1007.

THE AUTHORITY IS EXEMPT FROM STATE AND LOCAL TAXES.

10–1008.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE MARYLAND RACING
OPERATIONS FUND.

(B) THERE IS A MARYLAND RACING OPERATIONS FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO ASSIST THE AUTHORITY IN
FINANCING THE ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION, REHABILITATION, OR OTHER

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

CAPITAL EXPENSES OR OPERATING EXPENSES FOR THOROUGHBRED RACETRACKS
IN THE STATE.

(D) THE AUTHORITY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND FROM THE RACING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCING FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–657.3 OF
THIS TITLE;

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(H) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

170. the Cannabis Public Health Fund; [and]

171. the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund; AND

172. THE MARYLAND RACING OPERATIONS FUND.

11–203.

(J) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 AND TITLE 14,
SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS ARTICLE, THIS DIVISION II DOES NOT APPLY TO THE
MARYLAND THOROUGHBRED RACETRACK OPERATING AUTHORITY.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Chapter 590 of the Acts of 2020

SECTION 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, in addition to the funds
otherwise available for racing and community development project costs under this Act and
notwithstanding the limitations under § 10–657.3 of the Economic Development Article, as
enacted by Section 1 of this Act, [at least $1,000,000 but not exceeding] $1,500,000 of the
funds transferred to the Racing and Community Development Facilities Fund established
under § 10–657.3 of the Economic Development Article in accordance with § 9–1A–29(d)(2)
of the State Government Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall be transferred to
the City of Bowie, PROVIDED THAT A JOINT USE AGREEMENT HAS BEEN EXECUTED
BETWEEN THE CITY OF BOWIE AND BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 11–519 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE, AS ENACTED BY SECTION
1 OF THIS ACT, AND SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED AS FOLLOWS:

(1) NOT MORE THAN $100,000 FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN AND
ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS PRIOR TO THE ACQUISITION OF THE BOWIE RACE
COURSE TRAINING CENTER PROPERTY; AND

(2) THE REMAINDER for remediation costs of the Bowie Race Course
Training Center property[, provided that a joint use agreement has been executed between
the City of Bowie and Bowie State University in accordance with § 11–519 of the Business
Regulation Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act].

Chapter 344 of the Acts of 2022

Section 1(3)

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 111

DA03 MARYLAND STADIUM AUTHORITY

(B) [Pimlico Race Course Demolition. Provide funds for the
demolition of existing structures at the Pimlico Race Course
(Baltimore City)] MARYLAND RACING OPERATIONS FUND.
PROVIDE FUNDS FOR THE ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION,
REHABILITATION, OR OTHER CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
FOR THOROUGHBRED RACETRACKS (STATEWIDE) ............. 5,000,000

SA25 DIVISION OF DEVELOPMENT FINANCE
(Statewide)

(B) [Laurel Park – Backstretch Housing. Provide funds for the
acquisition, planning, design, construction, repair, renovation,
reconstruction, site improvement, and capital equipping of
backstretch housing facilities at Laurel Park (Anne Arundel
County)] MARYLAND RACING OPERATIONS FUND.
PROVIDE FUNDS FOR THE ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION,
REHABILITATION, OR OTHER CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
FOR THOROUGHBRED RACETRACKS …………………………... 10,000,000

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2023, the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority established under §
10–1002 of the Economic Development Article, as enacted by Section 2 of this Act, shall
report to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Appropriations
Committee, and the House Ways and Means Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article, on:

(1) the feasibility of establishing at least two alternative thoroughbred
training facilities in the State;

(2) a review of best practices for thoroughbred racing industry operating
models and recommendations for operating models in the State; and

(3) the progress of the Pimlico and Laurel Park racing facility
redevelopment plans under Chapter 590 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2020.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
take effect October 1, 2023.

SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
5 of this Act, this Act shall take effect June 1, 2023. Section 2 of this Act shall remain
effective for a period of 4 years and 1 month and, at the end of June 30, 2027, Section 2 of
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 111 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, April 24, 2023.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14