START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 442

Chapter 442

(Senate Bill 709)

AN ACT concerning

Motor Vehicles – Commercial Driver’s Licenses and Instructional Permits
– Revisions

FOR the purpose of altering the expiration date for a commercial driver’s instructional
permit held by certain individuals; exempting a holder of a commercial driver’s
license who applies for renewal from the requirement to pass a vision test if the
holder has a current certificate of physical examination on file with the Motor Vehicle
Administration; and generally relating to commercial driver’s licenses and
instructional permits.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 16–105(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 16–105(e) and 16–115(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

16–105.

(a) (1) Any individual who desires to obtain an original driver’s license under
this subtitle or to be licensed in a class for which the individual is not already licensed
under this subtitle shall apply to the Administration for the desired driver’s license.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, before issuing a
driver’s license, the Administration shall issue to each applicant a learner’s instructional
permit. The learner’s instructional permit shall identify clearly the class of license for which
the applicant has applied.

(3) (i) Each applicant for a learner’s instructional permit who is under
the age of 16 years shall present to the Administration a copy of the applicant’s school
attendance record.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 442 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) The Administration may not issue a learner’s instructional
permit to an applicant under the age of 16 years if the applicant’s school attendance record
indicates more than 10 unexcused absences during the prior school semester.

(e) (1) This subsection only applies to an individual who holds a license and
who seeks a different class license to drive a motor vehicle that, under the individual’s
current license, the individual is not authorized to drive.

(2) The holder of a learner’s instructional permit may not take the driver’s
license examination sooner than 14 days after the permit is issued.

(3) The 14 days’ requirement may be waived if a subsequent learner’s
instructional permit is issued or applied for.

(4) A learner’s instructional permit issued to an individual described in
paragraph (1) of this subsection expires 180 days after date of issuance.

(5) A COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S INSTRUCTIONAL PERMIT ISSUED TO AN
INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION EXPIRES 1 YEAR
AFTER THE DATE OF ISSUANCE.

16–115.

(i) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) [and], (3), AND (5) of this
subsection, the Administration shall require every individual applying for renewal of a
driver’s license to pass a vision test as prescribed by the Administration.

(2) (i) The Administration shall accept a certification of acceptable
visual acuity from a licensed physician or optometrist instead of requiring the actual test
provided for in this subsection.

(ii) The examination for which certification is made shall take place
within 2 years of the date of application for renewal.

(3) An individual at least 21 years of age but under the age of 40 years may
apply for renewal of a driver’s license electronically or by mail or other means authorized
by the Administration without taking a vision test if the applicant has passed a vision test
authorized by the Administration within the previous 9 years.

(4) (i) If the Administration has reason to believe that an individual is
a safety hazard by reason of a vision deficiency, the Administration may require the vision
test provided for in this subsection at a time other than renewal of a driver’s license.

(ii) The Administration may adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this subsection.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 442

(5) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HOLDS A COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE
AND APPLIES FOR RENEWAL IS EXEMPT FROM THE REQUIREMENT TO PASS A VISION
TEST IF THE INDIVIDUAL HAS A CURRENT CERTIFICATE OF PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
ON FILE WITH THE ADMINISTRATION, AS REQUIRED UNDER 49 C.F.R. §§ 391.43 AND
391.45.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3