START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 709 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 709 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Motor Vehicles - Commercial Driver's Licenses and Instructional Permits - 
Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the term of a commercial driver’s instructional permit from 
180 days to one year. The bill also exempts a holder of a commercial driver’s license (CDL) 
who applies for renewal from the requirement to pass a vision test if the individual has a 
current certificate of physical examination on file with the Motor Vehicle Administration 
(MVA), as required under specified federal regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by approximately 
$263,300 in FY 2024 and by $351,000 in subsequent years due to fewer reissuances of 
commercial driver’s instructional permits. TTF expenditures are not materially affected; 
however, MVA may realize operational efficiencies, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
($263,300) 
($351,000) 
($351,000) 
($351,000) 
($351,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($263,300) 
($351,000) 
($351,000) 
($351,000) 
($351,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 709/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Instructional Permits 
 
A learner’s instructional permit held by an individual who currently holds a driver’s license 
to operate one class of motor vehicle and desires a driver’s license for another class of 
vehicle expires 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit. 
 
Vision Tests 
 
Generally, MVA must require every individual applying for a renewal of a driver’s license 
to pass a vision test (as prescribed by MVA). However, MVA must also accept a 
certification of acceptable visual acuity from a licensed physician in lieu of a test at an 
MVA site. The examination for which certification is made must take place within 
two years of the date of application for renewal. 
 
An individual who is age 21 or older – but younger than age 40 – may apply for a renewal, 
as specified, without taking a vision test if the applicant has passed an authorized vision 
test within the previous nine years. 
 
If MVA has reason to believe that an individual is a safety hazard due to a vision deficiency, 
it may require the vision test at any time. 
 
Background:  MVA advises it is seeking to extend the term of a commercial driver’s 
instructional permit from 180 days to one year to allow drivers more time to complete 
required training and to obtain on-the-road practice. Federal regulations, which used to 
limit the term of a commercial driver’s instructional permit to at most 180 days, now allow 
for up to a one-year term. 
 
MVA further advises that, in early 2022, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration 
(FMCSA) enacted a change requiring drivers to receive additional training prior to taking 
the commercial skills test, which, in turn, is required to receive a CDL. The additional 
training requirements have increased the overall amount of time required to obtain a CDL, 
and MVA notes that many drivers do not successfully complete all portions of the CDL 
skills testing in the initial 180-day term. In those instances, instructional permit holders 
must obtain a new 180-day instructional permit, which requires the individual to pass a 
written knowledge skills test again. 
 
MVA reports the retesting requirement can sometimes discourage drivers from continuing 
the process. Thus, extending the permit to a one-year term is anticipated to provide greater 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 709/ Page 3 
flexibility for drivers and, potentially, to ease the shortage of qualified CDL drivers in the 
State. 
 
With respect to the change to the requirement regarding a vision test, MVA advises that 
FMCSA requires MVA to have a valid biennial medical examiner’s certificate, which 
requires a vision test, on file for a CDL holder. The bill will allow MVA to consider that 
certificate a valid report for purposes of meeting the statutory vision test requirement. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Because the bill extends the term of a commercial driver’s 
instructional permit (from 180 days to one year), MVA anticipates fewer individuals will 
apply for a second instructional permit. 
 
Under the bill, MVA estimates that approximately 3,900 fewer individuals will seek a 
second instructional permit on an annual basis. The fee for the instructional permit is $90; 
thus, TTF revenues decrease by approximately $351,000 annually ($263,250 in fiscal 2024 
due to the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date). 
 
As noted above, if an individual does not complete the requirements for a CDL within the 
current 180-day timeframe, the individual must again pass a written knowledge skills test. 
Because fewer instructional permit reissuances will be necessary under the bill, MVA will 
need to retest less often. As a result, administrative efficiencies may be realized. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 709/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Vehicle Laws - Commercial Learner’s Permit Issued for a Term of 
One Year 
 
BILL NUMBER: SB0709 
 
PREPARED BY: MDOT MVA 
(Dept./Agency) 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
    X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
______ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4