START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 719 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 719 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland 
Energy Administration) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Public Safety - State Fuel Security Program 
 
   
This departmental bill establishes a State Fuel Security Program, administered and 
enforced by the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA), and authorizes certain 
collection, analysis, and distribution of energy-related data by MEA to carry out the 
program. The parameters of the program are otherwise largely undefined. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a direct, material effect on State finances. 
MEA and other affected State agencies can implement the bill with existing resources. The 
bill’s administrative penalty provisions are not anticipated to materially affect State 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a direct, material effect on local government 
finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MEA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.)  
  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
State Fuel Security Program Established 
 
The bill establishes a State Fuel Security Program, administered and enforced by MEA. 
MEA must (1) maintain plans and procedures to carry out the program and (2) adopt 
regulations for the administration and enforcement of the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 719/ Page 2 
The program applies to (1) motor gasoline; (2) middle distillate; (3) propane; (4) residual 
fuel, except as specified; and (5) aviation gasoline. 
 
Data Collection, Analysis, and Distribution  
 
To carry out the program, MEA is authorized to collect energy-related data to inform its 
evaluations and decisions regarding energy, as well as those of State and federal agencies 
and the public. MEA may require a prime supplier, supplier, or wholesale 
purchaser-reseller to provide necessary information. MEA must coordinate with the 
Department of Information Technology to ensure that the collected data is transmitted and 
held securely. 
 
“Prime supplier” means a supplier that makes the first sale of a State fuel security product 
(a fuel product listed above to which the program applies), intended for consumption in the 
State, into the State distribution system. 
 
“Supplier” means a business entity or a part or subsidiary of a business entity that supplies, 
sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes, including by consignment, a State fuel security 
product to consumers or wholesale purchaser-resellers. 
 
“Wholesale purchaser-reseller” means a business entity that (1) purchases, receives 
through transfer, or otherwise obtains, including by consignment, a State fuel security 
product and (2) resells or transfers the State fuel security product to other purchasers 
without substantially changing its form. 
 
MEA is also authorized to maintain up-to-date reports on the supply, demand, and price of 
various energy resources, including (1) State fuel security products; (2) wholesale 
electricity; (3) coal; (4) natural gas; and (5) petroleum. In maintaining those reports, MEA 
must use data available from existing State and federal sources to the extent practicable. 
 
MEA must coordinate with the Maryland Department of Emergency Management to 
develop an information distribution plan to disseminate energy-related information to the 
general public and relevant State and federal agencies. Data disseminated to the public 
under the information distribution plan may not create a competitive advantage for or a 
disadvantage to the person who supplied the energy-related data. MEA must maintain 
confidentiality of all data that may create a competitive advantage or disadvantage that is 
unknown to competitors. In the event that data collected pursuant to the bill is stolen, 
breached, compromised, or otherwise released in an unauthorized manner, MEA must 
inform all parties that provided the data within 72 hours after learning of the release. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 719/ Page 3 
Administrative Penalties 
 
A person who violates the bill’s provisions, or a regulation adopted under the bill, is subject 
to an administrative penalty of up to $1,000 for a first violation and up to $5,000 for a 
second or subsequent violation. 
 
Current Law:  Among its duties, MEA must collect, analyze, and evaluate statistics and 
information related to energy use, conservation, consumption, and energy production and 
coordinate information related to energy resources, including electricity, natural gas, and 
the production of oil and natural gas, with specified State entities. 
 
MEA is also responsible for aspects of the State’s preparedness for, and management of, 
general energy emergencies and shortfalls. MEA must: 
 
 
prepare contingency plans for mitigating the impact of any severe shortage of fuel 
resources, including middle distillate oil, motor gasoline, residual fuel oil, and 
propane gas, on various classes of consumers; 
 
work with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) in preparing and training for an 
energy emergency response; 
 
maintain communications, including computerized electronic communication, with 
DOE and with neighboring states to obtain and share energy data pertaining to 
energy emergencies; and 
 
collect, analyze, evaluate, and maintain on a proprietary basis so as to preserve 
confidentiality of its source, data related to managing an energy emergency or 
shortfall. 
 
Background:  A previous fuel security program, the State Standby Petroleum Fuel 
Set-Aside Program, was established in 1982 and terminated in 2010. It authorized the State 
to assign a portion of the motor gasoline, middle distillate, propane, certain residual oil, 
and aviation gasoline received in the State to priority activities if the Governor declared a 
state of emergency due to a severe shortfall of any of those fuels. According to MEA, the 
program did not provide the agency with sufficient authority to collect necessary data to 
maintain reports of fuel levels and capacity within the State and did not provide sufficient 
enforcement authority to encourage compliance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 719/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):   Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Public Service 
Commission; Maryland Environmental Service; Maryland Institute for Emergency 
Medical Services Systems; Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; Baltimore City 
Public Schools; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal 
Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 4, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 4, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 719/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Safety – State Fuel Security Program 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 719 
  
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Landon R. Fahrig, Esq. 
  
   
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X     
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
           
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
MEA0005 will have little impact on Maryland small businesses. Businesses that store fuels 
regulated by MEA under the statute will incur minimal administrative burdens. 
 

END OF PAGE 5