START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 707 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 707 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Police) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations 
 
Public Safety - Deputy State Fire Marshal - Probationary Status and Promotion 
 
 
This departmental bill requires each deputy State fire marshal, including an individual who 
is appointed to the Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) for training before regular 
assignment as a deputy State fire marshal, to remain in probationary status for a period of 
two years after the date of appointment to OSFM. In addition, the bill specifies that, on 
promotion, a deputy State fire marshal is entitled to the pay specified for the new rank in 
the same step that the deputy State fire marshal occupied before promotion; however, if 
the step that the deputy State fire marshal occupied before promotion is higher than that 
held by a deputy State fire marshal who is already in the rank and has equal or higher total 
service time, on promotion, the deputy State fire marshal is entitled only to the pay 
specified for the new rank in the next lower step than the deputy State fire marshal occupied 
before promotion. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of State Police (DSP) has determined that this 
bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 707/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each police employee, including an individual who is appointed to DSP for 
training before regular assignment as a police employee, must remain in probationary status 
for a period of two years after the date of appointment to the department. Each civilian 
employee must remain in probationary status for six months. 
 
The Secretary must develop a pay plan for police employees, DSP communications 
operators, and DSP communications supervisors that includes the ranks and the grades 
within ranks that the Secretary considers appropriate. The pay plan is subject to approval 
by the Secretary of Budget and Management and is effective on approval by the Governor 
only to the extent that sufficient money is included in the State budget. Each police 
employee, DSP communications operator, and DSP communications supervisor is entitled 
to receive the pay rate, including any increment based on length of service, set forth in the 
pay plan established by the Secretary. 
 
Each police employee is entitled to the pay rate for the next highest step within the police 
employee’s rank on (1) each July 1, if the police employee was a police employee on 
July 1, 1967, or (2) each anniversary of the date of employment, for all other police 
employees. On promotion, a police employee is entitled to the pay specified for the new 
rank in the same step that the police employee occupied before promotion; however, if the 
step that the police employee occupied before promotion is higher than that held by a police 
employee who is already in the rank and has equal or higher total service time, on 
promotion, the police employee is entitled only to the pay specified for the new rank in the 
next lower step than the police employee occupied before promotion. 
 
Background:  DSP advises that the mandatory training for deputy State fire marshals 
exceeds the current six-month probationary period applicable to civilian employees of the 
department. The two-year probationary period is consistent with current standards for 
police employees within DSP and ensures adequate time for evaluation and completion of 
the basic, field, and technical core training to perform the job functions of a police 
employee appointed to OSFM. DSP reports that deputy State fire marshals have been 
treated the same as police employees within the department with regards to the 
probationary period, pay plan, and pay after promotion. This bill codifies the existing 
practice. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 707/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 14, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 707/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Safety – Deputy State Fire Marshal – Probationary Status and 
Promotion 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB707 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Department of State Police 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_XX_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4