START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 441

Chapter 441

(Senate Bill 705)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Certificate of Title – Surviving Spouse

FOR the purpose of prohibiting the Motor Vehicle Administration from charging a fee for
the issuance of a new certificate of title to a surviving spouse under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to fees for the issuance of a certificate of title
to a surviving spouse.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–114(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–802
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

13–114.

(d) (1) If the interest of an owner in a vehicle for which a certificate of title has
been issued passes to a legatee or distributee as a result of testamentary disposition or
intestate devolution:

(i) An application for a new certificate of title need not be made until
the expiration of the last annual registration in the name of the deceased owner; and

(ii) The certificate of title need not be submitted to the
Administration until the application for a new certificate of title is made.

(2) If title is assigned properly by the personal representative of the
deceased owner, a certificate of letters testamentary or of administration issued by a court
of competent jurisdiction in this State is sufficient authority for the Administration to
transfer the title of the vehicle of a deceased owner.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 441 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

13–802.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section and § 13–805 of this
subtitle, the fee for each certificate of title issued under this title is $100.

(b) (1) The fee for each certificate of title issued for a rental vehicle is $50.

(2) The fee for each certificate of title issued for an off–highway
recreational vehicle is $35.

(3) The fee for each certificate of title issued for a motor scooter or a moped
is $20.

(4) The fee for each certificate of title issued for a trailer with a gross
vehicle weight of 3,000 pounds or less is $50 if:

(i) The trailer is transferred to:

1. A spouse, child, grandchild, parent, sibling, grandparent,
father–in–law, mother–in–law, son–in–law, or daughter–in–law of the transferor; or

2. A niece or nephew of the transferor if the transferor is at
least 65 years of age at the time of the transfer; and

(ii) No money or other valuable consideration is involved in the
transfer.

(5) On the death of a joint owner of a vehicle, the Administration may not
charge a fee for a new certificate of title issued for the vehicle to another joint owner who
is the surviving spouse.

(6) ON THE DEATH OF A SOLE OWNER OF A VEHICLE, THE
ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT CHARGE A FEE FOR A NEW CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
ISSUED FOR THE VEHICLE TO A SURVIVING SPOUSE IF OWNERSHIP OF THE VEHICLE
IS TRANSFERRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 13–114 OF THIS TITLE.

(c) The Administration may not charge a fee for a certificate of title issued for a
vehicle that is transferred to a trust or from a trust to one or more beneficiaries in
accordance with § 14.5–1001 of the Estates and Trusts Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2