START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 823 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 823 
(Senator Carozza, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Annual State Park Pass - Discounts for Law Enforcement 
Officers and First Responders 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to provide a discount of at 
least $40 on annual State park passes for all first responders and law enforcement officers 
who are Maryland residents. “Annual State park pass” means a pass issued by DNR that 
allows the holder unlimited day-use entry to all State parks and State park facilities for 
one year. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues decrease minimally beginning in FY 2023, as 
discussed below. Expenditures are not expected to be materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to DNR regulations, the State park system is administered under 
the jurisdiction of the Maryland Park Service (MPS) to preserve and protect the best of 
Maryland’s natural and historic places for the enjoyment and appreciation of its citizens. 
The parks are managed to provide public benefits, including (1) natural resource 
conservation; (2) cultural and historic preservation; (3) watershed protection; (4) education 
and interpretation; and (5) nature-based outdoor recreation, including trails, picnicking, 
boating, camping, cabins, hunting, fishing, and swimming. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 823/ Page 2 
An individual may not make use of, or gain admittance to, a facility or activity in a State 
park for which there is a fee, unless the fee is paid. An individual age 62 or older must be 
admitted to day-use areas free of an admittance charge, if the individual submits proof of 
age and registers with MPS. In addition, an individual who has a disability that is 
permanent and substantially limits one or more major life activities must be admitted to 
day-use areas free of an admittance charge, if the individual registers with MPS. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues decrease annually, beginning in fiscal 2023, as a 
result of the minimum $40 discount on annual State park passes for Maryland residents 
who are first responders and law enforcement officers. The cost of the annual pass for 
Maryland residents is $75. A reliable estimate of the decrease in revenues cannot be made, 
but the impact is expected to be minimal. 
 
For illustrative purposes, under one set of assumptions, special fund revenues decrease by 
an estimated $9,360 each fiscal year (with the exception of fiscal 2023, when the decrease 
is a fraction of that amount because the bill is only in effect for one month of the 
fiscal year). This illustrative example is based on the following information and 
assumptions:   
 
 
first responders and law enforcement officers make up approximately 2% of the 
adult population in the State, consistent with a nationwide percentage calculated 
using U.S. Census Bureau data for the U.S. adult population and an estimate of the 
number of first responders and law enforcement officers across the country; 
 
11,703 annual State park passes were purchased in calendar 2022 and approximately 
the same number of annual passes are purchased in future years; 
 
the percentage of annual State park passes purchased by first responders and law 
enforcement officers is equivalent to the percentage of the adult population in the 
State that is assumed to be first responders and law enforcement officers (2%); and 
 
pursuant to the bill’s authority, first responders and law enforcement officers receive 
a $40 discount on annual State park passes (although under the bill, DNR could 
provide a discount of more than $40). 
 
The decrease in revenues shown in the illustrative example may be offset to some extent if 
the discount itself results in first responders and law enforcement officers purchasing the 
annual pass – when, in the absence of the bill, they would not have done so – and paying 
the remaining discounted fee ($35, if the discount provided under the bill is $40). 
 
DNR also currently waives park day-use fees for veterans, active-duty military personnel, 
and members of the Maryland National Guard. To the extent first responders and law 
enforcement officers are veterans or members of the National Guard, they may have less 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 823/ Page 3 
of an incentive to purchase an annual pass, even with the bill’s discount (though the annual 
State park pass does have additional benefits). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Census Bureau; 
U.S. Department of Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
Enrolled - May 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3