START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 577

Chapter 577

(Senate Bill 830)

AN ACT concerning

Environmental Health Specialists and ~~On–Site~~ ~~Sewage~~ ~~Disposal~~ ~~Systems~~ Well
and Septic Systems Permitting – ~~Reform~~ Studies
(Environmental Health Systems Support Act of 2023)

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environment~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~ ~~and~~ ~~make~~
~~available~~ ~~certain~~ ~~standardized~~ ~~permit~~ ~~forms;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~local~~ ~~health~~ ~~department~~ ~~to~~
~~provide~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~applicant~~ ~~with~~ ~~certain~~ ~~information~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~to~~ ~~promote~~ ~~consistent~~ ~~standards~~ ~~and~~
~~regulations~~ ~~governing~~ ~~environmental~~ ~~health~~ ~~specialists,~~ ~~host~~ ~~certain~~ ~~monthly~~
~~information~~ ~~meetings,~~ ~~and~~ ~~develop~~ ~~an~~ ~~online~~ ~~tracking~~ ~~system~~ ~~for~~ ~~on–site~~ ~~sewage~~
~~disposal~~ ~~system~~ ~~permits;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Budget~~ ~~and~~ ~~Management,~~ ~~on~~
~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~ ~~to~~ ~~increase~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~full–time~~ ~~employees~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environment~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~permanent,~~ ~~classified~~
~~positions;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environmental~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Specialist~~ ~~Student~~ ~~Loan~~
~~Forgiveness~~ ~~Program;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~an~~ ~~applicant~~ ~~selected~~ ~~to~~ ~~participate~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~
~~to~~ ~~sign~~ ~~a~~ ~~contract~~ ~~agreeing~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~service~~ ~~obligation;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~
~~Student~~ ~~Financial~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~to~~ ~~make~~ ~~certain~~ ~~annual~~ ~~disbursements~~ ~~directly~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~
~~Program~~ ~~participant~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ requiring the Department of the
Environment and the Maryland Department of Health, in conjunction with the
Board of Environmental Health Specialists, to conduct a certain study; requiring the
Department of the Environment, ~~to~~ ~~contract~~ in consultation with the Department of
Legislative Services and the University of Maryland Agriculture and Food Systems
Extension Program, to conduct a certain study; and generally relating to studying
environmental health specialists and well and septic systems permitting.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Environment~~
~~Section~~ ~~9–1114~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2014~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Occupations~~
~~Section~~ ~~21–103~~ ~~and~~ ~~21–104~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2022~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Education~~
~~Section~~ ~~18–3901~~ ~~and~~ ~~18–3902~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~39.~~
~~Environmental~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Specialist~~ ~~Student~~ ~~Loan~~ ~~Forgiveness~~ ~~Program”~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 577 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Environment~~

~~9–1114.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP AND MAKE AVAILABLE
STANDARDIZED PERMIT FORMS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF ON–SITE SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.

(B) IF A LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT DENIES AN APPLICATION FOR THE
INSTALLATION OF AN ON–SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, THE LOCAL HEALTH
~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~APPLICANT~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~ON~~ ~~HOW~~ ~~TO~~
APPEAL THE DECISION TO THE DEPARTMENT.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Occupations~~

~~21–103.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
~~ENVIRONMENT,~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) PROMOTE CONSISTENT STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS UNDER
THIS TITLE;

(2) HOST MONTHLY INFORMATIONAL MEETINGS ON THE
~~INTERPRETATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~TITLE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CORRESPONDING~~
~~REGULATIONS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~GOVERNMENT~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~WORK~~ ~~WITH~~
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALISTS; AND

(3) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, PRODUCE A
~~TIMELINE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FUNDING~~ ~~ESTIMATE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~DEVELOPING~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ONLINE~~ ~~TRACKING~~ ~~SYSTEM~~
~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~STATUS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INSTALLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~
PERMITS FOR AN ON–SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP THE TRACKING SYSTEM
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION IN CONSULTATION WITH
THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 577

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT WITH PERMIT APPLICANTS,
PERMIT HOLDERS, AND LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS IN EVALUATING THE
TRACKING SYSTEM FOR ON–SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT
~~APPLICATIONS.~~

~~21–104.~~

(A) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND
MANAGEMENT SHALL INCREASE THE NUMBER OF FULL–TIME EMPLOYEES IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT BY THREE PERMANENT, CLASSIFIED
~~POSITIONS.~~

(B) THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT SHALL BUDGET THE
THREE POSITIONS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AS
~~FOLLOWS:~~

(1) TWO ADMINISTRATORS; AND

(2) ONE ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL WITH EXPERIENCE IN
ENVIRONMENTAL LAW ASSIGNED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND
DESIGNATED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO ADVISE ON MATTERS RELATED TO
PERMITTING, INCLUDING PERMITS FOR ON–SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.

(C) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025, AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$350,000 TO FUND THE THREE PERMANENT, CLASSIFIED POSITIONS REQUIRED
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AND RELATED OPERATING COSTS.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Education~~

~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~39.~~ ~~ENVIRONMENTAL~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~SPECIALIST~~ ~~STUDENT~~ ~~LOAN~~
~~FORGIVENESS~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

~~18–3901.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES” MEANS CONDITIONS THAT MAY
PRECLUDE A PARTICIPANT FROM FULFILLING THE SERVICE COMMITMENT,
INCLUDING DEATH, TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY, OR TEMPORARY
DISABILITY LASTING MORE THAN 2 YEARS.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 577 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) “ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
PRACTICES AS AN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST.

(D) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST
~~STUDENT~~ ~~LOAN~~ ~~FORGIVENESS~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

(E) “QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL LOAN” MEANS A GOVERNMENT,
COMMERCIAL, OR FOUNDATION LOAN FOR ACTUAL COSTS PAID FOR TUITION,
REASONABLE EDUCATION EXPENSES, AND REASONABLE LIVING EXPENSES
~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~POSTSECONDARY~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ENVIRONMENTAL~~ ~~HEALTH~~
~~SPECIALIST.~~

~~18–3902.~~

(A) (1) THERE IS AN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST STUDENT
~~LOAN~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~REPAYMENT~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

(2) THE OFFICE SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE QUALIFIED
~~EDUCATIONAL~~ ~~LOAN~~ ~~FORGIVENESS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ENVIRONMENTAL~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~SPECIALISTS~~ ~~IN~~
THE STATE.

(C) TO BE ELIGIBLE TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM, AN INDIVIDUAL
~~SHALL:~~

(1) BE AN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST WORKING FOR A
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT IN THE STATE WITH AT LEAST 1 FULL YEAR OF
SERVICE; AND

(2) SUBMIT AN APPLICATION TO THE OFFICE, IN THE FORM AND
MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THE OFFICE.

(D) AN APPLICANT SELECTED TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM SHALL
~~SIGN~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONTRACT~~ ~~AGREEING~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMPLETE~~ ~~A~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~OBLIGATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~WORK~~ ~~IN~~
THE STATE FOR 3 YEARS.

(E) EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE OFFICE MAY SELECT ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS
FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM, WITHIN THE LIMITS OF AVAILABLE
~~FUNDING.~~

(F) (1) THE OFFICE SHALL MAKE ANNUAL DISBURSEMENTS DIRECTLY
TO A PARTICIPATING ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST OF $6,000 OR THE

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 577

BALANCE OF THE PARTICIPANT’S QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL LOANS, WHICHEVER IS
LESS, FOR EACH YEAR THAT A PARTICIPANT MEETS THE SERVICE OBLIGATION
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, UP TO A MAXIMUM OF 3 YEARS.

(2) DISBURSEMENTS UNDER THE PROGRAM ARE SUBJECT TO
APPLICABLE LAWS ON LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL TAXATION.

(G) (1) THE OFFICE MAY WAIVE AN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
SPECIALIST’S SERVICE OBLIGATION UNDER THE PROGRAM IF EMERGENCY
CIRCUMSTANCES PREVENT FULFILLMENT OF THE SERVICE OBLIGATION.

(2) IF AN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST PARTICIPATING IN
THE PROGRAM FAILS TO COMPLETE A FULL YEAR OF THE SERVICE OBLIGATION,
THE OFFICE MAY PRORATE THE LOAN FORGIVENESS PAYMENT FOR THAT SERVICE
~~YEAR.~~

(H) AN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST PARTICIPATING IN THE
~~PROGRAM~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) APPLY TO FEDERAL LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR WHICH THE
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST MAY QUALIFY; AND

(2) NOTIFY THE OFFICE IF THE INDIVIDUAL RECEIVES OTHER LOAN
REPAYMENT ASSISTANCE.

(I) (1) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF $150,000 TO THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE APPROPRIATION REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO A SPECIAL FUND, TO BE USED ONLY FOR:

(I) PROVIDING LOAN FORGIVENESS UNDER THE PROGRAM;
~~AND~~

(II) ADMINISTERING THE PROGRAM.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

(a) The Department of the Environment and the Maryland Department of Health,
in conjunction with the Board of Environmental Health Specialists, shall conduct a study
on staffing needs for environmental health specialists in local health departments.

(b) The study shall include:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 577 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) an analysis of the educational and licensing requirements for
environmental health specialists, including recommendations on any revisions to the
requirements to aid in recruitment and retention;

(2) an analysis of the competitiveness of wages for current environmental
health specialists compared to other states’ specialists and specialists in the private sector;
and

(3) an analysis of the feasibility of establishing an apprenticeship program
for environmental health specialists.

(c) On or before December 1, 2023, the Department of the Environment and the
Maryland Department of Health shall submit a report of their findings and
recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) The Department of the Environment, in consultation with the
Department of Legislative Services and ~~shall~~ ~~contract~~ ~~with~~ the University of Maryland
Agriculture and Food Systems Extension Program, ~~to~~ shall study the implications of the
delegation of the Department’s authority related to well and septic systems permitting to
the Maryland Department of Health.

(2) The study shall address:

(i) the benefits of and issues with the existing system of the
Department delegating authority related to well and septic systems;

(ii) lessons that can be drawn from other states’ administrative
structure and accountability measures; and

(iii) the optimal long–term staff organization structure to best
address issues of delays, communication, and customer service.

(3) In conducting the study, the ~~University~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Agriculture~~ ~~and~~
~~Food~~ ~~Systems~~ ~~Extension~~ ~~Program~~ Department of the Environment shall consult with
representatives from impacted stakeholder groups.

(b) (1) On or before December 1, 2023, the ~~University~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Agriculture~~
~~and~~ ~~Food~~ ~~Systems~~ ~~Extension~~ ~~Program~~ Department of the Environment shall submit ~~a~~ an
interim report of its findings and any recommendations for legislative or administrative
changes to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
the General Assembly.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 577

(2) On or before December 1, 2024, the Department of the Environment
shall submit a final report of its findings and any recommendations for legislative or
administrative changes to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2023. ~~Sections~~ ~~2~~ ~~and~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ It shall remain effective for a period of ~~1~~ ~~year~~ 2
years and, at the end of June 30, ~~2024,~~ ~~Sections~~ ~~2~~ ~~and~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ 2025, this Act, with no further
action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and
effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7