START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 801 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 801 
(Senators Hester and Jennings) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations and 
Economic Matters 
 
Economic Development - Cybersecurity - Cyber Maryland Program 
 
This bill establishes a Cyber Maryland Program in the Maryland Technology Development 
Corporation (TEDCO) to create a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, serve as a hub for State 
workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and generally coordinate cybersecurity 
and research and innovation in the State, among other things. The bill also creates the 
Cyber Maryland Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund to be administered by the program. 
The bill establishes and specifies the membership of the Cyber Maryland Board to 
(1) provide input on the strategic plan; (2) assist the executive director of the program in 
specified ways; and (3) coordinate with the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) and the 
Department of Commerce. Beginning December 1, 2026, the program in conjunction with 
TEDCO must submit an annual report on the operation and performance of the program to 
the Governor and the General Assembly. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must 
include an appropriation in the annual budget bill sufficient to cover specified staff for the 
program and may include an additional appropriation of $250,000 for the fund. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $690,000 in FY 2024, in accordance 
with budgeted amounts and under the assumptions discussed below; future years reflect 
elimination of one-time costs and inflation. Special fund revenues and expenditures for the 
Cyber Maryland Fund increase correspondingly as funds are received and used for 
authorized purposes. Board members must serve without compensation, and any expense 
reimbursements are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing resources. This 
bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
   
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$690,000 
$669,300 
$681,000 
$693,100 
$705,400 
GF Expenditure 
$690,000 
$669,300 
$681,000 
$693,100 
$705,400 
SF Expenditure 
$690,000 
$669,300 
$681,000 
$693,100 
$705,400 
Net Effect 
($690,000) 
($669,300) 
($681,000) 
($693,100) 
($705,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 801/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Beginning in FY 2024, revenues and expenditures may increase for local 
governments as a result of grants from the Maryland Cyber Fund, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For fiscal 2025 and each year thereafter, funds from the Dedicated Purpose 
Account (DPA) may be transferred to implement the bill. 
 
Cyber Maryland Program 
 
The purposes of the Cyber Maryland Program are to:   
 
 
create and execute a talent pipeline that materially reduces workforce vacancies by 
July 1, 2026; 
 
serve as a one-stop shop for employers seeking to leverage cyber workforce 
development programs offered by the State and its partners; 
 
inform cybersecurity training and education programs operated by public or private 
entities with industry-driven needs; 
 
build the most advanced local and State information technology (IT) workforce in 
the nation, which, to the maximum extent possible, reflects the racial, gender, 
ethnic, and geographic diversity of the State; 
 
coordinate and accelerate cybersecurity research and innovation in the State; and 
 
support the efforts of the Department of Information Technology to improve the 
State government’s cybersecurity posture, including State agencies, local 
government units, and critical infrastructure. 
 
The program must conduct ongoing research by collaborating with specified entities to 
collect and analyze real-time industry data to identify cybersecurity workforce needs as 
described in the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach. The 
program must use the results of its research to (1) increase the effectiveness of existing 
State cybersecurity workforce programs for employers in the State; (2) facilitate 
partnerships for new training and education programs to address the workforce needs 
identified in the program’s research; and (3) develop a statewide strategic plan for 
cybersecurity workforce development. 
 
The program must ensure that the outcomes of the program are inclusive and, to the 
maximum extent possible, reflect the racial, gender, ethnic, and geographic diversity of the 
State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 801/ Page 3 
The program’s executive director must be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of TEDCO and must have relevant qualifications and 
experience with the activities and purposes of the program. 
 
The bill expresses legislative intent that the program immediately consider the 
Cybersecurity Pathways Across Maryland as an immediate, proven, and scalable 
mechanism to fill jobs. It further expresses intent that the program, in implementing the 
strategic plan, consider the role and scale of specified programs, the development of cyber 
range scenarios, and the provision of cyber range training through appropriate partners. 
 
Cyber Maryland Fund 
 
The Cyber Maryland Fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget and any 
money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The Cyber Maryland 
Fund exists to facilitate the Cyber Maryland Program’s achievement of the program’s 
specified purposes and support innovative approaches to meeting cybersecurity workforce 
needs. Funds may only be used for administering the program and providing grants to 
elementary and secondary schools, institutions of higher education, including community 
colleges, for-profit corporations, and nonprofit organizations to operate cybersecurity 
programs based on the strategic plan of the Cyber Maryland Program. Expenditures from 
the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. 
 
In fiscal 2025 and annually thereafter, and subject to the availability of funding, $250,000 
of the fund must be used for implementing the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline 
Management Approach. 
 
The Governor must include an appropriation in an amount sufficient for hiring individuals 
to conduct the duties of the Cyber Maryland Program, including an executive director and 
at least one administrator. 
 
Cyber Maryland Board 
 
The Cyber Maryland Board must generally provide advice and support to the 
Cyber Maryland Program, provide input on its strategic plan, assist the executive director 
of the program in specified ways, and coordinate with MDL and Commerce. 
 
The board chair may not be a State employee or the CEO of TEDCO. A member of the 
board may not receive compensation as a member of the board but is entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses. The Governor may remove an appointed member of the board 
for incompetence, misconduct, or failure to perform the duties of the position. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 801/ Page 4 
Cyber Warrior Diversity Program 
 
By July 1, 2024, and each year thereafter, the Maryland Higher Education Commission 
(MHEC), in consultation with the Cybersecurity Association of Maryland, Inc., must, if 
applicable, expand the Cyber Warrior Diversity Program (CWDP) to accommodate any 
changes in certification trends. At the end of each fiscal year, any unexpended funds 
allocated by MHEC under the program must revert to MHEC to be allocated for the 
upcoming fiscal year and be used to supplement, but not supplant, MHEC required 
appropriations for the upcoming year. The bill repeals the required methodology for 
MHEC’s annual allocation of funds – specifically on a pro-rata basis according to the most 
recent enrollment data – to Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), Bowie State 
University (BSU), Coppin State University (CSU), Morgan State University (MSU), the 
University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES), and the University of Maryland Baltimore 
County (UMBC) Training Centers. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 683 of 2021 codified the Center for Cybersecurity at UMBC and 
required the Governor to appropriate $3.0 million for the center annually beginning in 
fiscal 2023. The Center for Cybersecurity is housed within the College of Engineering and 
Information Technology at UMBC. The center provides interdisciplinary academic and 
research leadership, partnership, innovation, and outreach by streamlining academic 
research, workforce development, and technology incubation activities related to 
cybersecurity. By October 1 each year, the center must report on the use of State funds in 
the field of cybersecurity. 
 
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning 
 
The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) in MDL oversees 
the Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) program and State 
apprenticeship programs. 
 
The EARN program was established in 2013 to create industry-led partnerships to advance 
the skills of the State’s workforce, grow the State’s economy, and increase sustainable 
employment for working families. Specifically, the program provides general fund grants 
on a competitive basis for industry partnerships, workforce training programs, and 
job-readiness and skills training. Since fiscal 2018, EARN has received annual funding 
specifically for cyber and IT. DWDAL currently funds 17 active cyber/IT Strategic 
Industry Partnerships across the State. 
 
Cyber Warrior Diversity Program 
 
CWDPs are located at BCCC, BSU, CSU, MSU, UMES, and UMBC Training Centers to 
train students in computer networking and cybersecurity, including training to achieve 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 801/ Page 5 
specified CompTIA certifications. For fiscal 2020, and each fiscal year thereafter, the 
Governor must include an annual appropriation of $2.5 million for MHEC to provide grants 
to all of these institutions for their CWDPs. MHEC must annually allocate funds to those 
institutions on a pro-rata basis according to the most recent enrollment data for each 
institution’s CWDP as reported to the commission. Further, grants must be in the amount 
of at least $10,000 per student at BCCC, BSU, CSU, SU, and UMES and $500 per student 
at UMBC Training Centers. This funding must supplement, but not supplant, any funds 
that would otherwise be provided for each institution. 
 
Career and Technical Education Committee 
 
Chapter 36 of 2021 (Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation) created the Career 
and Technical Education (CTE) Committee as a unit within the Governor’s Workforce 
Development Board. The purpose of the committee is to build an integrated, globally 
competitive framework for providing CTE to Maryland students in public schools, 
postsecondary institutions, and the workforce. One of Maryland’s CTE programs of study 
is IT, with cybersecurity being an increasingly important part of IT programs. 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
 
TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 
to facilitate the creation of technology companies and encourage collaboration between 
these emerging businesses and federal and State research laboratories. TEDCO also aims 
to promote new research activity and investments that lead to business development in 
Maryland. For further information on TEDCO, see the Appendix – Maryland 
Technology Development Corporation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Cyber Maryland Program 
 
The bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in fiscal 2025 for an amount 
sufficient for hiring individuals to conduct the duties of the Cyber Maryland Program, 
including an executive director and at least one administrator. The bill also authorizes but 
does not require (1) the Governor to include $250,000 in the annual budget bill beginning 
in fiscal 2025 that, subject to the availability of funding, must be used for implementing 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach and (2) funds from 
DPA to be transferred by budget amendment to implement the bill beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $690,000 in 
general funds appropriated to TEDCO for the purpose of implementing the 
Cyber Maryland Program, including the addition of two staff, contingent on enactment of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 801/ Page 6 
this bill or its cross file (Senate Bill 801 or House Bill 1189); $250,000 of the budgeted 
funds must be used for implementing the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline 
Management Approach. In addition to the budgeted amount for fiscal 2024, this estimate 
assumes that sufficient general funds are provided each year thereafter to cover TEDCO’s 
full administrative expenses, which include staff, IT, and other overhead costs. 
 
The fiscal 2024 budgeted amount is more than sufficient to cover TEDCO’s estimated 
expenses of $688,000 in the first year of the program. This total includes $350,000 for 
two staff and related benefits; $40,000 for an online portal for employers seeking to 
leverage workforce development programs for the cybersecurity workforce; $250,000 for 
grants under the Talent Pipeline Management approach (five annually at $50,000 each); 
and the remaining $48,000 for marketing, IT, finance, and overhead costs. Annual costs 
are similar through fiscal 2028 as one-time expenses cease and salaries increase. TEDCO 
employees are not State employees. 
 
As the bill effectuates the contingent appropriation, general fund expenditures increase by 
$690,000 in fiscal 2024. General fund expenditures are assumed to increase by $669,300 
to $705,400 annually from fiscal 2025 through 2028 to provide sufficient funding for the 
program in the out-years. Sufficient funds for staffing are mandated beginning in 
fiscal 2025, and this analysis assumes continued annual discretionary appropriations of 
$250,000 to implement the Talent Pipeline Management Approach beginning in 
fiscal 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures for the Cyber Maryland Fund increase 
correspondingly as funds are received and used for authorized purposes. 
 
To the extent DPA funds are transferred via budget amendment in any year beginning in 
fiscal 2025, the effect on general fund expenditures is less. There is currently $152 million 
in DPA reserved for cybersecurity-related purposes. 
 
Higher education revenues (and expenditures) increase to the extent that public institutions 
of higher education receive grant funding under the program. 
 
Cyber Warrior Diversity Program 
 
The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $2.5 million for the 
program. The bill allows any unexpended funds allocated by MHEC at year end to revert 
to the commission for reallocation the following year. Any such impact has not been 
accounted for in this analysis. 
 
MHEC advises it currently employs a multi-step process to calculate the allocations for 
CWDP funds. MHEC first calculates an initial amount:  $10,000 per student, up to 
47 students per institution. The UMBC Training Centers are allocated $500 per student 
across all institutions, up to $120,000. Then, any unused funds (due to an institution 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 801/ Page 7 
reporting fewer than 47 students) are redistributed to the institutions with enrollment 
(except the UMBC Training Centers) on a pro-rata basis. In recent years, institutions have 
returned unused allocated funds primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Institutions that 
returned funds indicated that they did not use all of the funds due to changes in enrollment 
and unexpected shifts in institutional demands related to the pandemic. To the extent 
institutions utilize all allocated funds in future years, the provision in the bill has no effect. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Revenues and expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2024 to 
the extent that local governments receive grants from the Cyber Maryland Program Fund 
as called for in the strategic plan for new cybersecurity-related programs in local school 
systems or locally funded community colleges. The exact scale of the impact depends on 
the types of programming called for in the strategic plan and the funding decisions of the 
program and its board. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small cybersecurity companies, or small businesses that have a 
need for cybersecurity services, may benefit from increased coordination by State entities 
regarding cybersecurity workforce development and from a potentially larger 
cybersecurity workforce. Small businesses may also benefit from the expansion of the 
MDL program. The bill may bolster a more skilled and prepared cybersecurity workforce 
to meet the staffing demands of small businesses. Finally, small businesses may benefit 
from any additional funding received for cybersecurity programs as part of a grant from 
the program fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 753 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1189 (Delegate Forbes, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations and Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation; Department of Commerce; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 801/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - April 5, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 801/ Page 9 
Appendix – Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development:  from early stage and technology transfer to growth 
stage.  
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The Maryland Venture Fund and a biotechnology grant program were 
transferred to TEDCO in fiscal 2016. The following programs have been established by 
legislation since 2021:   
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund:  The Pre-Seed Builder Fund supports the development of 
start-up companies run by entrepreneurs from socially or economically 
disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder access to traditional forms of capital and 
executive networks at the pre-seed stage. The Governor must include appropriations 
in the budget bill in the following amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million 
in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund:  The Inclusion Fund provides capital investment in 
technology-based businesses that (1) would qualify for investment under the Builder 
Fund, as provided in TEDCO regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals 
who demonstrate economic disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at 
least one year after the time of investment by an individual or individuals who 
demonstrate economic disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program:  The program encourages the 
establishment and expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor 
must include an appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 through 2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund:  The Maryland Equity Investment Fund 
allows unappropriated general fund surplus to be invested in a “qualified business” 
– with a goal to increase private equity and venture capital in the State – and the 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 801/ Page 10 
interest earnings and investment returns realized to the benefit of participants of the 
several pension systems managed by the State Retirement and Pension System. For 
fiscal 2024, the Governor must include an appropriation in the budget bill to the 
fund equal to 10% of the unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of 
$10.0 million from the second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, 
with a corresponding decrease in the typical required appropriation. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program:  The SBIR/STTR Program allows eligible small 
businesses to apply for State awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal 
grants, limited to $25,000 for Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. 
TEDCO may make up to 20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per 
fiscal year for a total of $1.25 million. 
 
For a more thorough discussion of TEDCO’s structure and programs, including how its 
programs support companies in different stages of development, see “Chapter 13. 
Economic Development and Business Regulation” of Volume II – Government Services in 
Maryland of the 2022 Legislative Handbook Series. 
 

END OF PAGE 10