START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 848 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 848 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program in the Department 
of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). The purpose of the program is to 
provide vouchers and housing assistance payments for low-income families that are 
currently on a waiting list under the federal Housing Choice Voucher Program (HCVP) for 
housing in units approved by DHCD or a public housing agency (PHA). In general, the 
program must be administered in accordance with federal guidelines for HCVP. The 
Governor must include $10.0 million in the annual budget bill for the program in 
fiscal 2025 through 2027 and sufficient amounts in future years to fund the same number 
of vouchers. The bill authorizes DHCD to adopt implementing regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $255,400 in FY 2024 for DHCD 
administration. General fund expenditures increase by approximately $10.3 million in 
FY 2025 through 2027 and by approximately $10.6 million in FY 2028, reflecting ongoing 
administrative costs and mandated funding. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0.26 
10.29 
10.30 
10.31 
10.62 
Net Effect 
($0.26) 
($10.29) 
($10.30) 
($10.31) 
($10.62)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent they 
receive and distribute funding under the State program. Local administrative costs are 
partially offset by the 6% allocation of program funding for PHA staffing expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 848/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program – Established 
 
DHCD must administer the State program and issue vouchers and housing assistance 
payments in political subdivisions without PHAs. Political subdivisions with 
PHA-administrators under HCVP must administer the State program and issue vouchers 
and housing assistance payments to those eligible for, but who are not currently receiving, 
vouchers under HCVP. 
 
Eligibility 
 
To be eligible for a housing assistance payment under the State program, a family must 
(1) reside in the State; (2) be on the waiting list for the federal program; and (3) meet 
low-income eligibility limits under HCVP or income requirements as determined by the 
PHA. 
 
DHCD and each PHA must equally prioritize vouchers and housing assistance payments 
for families that meet specified demographic criteria. When an offer of assistance is made, 
a family has 30 days to provide documentation to verify their income with DHCD or the 
PHA. 
 
Payment Standards 
 
DHCD or a PHA must calculate payment standards and housing assistance payments under 
the State program in accordance with guidelines for HCVP. A family assisted under the 
State program must be expected to pay not more than 30% of its monthly adjusted gross 
income for rent and utilities, as determined by DHCD or the PHA. 
 
Housing assistance payments for a family must continue for up to five years or until an 
HCVP voucher becomes available, whichever occurs first. 
 
Accommodations 
 
A family may request that DHCD or a PHA approve a live-in aide to provide necessary 
supportive services for a family member who is a person with a disability. DHCD or a PHA 
must reasonably modify its policies, procedures, and rules to allow a family that includes 
a person with a disability to have a live-in aide. DHCD or a PHA may not include a live-in 
aide’s income when determining a family’s income eligibility under the State program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 848/ Page 3 
Inspection Requirements 
 
DHCD or a PHA must conduct annual inspections of each unit rented using housing 
assistance payments to ensure the continued compliance with specified federal housing 
quality standards. Inspections must occur on or before the initial lease date and annually 
thereafter. 
 
For a unit located in a building with 3 to 49 units, the property owner must provide DHCD 
or the PHA with a certificate of occupancy that has been completed within one year; for 
buildings with 50 units or more, the property owner must provide DHCD or the PHA with 
an inspection certificate. 
 
Subsidy Standards 
 
DHCD must ensure that subsidy standards for unit selection comply with federal guidelines 
under HCVP, including the mandate to provide for the smallest number of bedrooms 
needed to house a family without overcrowding. 
 
Denial and Termination of Assistance 
 
The bill authorizes DHCD or a PHA to deny assistance under the State program. DHCD 
or a PHA must deny assistance to sex offenders subject to lifetime registration. DHCD or 
a PHA may deny assistance on a finding that any individual residing in a unit rented using 
assistance from the State program has been convicted of a drug-related crime under State 
law or a violent crime. If DHCD or a PHA denies assistance under the State program, 
DHCD or the PHA must promptly provide the applicant with a notice explaining the denial 
and indicating that the applicant may request an informal review. 
 
The bill also authorizes DHCD or a PHA to terminate assistance under the State program. 
DHCD or a PHA must terminate assistance under the State program for (1) families who 
were evicted under the State program for serious violations of the lease; (2) families who 
fail to sign any forms from DHCD or a PHA indicating consent to obtain information; and 
(3) sex offenders subject to lifetime registration. 
 
When determining the denial or termination of assistance under the State program, DHCD 
may consider all relevant circumstances if a family member violates specified obligations 
or has engaged in specified activities.  
 
DHCD or a PHA may prohibit other family members who participated in or were culpable 
for actions specified in the bill from residing in a unit rented using assistance from the State 
program. In making such a determination, DHCD or a PHA may consider specified 
mitigating factors. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 848/ Page 4 
Program Participation 
 
A family member that receives a voucher under the State program must (1) supply any 
information to DHCD or the PHA necessary for the administration of the State program; 
(2) notify DHCD or the PHA before vacating the unit; (3) use the unit only as a principal 
place of residence; and (4) maintain all utilities that are not paid through the housing 
assistance payment. A family that receives a voucher under the State program may not 
(1) own the unit that the assistance is provided for; (2) commit fraud in connection with 
the State program; (3) sublease or assign the lease or transfer the unit; or (4) allow anyone 
not on the lease to reside in the unit. 
 
DHCD or a PHA must give each family that receives assistance under the State program a 
written description of the family’s obligations under the State program, the grounds on 
which DHCD or the PHA may deny or terminate assistance under the State program, and 
the process to request an informal hearing. DHCD or a PHA must recertify a family for 
continued admission under the State program in accordance with federal guidelines under 
HCVP. 
 
If the head of household who was receiving assistance under the State program dies, a 
surviving family member may continue to receive the assistance if the household is solely 
occupied by remaining family members. 
 
Guidelines on Termination of Assistance and Evictions 
 
Any guidelines on the termination of assistance or on evictions established by DHCD or a 
PHA must be at least as protective of tenants’ rights as guidelines established under HCVP. 
 
Funding 
 
The Governor must include an appropriation of $10.0 million in the annual budget bill for 
fiscal 2025, 2026, and 2027 to DHCD for the program. For fiscal 2028 and annually 
thereafter, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation sufficient 
to fund at least the same number of vouchers issued in the prior fiscal year. DHCD must 
distribute 6% each year to PHAs to help defray staffing expenses related to the 
administration of the federal and State program. 
 
Reporting 
 
By December 30, 2024, and annually thereafter, DHCD and each political subdivision with 
a PHA must report to the Governor and the General Assembly specified information 
relating to the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 848/ Page 5 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Housing Choice Voucher Program – Overview 
 
Among other housing assistance programs overseen by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD), HCVP (also known as Section 8) provides rental 
assistance through vouchers to subsidize the rent of low-income families, elderly 
individuals, and individuals with disabilities. 
 
Voucher recipients may choose any type of rental housing that meets specified safety and 
health quality standards, though federal law does not require that a landlord participate in 
the program. Jurisdictions with PHAs or local housing offices directly receive funding 
through HUD; DHCD coordinates the program for jurisdictions without PHAs or local 
housing offices. 
 
For federal fiscal 2022, HUD allocated $19.7 million for DHCD to administer HCVP in 
jurisdictions without PHAs and $657.7 million for jurisdictions with PHAs. The State 
fiscal 2022 budget included $21.8 million for DHCD for the federal program. In addition, 
the fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes $19.5 million for DHCD to administer 
HCVP. 
 
 
Eligibility and Cost Sharing 
 
Households with annual incomes of 50% or less of the area median income are eligible for 
the program. Under federal rules, 75% of annual admissions must be families with annual 
incomes at or below 30% of the area median income. Once a voucher has been awarded, 
eligible individuals are responsible for finding a suitable housing unit. A voucher recipient 
may choose a housing unit that rents for more or less than the payment standard. Voucher 
recipients must pay 30% of their monthly adjusted gross income for rent and utilities; 
housing assistance payments are generally the difference between the payment standard 
and 30% of the family’s adjusted gross income. 
 
If the rent is greater than the payment standard, the family must pay the additional amount; 
however, if a family moves to a new unit where the rent exceeds the payment standard, the 
family may not pay more than 40% of its monthly adjusted gross income for rent. 
Generally, the local housing agency pays the housing assistance payment directly to the 
owner of the property. 
 
 
Tenant Obligations and Restrictions 
 
Similar to obligations specified under the bill, HCVP tenants, household members, or 
guests must comply with ongoing requirements in order to continue participating in the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 848/ Page 6 
program. Generally, to remain in the program, participants must comply with the lease, 
maintain the unit in decent condition, pay the tenant share of rent, allow landlords and 
PHAs access to the unit for inspection, and offer information the PHA determines 
necessary.  
 
Tenants may not remain in HCVP if they engage in threatening, abusive, or violent 
behavior toward the landlord or PHA personnel, participate in specified criminal activity, 
damage the unit or premises (or permit any guest to damage either), or sublease or sublet 
the unit or assign or transfer the unit, as specified under program regulations. In addition, 
sex offenders subject to lifetime registration requirements are not eligible for HCVP. 
 
Other Provisions 
 
HUD pays administrative fees to PHAs based on units leased as of the first day of each 
month to cover the costs of administering HCVP. Generally, the rates for each PHA are 
the rates covering the areas in which each PHA has the greatest proportion of its 
participants. 
 
Each housing unit participating in HCVP must be inspected by certified inspectors 
(typically employed by PHAs or contracted by HUD) and meet HUD minimum standards. 
Reinspections must occur every one to two years thereafter. 
 
Families consisting of elderly, near-elderly, or disabled persons may request that the PHA 
approve a live-in aid and provide necessary supportive services. The PHA must approve 
the live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation, but the PHA may refuse to 
approve a particular person as a live-in aide (or withdraw approval) if the person commits 
specified criminal or drug related offenses or owes rent or other money to a PHA in relation 
to other federal housing programs. 
 
Generally, PHAs must establish procedures for determining what happens in the event of 
the death of the voucher holder and there is at least one remaining family member in the 
unit. The PHA then determines a new head of household, and the voucher may be 
transferred. However, the voucher is not transferrable to a live-in aide or any individual 
who was not a part of the household composition. 
 
 
Waitlists 
 
Generally, eligible applicants not able to secure a voucher under HCVP are placed on a 
waitlist until a voucher is available. However, not every jurisdiction maintains a waitlist. 
Though waiting times vary among each housing authority, as of October 31, 2021, the 
average waiting time for a voucher in Maryland is 20 months. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 848/ Page 7 
State Expenditures:   
 
Mandated Appropriation for the State Program 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually in fiscal 2025 through 2027, 
due to the bill’s mandated funding for DHCD for the State program. Beginning in 
fiscal 2028, the bill mandates an annual appropriation sufficient to fund at least the same 
number of vouchers as issued in the prior fiscal year. This analysis assumes that the 
appropriation increases by 3% each year beginning in fiscal 2028 to account for increasing 
rents. Therefore, in fiscal 2028, general fund expenditures increase by $10.3 million to 
fund the State program. 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development Administrative Expenses 
 
The bill requires DHCD to verify the income of program participants. Currently, DHCD 
uses a federal income verification platform that is proprietary to the federal program and, 
therefore, not available for use by the State program. DHCD advises that it must procure a 
contractual income verification service on an ongoing basis. 
 
DHCD advises that it cannot absorb any additional duties with existing resources and that, 
in order to implement the bill, it needs to hire four additional staff, provide additional 
funding to PHAs to cover their administrative expenses, and procure contractual services 
to verify income of State program participants – at a cost of approximately $1.0 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2024, DHCD’s estimate assumes that it issues additional 
vouchers in jurisdictions where DHCD already provides assistance under HCVP, provides 
administrative support for the State program for PHAs, and coordinates inspections of 
potential units for all tenants, including those served by PHAs. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services disagrees (DLS). While the bill requires DHCD to 
oversee the State program, it does not require DHCD to provide additional funding to PHAs 
for program administration beyond what is required under the bill (6% of the appropriation 
for the State program each year), and DLS assumes that PHAs will conduct the required 
inspections of units in their jurisdictions, consistent with current practice under the federal 
program. In addition, assuming DHCD retains the same proportion of total funding under 
the State program as it does under the federal program, with the balance distributed to 
PHAs, DHCD may distribute approximately $300,000 in vouchers in jurisdictions where 
DHCD administers the program. DLS acknowledges, however, that DHCD requires 
additional staff for program oversight in addition to contractual services for income 
verification of State program participants. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 848/ Page 8 
Although program funding does not begin until fiscal 2025, this analysis assumes that staff 
begin in October 2023 to develop program processes and materials and to prepare for 
program awards beginning in July 2024. 
 
Therefore, general fund administrative expenditures increase by $255,359 in fiscal 2024, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2023 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one program manager to oversee the program and one administrative assistant to 
assist the program manager and to complete other administrative tasks. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing contractual services for income 
verification, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$160,541 
Contractual Payment Verification Service 
80,000 
Operating Expenses 
    14,818 
Total FY 2024 DHCD Admin. Expenditures 
$255,359 
 
Future year administrative expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This analysis further assumes that DHCD is not eligible to retain 6% of its allocation for 
administrative expenses; under the bill, the 6% allowance for administration applies only 
to PHAs. 
 
DHCD contracts to a third-party for property inspections under the federal program; given 
that DHCD is expected to award about $300,000 in additional vouchers each year under 
the bill, any increase in costs to inspect additional properties is likely minimal and 
absorbable within existing resources. To the extent two additional staff prove insufficient 
to implement the bill, DHCD may request additional resources through the annual budget 
process. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase 
correspondingly to the extent PHAs receive funding from DHCD to issue State program 
vouchers to eligible participants. Local government expenditures increase further as PHAs 
inspect eligible housing units. Local administrative costs are partially offset by the required 
6% allocation of program funding for staffing expenses. However, it should be noted that 
funding provided by the bill to offset staffing costs is minimal, as the amount DHCD 
disburses to PHAs to defray their staffing costs is only 6% of the funding appropriated to 
the program each year ($600,000 annually in fiscal 2025 through 2027 and $618,000 in 
fiscal 2028 for all PHAs). 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 848/ Page 9 
Small Business Effect:  Landlords may experience additional revenues to the extent they 
participate in the State program. However, participating landlords also experience 
additional costs as a result of the bill’s inspection provisions. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 826 (Delegates Wilkins and Stewart) - Environment and 
Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Wicomico counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; City of College Park; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Budget and Management; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Correction - April 5, 2023 
Enrolled - April 28, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2023 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9