START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 511

Chapter 511

(Senate Bill 823)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Annual State Park Pass – Discounts for Law Enforcement
Officers and First Responders

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Natural Resources to provide a certain
discount on annual State park passes for certain first responders and law
enforcement officers; and generally relating to discounts on State park passes.

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
Section 1–407
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

1–407.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ANNUAL STATE PARK PASS” MEANS A PASS ISSUED BY THE
DEPARTMENT THAT ALLOWS THE HOLDER UNLIMITED DAY–USE ENTRY TO ALL
STATE PARKS AND STATE PARK FACILITIES FOR 1 YEAR.

(3) “FIRST RESPONDER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 1–301 OF
THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

(4) “LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
1–101 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE A DISCOUNT OF AT LEAST $40 ON
ANNUAL STATE PARK PASSES FOR ALL FIRST RESPONDERS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICERS WHO ARE MARYLAND RESIDENTS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2023.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 511 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2