START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 871 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 871 
(Senator M. Washington) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Social Workers - Sunset Extension, Notification of Complete Application, and 
Workgroup on Social Worker Requirements for Licensure 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the State Board of Social Work Examiners, within 15 days 
after the initial receipt of a license application and supplemental documentation, to notify 
the applicant whether the application is complete. The bill establishes a Workgroup on 
Social Worker Requirements for Licensure, staffed by the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH), which must submit reports to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health 
and Government Operations Committee, as specified. The bill also extends the termination 
date for the board by one year to July 1, 2025, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment 
provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The workgroup terminates 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $75,000 in FY 2024 to reflect 
a contingent appropriation and $15,400 in FY 2025 for contractual staff for the workgroup. 
Future years reflect elimination of the contractual position in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. Board special fund revenues and expenditures are maintained 
through FY 2025. The FY 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$75,000 in general funds for board operations, contingent on enactment of this bill and 
either Senate Bill 145 or House Bill 103 of 2023. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
75,000 
15,400 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($75,000) 
($15,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 871/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must determine:   
 
 
whether to continue to use examinations developed by the Association of Social 
Work Boards (ASWB) as a requirement for a bachelor social worker license or a 
master social worker license; 
 
whether to establish a temporary license for applicants for a bachelor social worker 
license or master social worker license, who, except for passing the required 
examination, meet the education and experience requirements for licensure; 
 
how supervision may be provided to bachelor social worker licensees and master 
social worker licensees at no cost to the licensees; and 
 
if the workgroup determines that the ASWB examination should not be used or that 
temporary licenses should be established, whether additional experience or 
education requirements are necessary. 
 
By September 1, 2023, the workgroup must submit a preliminary report of its findings and 
recommendations to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee. By December 1, 2023, the workgroup must submit an interim 
report, including a timeline for phasing in any determinations made pursuant to the findings 
of the preliminary report, and an outline and timeline for conducting a specified study. 
 
The workgroup must conduct a study that examines each type of license under the 
Maryland Social Workers Practice Act (Title 19 of the Health Occupations Article) by:   
 
 
conducting a bias analysis of the qualifications for each type of license; 
 
determining whether each type of license is necessary; 
 
identifying alternatives to examination requirements that may be used to assess an 
applicant’s qualifications for each type of license;  
 
considering examination testing options, as specified; 
 
identifying barriers in addition to the examination that present challenges to 
licensure in the State; and 
 
identifying the circumstances under which unlicensed individuals work in State and 
federal government positions as social workers. 
 
By December 1, 2024, the workgroup must report to the Senate Finance Committee and 
the House Health and Government Operations Committee on its findings from the study 
and recommendations to eliminate bias and make the process for licensing social workers 
in the State more fair, diverse, and efficient. 
 
The workgroup may establish subgroups or contract with an entity with expertise in 
analyzing assessment bias. The Governor must designate the chair of the workgroup. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 871/ Page 3 
Workgroup members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Licensure, Application, and Examination Requirements 
 
To obtain a license from the board, an applicant generally must (1) submit a written 
application on a board-prescribed form; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) be of good moral 
character; (4) successfully pass the required examination pertinent to the license sought; 
(5) pay any applicable fees; (6) complete a criminal history records check; and (7) if 
required, complete a mental or physical examination by a board-appointed health care 
practitioner. An applicant must also have specified education and experience pertinent to 
the license sought. 
 
The board must review each application and notify each applicant whether the applicant 
has been approved to take the pertinent licensure examination within 60 days from the date 
the board received the completed application from the applicant. 
 
The board must ensure that a board-approved examination for each category of license is 
made available for an applicant to take at least twice a year at the times and places that the 
board determines. The board uses a national examination administered by ASWB. After 
the board approves a license application, the applicant must register with ASWB and pay 
the examination fee. The ASWB national examination is available any time that scheduling 
permits at a Pearson VUE test center. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within the Department of Legislative Services prior to their 
termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified 
entities or by legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was 
not asked to conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$75,000 in general funds for board operations, contingent on the enactment of this bill and 
either Senate Bill 145 or House Bill 103. Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase 
by $75,000 in fiscal 2024. At least $39,107 of this $75,000 is expected to be used for 
contractual staff in fiscal 2024, which accounts for personnel costs beginning July 1, 2023. 
This reflects the costs of hiring one contractual, part-time (50%) health policy analyst to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 871/ Page 4 
staff the workgroup and prepare and submit the required reports. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$31,963 
Other Operating Expenses 
    7,144 
Total FY 2024 Quantified Personnel Expenditures 
$39,107 
 
An additional $35,893 in general funds is available in fiscal 2024 only for further board 
costs associated with the workgroup, accelerated notification of applicants regarding 
whether their application is complete, and costs associated with implementing a new 
conditional and temporary licensure program as required by Chapter 317 of 2023 (Senate 
Bill 145). Any unspent funds revert to the general fund. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect termination of the contractual position on 
December 31, 2024, following submission of the last required workgroup report. To the 
extent that the workgroup continues to meet through fiscal 2025, general fund expenditures 
increase by an additional $15,417 to continue the contractual position through 
June 30, 2025 (the date on which the workgroup terminates). Should the workgroup 
contract with an entity with expertise in analyzing assessment bias, as authorized under the 
bill, general fund expenditures increase by an additional indeterminate amount in 
fiscal 2024. This analysis does not reflect the cost of any expense reimbursements for the 
23 members of the workgroup. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2023 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 871/ Page 5 
rh/jc 
Third Reader - March 21, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2023 
Enrolled - April 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 8, 2023 
 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5