START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 855 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 855 
(Senator McCray) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Baltimore City - Property Tax - In Rem Foreclosure of Vacant or Nuisance 
Property 
 
 
This bill allows for Baltimore City to establish an in rem foreclosure process for vacant or 
nuisance properties on which taxes are in arrears. The bill also establishes provisions 
governing (1) the disposition of property subject to foreclosure and (2) reopening of an 
in rem foreclosure judgment. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase, and Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) 
revenues may be affected, beginning as early as FY 2024, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City finances may be affected, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
“Interested party” means any person having an interest in a vacant or nuisance property 
(1) who last appears as owner of the property on the collector’s tax roll; (2) who is a 
mortgagee of the property or assignee of a mortgage of record; (3) who is a holder of a 
beneficial interest in a deed of trust recorded against the property; (4) who is a taxing 
agency that has the authority to collect tax on the property; or (5) whose identity and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 855/ Page 2 
address are reasonably ascertainable from the county land records or revealed by a full title 
search consisting of at least 50 years. 
 
“Vacant or nuisance property” means a vacant lot or improved property determined to be 
a vacant property or a nuisance property under the Baltimore City Building Code. 
 
In Rem Foreclosure 
 
The bill authorizes Baltimore City to authorize, by law, in rem foreclosure of vacant or 
nuisance property on which taxes are in arrears. A law that authorizes an in rem foreclosure 
of vacant or nuisance property must (1) state the date after which real property may be 
subject to in rem foreclosure; (2) establish criteria for designating real property to be 
foreclosed; (3) authorize Baltimore City to file a complaint for an in rem foreclosure; and 
(4) include administrative rules and procedures necessary to carry out an in rem foreclosure 
of vacant or nuisance property. The city may not file a complaint for an in rem foreclosure 
action unless (1) the taxes on the real property have been delinquent for at least six months 
and (2) the right to appeal the notice of the property as vacant or nuisance property has 
tolled. 
 
To initiate an in rem foreclosure action, Baltimore City must (1) file a complaint for an 
in rem foreclosure in the circuit court and (2) serve the complaint to each interested party 
in accordance with the Maryland Rules. The complaint must meet specified criteria. All 
taxes must be included in the foreclosure action and cease to be a lien against the property 
if a judgment is entered foreclosing the existing interests of all interested parties in the 
property. A complaint may be amended to include all taxes that become delinquent after 
the commencement of the in rem foreclosure action. 
 
An interested party has the right (1) to cure the delinquent taxes on the property by paying 
all past due taxes at any time before the entry of the foreclosure judgment and (2) to be 
heard at the hearing on the complaint and contest the delinquency of the taxes and the 
adequacy of the proceedings. 
 
If the circuit court finds that the complaint was served on each interested party and that the 
information set forth in the complaint is accurate, the court must: 
 
 
enter a judgment that (1) proper notice has been provided to all interested parties; 
(2) the real property is a vacant or nuisance property; and (3) forecloses the existing 
interests of all interested parties in the real property; and 
 
order that ownership of the real property be transferred to Baltimore City.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 855/ Page 3 
Disposition of Property and Compensation of Interested Parties  
 
The city may sell a property at public auction (in accordance with specified procedures) or 
retain title to the property. In a sale, if the minimum bid (the total amount of liens for unpaid 
taxes on the property) is not made or exceeded, the city may bid the minimum bid price 
and purchase the property. If the property is sold and the sale price exceeds the amount of 
taxes due on the property plus the value of any improvements made by the city and any 
costs incurred by the city with respect to development of the property, the amount by which 
the sale price exceeds those amounts is distributed to the interested parties. If the city 
retains a property without a sale, the amount by which the appraised value of the property 
exceeds the amount of taxes due on the property is distributed to the interested parties. 
 
Reopening Judgment 
 
The bill prohibits a court from reopening a judgment rendered in an in rem foreclosure 
proceeding unless it is reopened for lack of jurisdiction or fraud in the conduct of the 
proceedings. A plaintiff seeking to reopen a judgment must file the action within 
three years of the issuance of the judgment, pay all taxes due on the property before filing 
the action, and within 30 days of filing the action, submit evidence to the court that they 
have obtained a bond equal to the property’s reasonable value. A court may not reopen a 
judgment on the ground of constructive fraud in the conduct of the proceedings unless an 
application to reopen a judgment is filed within one year from the date of the judgment. 
The bill also establishes the amount required to redeem the property if an in rem foreclosure 
judgment is set aside. 
 
Current Law:  Statute provides counties and municipalities with specified authority for 
in rem foreclosure and sale of real property (1) that consists of a vacant lot or improved 
property cited as vacant and unsafe or unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a 
housing or building violation notice and (2) for which the total amount of liens for unpaid 
taxes on the property exceeds the total value of the property. A complaint for an in rem 
foreclosure action may not be filed by a county or municipality unless (1) the tax on the 
real property has been delinquent for at least six months and (2) the right to appeal the 
notice of the property as vacant and unsafe or unfit has tolled. 
 
A complaint for in rem foreclosure must be filed in the circuit court of the county where 
the real property is located and must meet specified criteria. An interested party has the 
right (1) to cure the delinquent taxes and liens on the real property by paying all past due 
fees, payments, and penalties at any time before the entry of the foreclosure judgment and 
(2) to be heard at the hearing on the complaint and contest the delinquency of the taxes and 
the adequacy of the proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 855/ Page 4 
If the court finds that the county or municipality sent sufficient notice and a copy of the 
complaint to each interested party and that the information in the complaint is accurate, it 
must enter a judgment and order that ownership of the real property be transferred to the 
county or municipality. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024, for additional staff and operating expenses for the clerk of the circuit court in 
Baltimore City, to handle foreclosure filings, to the extent the city uses the authority 
provided by the bill. Any impact, however, cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
State Revenues:  ABF revenues (State property tax revenues) may be affected, beginning 
as early as fiscal 2024, to the extent actions taken by the city under the bill’s provisions 
impact the timing and amount of State property tax revenues collected from affected 
properties in the city; however, any impact cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s general obligation bonds are paid from the ABF. 
Revenue sources for the fund include State property taxes; premium from bond sales; and 
repayments from certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City finances may be affected to the extent the bill’s 
provisions allow for improvement of the use of properties in the city and/or increased 
collection of tax revenues associated with properties in the city. If the city uses the authority 
in the bill to take title to properties, city finances may be affected by costs associated with 
maintenance and/or improvement of those properties and any revenues (including tax 
revenues) or reduction in costs, resulting from any future sale or use of the properties. The 
city may incur administrative/operating costs associated with the in rem foreclosure and 
sale process. The city indicates it has initiated an in rem foreclosure program under existing 
law, but presumably the bill may result in the expansion of that program. The extent of any 
fiscal impact cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent Baltimore City uses the authority under the bill, 
small businesses may benefit from any demand for their goods or services for 
improvements to, or maintenance of, properties after foreclosure judgements and/or the 
opportunity to purchase properties sold after foreclosure judgments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 921 (Delegate Smith) - Ways and Means. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 855/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer 
Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Housing and Community Development; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5