START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 737

Chapter 737

(Senate Bill 846)

AN ACT concerning

Libraries – Circulation Records – Inspection, Use, or Disclosure Requirement
Revision

FOR the purpose of altering the circumstances under which certain libraries must permit
the inspection, use, or disclosure of the circulation record of an individual; and
generally relating to circulation records and libraries.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–108
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

23–108.

(a) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, a [free association]
PUBLIC, school, college, or university library in this State shall prohibit inspection, use, or
disclosure of any circulation record or other item, collection, or grouping of information
about an individual that:

(1) Is maintained by a library;

(2) Contains an individual’s name or the identifying number, symbol, or
other identifying particular assigned to the individual; and

(3) Identifies the use a patron makes of that library’s materials, services,
or facilities.

(b) A [free association] PUBLIC, school, college, or university library in the State
shall permit inspection, use, or disclosure of the circulation record of an individual only [in
connection with the library’s ordinary business and only for the purposes for which the
record was created]:

(1) IF NECESSARY FOR THE REASONABLE OPERATION OF THE
LIBRARY;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 737 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) ON WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL; OR

(3) BY SUBPOENA OR COURT ORDER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2