START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 841 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 841 
(Senator Kramer, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
 
Local School Systems - Student Field Trips - Funding 
 
   
This bill requires the Governor to include $500,000 in the annual budget bill for the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to provide grants to local school systems 
for expenses related to student field trips to museums of cultural import. “Museum of 
cultural import” means a museum that provides historic and sociological learning 
opportunities on the history and culture of an oppressed and historically underrepresented 
community, leaving attendees with a deeper understanding of the community and all 
people’s shared humanity, and includes (1) the United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum; (2) the National Museum of African American History and Culture; (3) the 
Jewish Museum of Maryland; and (4) the Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland 
African American History and Culture. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2025. MSDE can administer grants using existing resources. This bill establishes a 
mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems receive annual funding amounting to 
$500,000 statewide, beginning in FY 2025. Expenditures increase accordingly. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 841/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State of Maryland, through MSDE, provides annual grants to nonprofit 
organizations through the State Aided Institutions (SAI) program to provide enriching 
educational programs experiences to students and teachers that cannot be replicated in the 
classroom. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
SAI funding amounting to $18,080 for the Jewish Museum of Maryland and $26,340 for 
the Reginald F. Lewis Museum. (The other two entities specified under the bill are located 
in Washington, DC.) State funding for SAIs and for student field trips is not mandated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1242 (Delegate Attar) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
Enrolled - April 19, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2023 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2