START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 863 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 863 
(Senators Kagan and Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
State Administrator of Elections - Removal From Office 
 
 
This bill alters the requirements for the removal from office of the State Administrator of 
Elections such that, provided the State Board of Elections (SBE) is fully constituted with 
five duly confirmed members, the State Administrator must be subject to removal by the 
affirmative vote of four duly confirmed members of the board. The bill repeals (1) a 
requirement that the removal be for incompetence, misconduct, or other good cause; (2) a 
requirement that, prior to removal, SBE set forth written charges stating the grounds for 
dismissal and afford the State Administrator notice and an ample opportunity to be heard; 
and (3) the authority of the State Administrator to continue to serve, subsequent to a valid 
vote for removal, until a successor is appointed and confirmed by the Senate of Maryland. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Provided SBE is fully constituted with five duly confirmed members, the 
State Administrator must be subject to removal by the affirmative vote of four duly 
confirmed members of the board for incompetence, misconduct, or other good cause. Prior 
to removal, SBE must set forth written charges stating the grounds for dismissal and afford 
the State Administrator notice and an ample opportunity to be heard. Subsequent to a valid 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 863/ Page 2 
vote for removal by at least four duly confirmed members of SBE, the State Administrator 
is authorized to continue to serve until a successor is appointed and confirmed by the 
Senate of Maryland. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 899 (Delegate D. Jones) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; State Board of 
Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2023 
Third Reader - March 17, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2