START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 840 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 840 
(Senator Kramer, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Judiciary 
 
Public Safety - Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund, a special fund 
administered by the Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, 
Youth, and Victim Services (GOCPYVS), to make grants to nonprofit organizations, 
including faith-based organizations, to provide security enhancements to protect against 
hate crimes. For fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor may include in 
the annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million to the fund. The bill establishes 
provisions regarding procedures for the distribution of grants and a related reporting 
requirement. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2025, under one set of assumptions, to capitalize the fund. The FY 2024 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million in general funds for an existing grant 
program that is largely codified by the bill; assuming those funds flow through the new 
special fund, special fund revenues increase by $5.0 million in FY 2024 and $10.0 million 
annually thereafter due to the receipt of the general funds appropriated to the program 
(reflecting $5.0 million annually for the existing program plus the additional capitalization 
funding); special fund expenditures increase correspondingly to provide grants. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
SF Revenue 
$5.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
SF Expenditure 
$5.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 840/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, 
any interest earnings of the fund, and any other money from any other source accepted for 
the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only to make grants to nonprofit 
organizations, including faith-based organizations, to provide security enhancements to 
protect against hate crimes. 
 
The Executive Director of GOCPYVS must (1) establish and publish procedures for the 
distribution of grants; (2) set aside a minimum of $1.0 million each year for grants to 
faith-based organizations to increase security measures against faith-based hate crimes, 
with priority given to applicants that can demonstrate a high prevalence of hate crimes 
against members of and institutions representing the applicant’s faith; and (3) report to the 
General Assembly on the distribution of funding before September 1 each year. 
 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. Money 
expended from the fund for grants to nonprofit organizations, including faith-based 
organizations, to provide security enhancements to protect against hate crimes is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for providing nonprofit organizations, including faith-based organizations, 
with security enhancements to protect against hate crimes. 
 
Current Law:  The State’s hate crimes statutes are contained in Title 10, Subtitle 3 of the 
Criminal Law Article, specifically §§ 10-302 (damaging property of a religious entity), 
10-303 (obstructing exercise of religious beliefs), 10-304 (harassment or destruction of 
property), 10-305 (damage to an associated building), and 10-305.1 (prohibition on use of 
an item or symbol to threaten or intimidate). 
 
Section 10-302 (Damaging Property of a Religious Entity) 
 
A person may not deface, damage, or destroy, or attempt or threaten to deface, damage, or 
destroy, personal or real property that is owned, leased, or used by a religious entity or for 
any religious purpose. 
 
Section 10-303 (Obstructing Exercise of Religious Beliefs) 
 
A person may not, by force or threat of force, obstruct or attempt to obstruct another in the 
free exercise of that person’s religious beliefs. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 840/ Page 3 
Section 10-304 (Harassment or Destruction of Property) 
 
A person may not engage in the following acts motivated either in whole or in substantial 
part because another person or group is homeless or because of another person’s or group’s 
race, color, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, disability, or 
national origin:   
 
 
commit a crime or attempt or threaten to commit a crime against that person or 
group; 
 
deface, damage, or destroy, or attempt or threaten to deface, damage, or destroy, the 
real or personal property of that person or group; 
 
burn or attempt or threaten to burn an object on the real or personal property of that 
person or group; 
 
make or cause to be made a false statement, report, or complaint that the person 
knows to be false as a whole or in material part to a specified law enforcement 
officer, about that person or group with the intent to deceive and to cause an 
investigation or other action to be taken as a result of the statement, report, or 
complaint, in violation of § 9-501 of the Criminal Law Article; or 
 
commit any of these acts when the act involves a separate crime that is a felony or 
that results in the death of a victim. 
 
Section 10-305 (Damage to an Associated Building) 
 
A person may not deface, damage, or destroy; attempt or threaten to deface, damage, or 
destroy; burn or attempt or threaten to burn an object on; or damage the real or personal 
property connected to a building that is publicly or privately owned, leased, or used 
(1) because a person or group of a particular race, color, religious belief, sexual orientation, 
gender, gender identity, disability, or national origin, or because a person or group that is 
homeless, has contacts or is associated with the building or (2) if there is evidence that 
exhibits animosity against a person or group because of the race, color, religious beliefs, 
sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, disability, or national origin of that person or 
group or because that person or group is homeless. 
 
Section 10-305.1 (Prohibition on Use of an Item or Symbol to Threaten or Intimidate)  
 
A person may not place or inscribe an item or a symbol, including an actual or depicted 
noose or swastika, whether temporary or permanent, on any real or personal property, 
public or private, without the express permission of the owner or specific persons, with the 
intent to threaten or intimidate any person or group of persons. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 840/ Page 4 
Penalties 
 
In general, a person who violates these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable 
by imprisonment for up to 3 years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000. However, if a 
violation of § 10-304 involves a separate felony, the violator is guilty of a felony and is 
subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up to $10,000. If a violation of 
§ 10-304 results in the death of the victim, the violator is guilty of a felony and is subject 
to imprisonment for up to 20 years and/or a fine of up to $20,000. 
 
In addition to any other penalties imposed, the court may require a person to complete an 
antibias education program. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services 
 
GOCPYVS plans, promotes, and funds efforts with government entities, private 
organizations, and the community to advance public policy, enhance public safety, reduce 
crime and juvenile delinquency, and serve victims.  
 
Among other grant programs, GOCPYVS administers the Protecting Against Hate Crimes 
Grant Program to provide support and security enhancements to nonprofit organizations, 
including faith-based organizations, that have facilities and membership that can be 
targeted for a hate crime. The fiscal 2024 budget as introduced includes $5.0 million in 
general funds for the grant program. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill largely codifies an existing grant program – the Protecting 
Against Hate Crimes Grant Program – administered by GOCPYVS. As noted above, the 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million in general 
funds for the existing grant program. Although the bill does not establish a mandated 
appropriation to the new special fund, the bill authorizes an appropriation of $5.0 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025 for the fund and stipulates that money expended from 
the fund for grants to nonprofit organizations, including faith-based organizations, is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for providing nonprofit organizations, including faith-based organizations, 
with security enhancements to protect against hate crimes. Accordingly, although not 
mandated, this analysis assumes that an additional $5.0 million in general funds is provided 
each year for the grant program beginning in fiscal 2025 – on top of what the existing grant 
program would otherwise be appropriated. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by 
$5.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to capitalize the fund. 
 
Because the bill establishes a special fund for the grant program, special fund revenues and 
expenditures increase each year beginning in fiscal 2024; it is assumed that the 
general funds that are appropriated for the existing grant program – including the funding 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 840/ Page 5 
in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly – flow through the new special 
fund. (As noted above, it is also assumed that the existing grant program continues to be 
funded at $5.0 million in future years, in addition to the funding authorized by the bill.) 
Accordingly, special fund revenues increase by $5.0 million in fiscal 2024 and by 
$10.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025, reflecting the receipt of the general funds 
appropriated to the program each year. Special fund expenditures increase correspondingly 
to provide grants. 
 
GOCPYVS advises that one full-time coordinator is needed to administer the new special 
fund and provide grant awards. The Department of Legislative Services acknowledges that 
with the additional funding assumed to be appropriated to the program under the bill, the 
workload related to administering grants likely increases beginning in fiscal 2025. 
However, it is unclear at this time that the additional funding justifies the need for an 
additional position. To the extent existing staff cannot handle the increase in workload, 
GOCPYVS may request additional resources through the annual budget process. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Nonprofit organizations are not considered small businesses for 
purposes of fiscal and policy notes; however, the use of additional program grant funds by 
nonprofit organizations to provide security enhancements to protect against hate crimes 
likely benefits small for-profit businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1243 (Delegate Attar, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim 
Services; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2023 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 10, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5