START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

Chapter 446

(Senate Bill 848)

AN ACT concerning

Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing a Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program in the
Department of Housing and Community Development to provide vouchers and
housing assistance payments for low–income families that are on a certain federal
housing program waitlist; requiring the Department and public housing agencies to
administer the State Program; and generally relating to the Statewide Rental
Assistance Voucher Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–101, 4–103, and 4–1401
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–2901 through 4–2921 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 29. Statewide
Rental Assistance Voucher Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

4–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Administration” means the Community Development Administration.

(c) “Division” means the Division of Development Finance.

(d) “Elderly household” means, EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 4–2901 OF THIS
TITLE, one or more individuals who occupy a residential dwelling unit, at least one of whom
meets the age limit specified by the Secretary that:

(1) is greater than or equal to age 55; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) may vary for different programs or types of projects.

(e) “Nonprofit sponsor” means a sponsor that is:

(1) a nonprofit organization; or

(2) a limited partnership, if:

(i) 1. each general partner is a nonprofit organization; or

2. each general partner is a wholly owned subsidiary of a
nonprofit organization;

(ii) the limited partnership is formed to undertake a project that is
eligible as a whole or in part for a federal program or incentive, including low–income
housing tax credits; and

(iii) a nonprofit organization manages the project or will receive the
net cash flow or residual sale proceeds on the sale of the project.

4–103.

The Division includes:

(1) the Community Development Administration;

(2) the Disaster Relief Housing Program;

(3) the Down Payment and Settlement Expense Loan Program;

(4) federal and State weatherization programs;

(5) the Group Home Financing Program;

(6) the Lead Hazard Reduction Grant Program;

(7) the Lead Hazard Reduction Loan Program;

(8) the local government infrastructure program;

(9) the Maryland Home Financing Program;

(10) the Maryland Housing Rehabilitation Program;

(11) the Neighborhood Housing Services Fund;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

(12) the Operating Assistance Grants Demonstration Projects;

(13) the Partnership Rental Housing Program;

(14) the Radium Grant Program;

(15) the Rental Allowance Program, THE STATEWIDE RENTAL
ASSISTANCE VOUCHER PROGRAM, and other rental assistance programs;

(16) the Rental Housing Program; and

(17) the Self–Help Homeownership Technical Assistance Program.

4–1401.

In this subtitle, “programs” means rental assistance programs other than the Rental
Allowance Program established under § 4–1403 of this subtitle AND THE STATEWIDE
RENTAL ASSISTANCE VOUCHER PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBTITLE 29 OF
THIS TITLE.

SUBTITLE 29. STATEWIDE RENTAL ASSISTANCE VOUCHER PROGRAM.

4–2901.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “DISABLED” MEANS HAVING:

(1) A DISABILITY UNDER 42 U.S.C. § 423;

(2) A PHYSICAL, MENTAL, OR EMOTIONAL IMPAIRMENT THAT IS
EXPECTED TO BE OF LONG–CONTINUED AND INDEFINITE DURATION, IS EXPECTED
TO SUBSTANTIALLY IMPEDE AN INDIVIDUAL’S ABILITY TO LIVE INDEPENDENTLY,
AND MAY BE IMPROVED BY MORE SUITABLE HOUSING OPTIONS; OR

(3) A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY AS DEFINED IN THE FEDERAL
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES ASSISTANCE AND BILL OF RIGHTS ACT.

(B) “DISABILITY” MEANS A PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT THAT
SUBSTANTIALLY LIMITS A MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITY.

(C) “ELDERLY” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL THAT IS AT LEAST 62 YEARS OLD.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (1) “FAMILY” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP OF INDIVIDUALS
ELIGIBLE FOR ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM.

(2) “FAMILY” INCLUDES A PREFERENCE CATEGORY ESTABLISHED
UNDER § 4–2906(B) § 4–2906 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) “HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENT” MEANS THE MONTHLY ASSISTANCE
PAYMENT PAID FOR A FAMILY UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM.

(F) “HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM” MEANS THE PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER 24 C.F.R. PART 982.

(G) “LIVE–IN AIDE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL THAT:

(1) MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER 24 C.F.R. § 5.403; AND

(2) RESIDES WITH AN ELDERLY OR DISABLED INDIVIDUAL WHO
RECEIVES ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM.

(H) “PAYMENT STANDARD” MEANS THE MAXIMUM MONTHLY HOUSING
ASSISTANCE PAYMENT FOR A FAMILY ASSISTED UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM.

(I) (1) “PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY” MEANS AN ENTITY AUTHORIZED BY
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT TO ADMINISTER
THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM IN THE STATE.

(2) “PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE
DEPARTMENT.

(J) “STATE PROGRAM” MEANS THE STATEWIDE RENTAL ASSISTANCE
VOUCHER PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(K) “VOUCHER” MEANS A DOCUMENT ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR A
PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY TO A FAMILY THAT IS SELECTED TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE
UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM, WHICH DESCRIBES THE STATE PROGRAM AND
PROCEDURES UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM.

4–2902.

THERE IS A STATEWIDE RENTAL ASSISTANCE VOUCHER PROGRAM IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

4–2903.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

THE PURPOSE OF THE STATE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE VOUCHERS AND
HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS FOR LOW–INCOME FAMILIES THAT ARE
CURRENTLY ON A WAITING LIST UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
PROGRAM FOR HOUSING IN UNITS APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH GUIDELINES UNDER THE FEDERAL
HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM.

4–2904.

(A) (1) IN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS WITHOUT A LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL ADMINISTER THE STATE PROGRAM AND ISSUE VOUCHERS AND HOUSING
ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS TO ASSIST LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS THAT ARE ELIGIBLE
FOR BUT ARE NOT CURRENTLY RECEIVING HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS UNDER THE
FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM.

(2) IN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS WITH A PUBLIC HOUSING
AGENCY–ADMINISTRATOR UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
PROGRAM, THE PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL ADMINISTER THE STATE
PROGRAM AND ISSUE VOUCHERS AND HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS TO ASSIST
LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS THAT ARE ELIGIBLE FOR BUT ARE NOT CURRENTLY
RECEIVING HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHER PROGRAM.

(B) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, THE STATE
PROGRAM SHALL BE ADMINISTERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH FEDERAL GUIDELINES
UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM.

4–2905.

TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR A HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENT UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM, A FAMILY SHALL:

(1) RESIDE IN THE STATE;

(2) BE ON A FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER WAITING LIST; AND

(3) MEET LOW–INCOME ELIGIBILITY LIMITS UNDER THE FEDERAL
HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM OR INCOME REQUIREMENTS AS
DETERMINED BY THE PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY.

4–2906.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE DEPARTMENT AND EACH PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL EQUALLY
PRIORITIZE VOUCHERS AND HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS FOR FAMILIES THAT
INCLUDE:

(1) A CHILD WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF 16 18 YEARS;

(2) A FOSTER CHILD WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF 18:

(I) AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD; BUT

(II) UNDER THE AGE OF 24 YEARS;

(3) A MILITARY VETERAN;

(3) (4) AN INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS;

(4) (5) A DISABLED INDIVIDUAL; OR

(5) (6) AN ELDERLY INDIVIDUAL.

4–2907.

WHEN AN OFFER OF ASSISTANCE IS MADE, A FAMILY HAS 15 30 DAYS TO
PROVIDE DOCUMENTATION TO VERIFY THEIR INCOME WITH THE DEPARTMENT OR
THE PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY.

4–2908.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL CALCULATE
PAYMENT STANDARDS AND HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH GUIDELINES FOR THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHER PROGRAM.

(B) A FAMILY ASSISTED UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM SHALL BE EXPECTED
TO PAY A PROPORTION NOT MORE THAN 30% OF ITS MONTHLY ADJUSTED GROSS
INCOME FOR RENT AND UTILITIES, AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR THE
PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY.

4–2909.

HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS FOR A FAMILY SHALL CONTINUE FOR UP TO
5 YEARS OR UNTIL A FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER UNDER THE FEDERAL
HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM BECOMES AVAILABLE, WHICHEVER OCCURS
FIRST.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

4–2910.

(A) A FAMILY MAY REQUEST THAT THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY APPROVE A LIVE–IN AIDE IF THE FAMILY IS COMPOSED OF A
~~DISABLED~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~IS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HEAD~~ ~~OF~~ ~~HOUSEHOLD~~ TO PROVIDE NECESSARY
SUPPORTIVE SERVICES FOR A FAMILY MEMBER WHO IS A PERSON WITH A
DISABILITY.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL APPROVE A
LIVE–IN AIDE IF A LIVE–IN AIDE IS REQUIRED AS A REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
UNDER 24 C.F.R. § 8.11 REASONABLY MODIFY ITS POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND
RULES TO ALLOW A FAMILY THAT INCLUDES A PERSON WITH A DISABILITY TO HAVE
A LIVE–IN AIDE.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY NOT INCLUDE A
LIVE–IN AIDE’S INCOME WHEN DETERMINING A FAMILY’S INCOME ELIGIBILITY
UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM.

4–2911.

(A) (1) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL
CONDUCT ANNUAL INSPECTIONS OF EACH UNIT RENTED USING HOUSING
ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS TO ENSURE THE CONTINUED COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL
HOUSING QUALITY STANDARDS UNDER 24 C.F.R. § 982.401.

(II) (2) INSPECTIONS SHALL OCCUR ON OR BEFORE THE
INITIAL LEASE DATE AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER.

(2) (B) FOR A UNIT LOCATED IN A BUILDING WITH 3 TO 49 UNITS,
THE PROPERTY OWNER SHALL PROVIDE THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY WITH A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY THAT HAS BEEN
COMPLETED WITHIN 1 YEAR.

(3) (C) FOR A UNIT LOCATED IN A BUILDING WITH 50 UNITS OR
MORE, THE PROPERTY OWNER SHALL PROVIDE THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY WITH AN INSPECTION CERTIFICATE.

(B) A PROPERTY OWNER WHO HAS RECEIVED THREE OR MORE PENALTY
NOTICES FROM THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY FOR A VIOLATION
~~OF~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~HOUSING~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~STANDARDS~~ ~~IS~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~LEASE~~ ~~THE~~
OWNER’S PROPERTIES TO FAMILIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE
~~PROGRAM.~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4–2912.

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ENSURE THAT SUBSIDY STANDARDS FOR UNIT
SELECTION COMPLY WITH FEDERAL GUIDELINES UNDER THE HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHER PROGRAM, INCLUDING THE MANDATE TO PROVIDE FOR THE SMALLEST
NUMBER OF BEDROOMS NEEDED TO HOUSE A FAMILY WITHOUT OVERCROWDING.

4–2913.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY DENY
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM BY:

(I) DENYING LISTING ON THE STATE PROGRAM LIST;

(II) (I) DENYING A VOUCHER UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM;

(III) (II) WITHDRAWING A STATE PROGRAM VOUCHER;

(IV) (III) REFUSING TO ENTER INTO A CONTRACT FOR HOUSING
ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS; OR

(V) (IV) REFUSING TO APPROVE A LEASE UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL DENY
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM TO:

(I) SEX OFFENDERS WHO ARE SUBJECT TO A LIFETIME
REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT UNDER A STATE SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION
PROGRAM; AND

(II) ALL OTHER SEX OFFENDERS, FOR 10 YEARS FOLLOWING
THEIR CONVICTION FOR A SEX–RELATED CRIME.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY DENY
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM IF THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY FINDS THAT ANY INDIVIDUAL ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~FAMILY~~ RESIDING IN A UNIT
RENTED USING ASSISTANCE FROM THE STATE PROGRAM HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF:

(I) A DRUG–RELATED CRIME UNDER STATE LAW; OR

(II) A VIOLENT CRIME.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

(4) IF THE DEPARTMENT OR PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY DENIES
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY SHALL PROMPTLY PROVIDE THE APPLICANT WITH A NOTICE
EXPLAINING THE DENIAL AND INDICATING THAT THE APPLICANT MAY REQUEST AN
INFORMAL REVIEW.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY
TERMINATE ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM BY:

(I) REFUSING TO ENTER INTO A STATE PROGRAM CONTRACT;

(II) REFUSING TO APPROVE A LEASE UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM; OR

(III) TERMINATING HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS UNDER A
STATE PROGRAM CONTRACT.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC AGENCY SHALL TERMINATE
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM FOR:

(I) FAMILIES WHO WERE EVICTED UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM FOR SERIOUS VIOLATIONS OF THE LEASE;

(II) FAMILIES WHO FAIL TO SIGN ANY FORMS FROM THE
DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY INDICATING CONSENT TO OBTAIN
INFORMATION; AND

(III) SEX OFFENDERS SUBJECT TO A LIFETIME REGISTRATION
REQUIREMENT UNDER A STATE SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION PROGRAM;.

(IV) ALL OTHER SEX OFFENDERS, FOR 10 YEARS FOLLOWING
THEIR CONVICTION FOR A SEX–RELATED CRIME UNDER STATE LAW; AND

(V) FAMILIES THAT ARE ABSENT FROM A STATE PROGRAM UNIT
FOR MORE THAN 180 CONSECUTIVE DAYS.

(C) AFTER CONSIDERING WHEN DETERMINING THE DENIAL OR
TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT
MAY CONSIDER ALL RELEVANT CIRCUMSTANCES, INCLUDING THE SERIOUSNESS OF
THE CASE, THE EXTENT OF PARTICIPATION OR CULPABILITY OF INDIVIDUAL FAMILY
MEMBERS, MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES RELATED TO THE DISABILITY OF A FAMILY
MEMBER, AND THE EFFECTS OF DENIAL OR TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE ON
OTHER FAMILY MEMBERS WHO WERE NOT INVOLVED IN THE ACTION OR FAILURE,

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY DENY ADMISSION INTO
OR TERMINATE ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM IF A FAMILY MEMBER:

(1) VIOLATES ANY OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM;

(2) HAS BEEN EVICTED FROM FEDERALLY ASSISTED HOUSING FOR
VIOLENT CRIMINAL ACTIVITY THAT THREATENED THE HEALTH, SAFETY, OR
WELFARE OF OTHER RESIDENTS WITHIN THE PRECEDING 3 YEARS;

(3) HAS COMMITTED FRAUD, BRIBERY, OR ANY OTHER CORRUPT OR
CRIMINAL ACT IN CONNECTION WITH THE STATE PROGRAM;

(4) OWES A FINANCIAL OBLIGATION TO THE DEPARTMENT OR PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY IN CONNECTION WITH ANOTHER HOUSING OR RENTAL
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM;

(5) BREACHES A REPAYMENT AGREEMENT TO PAY AMOUNTS OWED
TO THE DEPARTMENT OR PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY; OR

(6) HAS ENGAGED IN OR THREATENED ABUSIVE OR VIOLENT
BEHAVIOR TOWARD DEPARTMENT OR PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY EMPLOYEES, THE
PROPERTY OWNER OR PROPERTY MANAGEMENT STAFF, OR OTHER RESIDENTS; OR

(7) RECEIVES ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM AND IS
ABSENT FROM THE UNIT FOR MORE THAN 180 CONSECUTIVE DAYS.

(D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY PROHIBIT
OTHER FAMILY MEMBERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN OR WERE CULPABLE FOR ACTIONS
SPECIFIED UNDER THIS SECTION FROM RESIDING IN A UNIT RENTED USING
ASSISTANCE FROM THE STATE PROGRAM.

(2) IN MAKING THE DETERMINATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY MAY CONSIDER:

(I) THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE CASE;

(II) THE EXTENT OF PARTICIPATION BY OR CULPABILITY OF
INDIVIDUAL FAMILY MEMBERS;

(III) MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES RELATED TO THE DISABILITY
OF A FAMILY MEMBER; AND

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

(IV) THE EFFECTS OF THE PROHIBITION ON OTHER FAMILY
MEMBERS WHO WERE NOT INVOLVED IN THE ACTION OR FAILURE.

4–2914.

(A) A FAMILY THAT RECEIVES A VOUCHER UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM
SHALL:

(1) SUPPLY ANY INFORMATION TO THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY NECESSARY FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE STATE PROGRAM;

(2) NOTIFY THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY
BEFORE VACATING THE UNIT;

(3) USE THE UNIT ONLY AS A PRINCIPAL PLACE OF RESIDENCE; AND

(4) MAINTAIN ALL UTILITIES THAT ARE NOT PAID THROUGH THE
HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENT.

(B) A FAMILY THAT RECEIVES A VOUCHER UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM
MAY NOT:

(1) HAVE A FINANCIAL INTEREST IN THE UNIT OWN THE UNIT THAT
THE ASSISTANCE IS PROVIDED FOR;

(2) COMMIT FRAUD IN CONNECTION WITH THE STATE PROGRAM; OR

(3) SUBLEASE OR ASSIGN THE LEASE OR TRANSFER THE UNIT; OR

(4) ALLOW ANYONE NOT ON THE UNIT LEASE TO RESIDE IN THE UNIT.

4–2915.

THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL GIVE EACH FAMILY
THAT RECEIVES ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM A WRITTEN
DESCRIPTION OF:

(1) THE FAMILY’S OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM;

(2) THE GROUNDS ON WHICH THE DEPARTMENT OR THE PUBLIC
HOUSING AGENCY MAY DENY OR TERMINATE ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM; AND

(3) THE PROCESS TO REQUEST A AN INFORMAL HEARING.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4–2916.

THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY SHALL RECERTIFY A
FAMILY FOR CONTINUED ADMISSION UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH FEDERAL GUIDELINES UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHER PROGRAM.

4–2917.

(A) IF THE HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD WHO WAS RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER
THE STATE PROGRAM DIES, A SURVIVING FAMILY MEMBER MAY CONTINUE TO
RECEIVE THE ASSISTANCE IF THE HOUSEHOLD IS SOLELY OCCUPIED BY REMAINING
FAMILY MEMBERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) IF AN ELDERLY FAMILY MEMBER WHO WAS RECEIVING
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM DIES:

(I) A REMAINING ELDERLY INDIVIDUAL IN THE UNIT SHALL
RECEIVE THE ASSISTANCE; OR

(II) HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS SHALL TERMINATE.

(2) IF AN ELDERLY FAMILY MEMBER WHO WAS RECEIVING
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM MOVES TO A FEDERALLY ASSISTED
LONG–TERM CARE FACILITY, THE HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS SHALL
~~TERMINATE.~~

4–2918.

ANY GUIDELINES ON THE TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE OR ON EVICTIONS
ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR A PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE SHALL BE AT LEAST AS PROTECTIVE OF TENANTS’ RIGHTS AS GUIDELINES
ESTABLISHED UNDER THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM.

4–2919.

(A) (1) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2025, 2026, AND 2027, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $15,000,000
$10,000,000 TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR THE STATE PROGRAM.

(2) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 446

SUFFICIENT TO FUND AT LEAST THE SAME NUMBER OF VOUCHERS ISSUED IN THE
PRIOR FISCAL YEAR.

(B) OF THE AMOUNT SPECIFIED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DISTRIBUTE 1% 6% EACH YEAR TO PUBLIC HOUSING
AGENCIES TO HELP DEFRAY STAFFING EXPENSES RELATED TO THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM AND
THE STATE PROGRAM.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP A FORMULA FOR DISTRIBUTING
STATE PROGRAM FUNDS TO THE DEPARTMENT AND EACH PUBLIC HOUSING
AGENCY.

4–2920.

ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 30, 2024, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
DEPARTMENT AND EACH POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT HAS A PUBLIC HOUSING
AGENCY SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) THE NUMBER OF FAMILIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER THE
STATE PROGRAM;

(2) COMPLIANCE WITH INCOME ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS UNDER
THE FEDERAL HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM;

(3) THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF FUNDS RECEIVED;

(4) THE NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS TERMINATED FROM THE STATE
PROGRAM;

(5) THE INCOMES OF FAMILIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER THE
STATE PROGRAM;

(6) THE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATIONS WHERE FAMILIES RECEIVING
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM HAVE BEEN HOUSED;

(7) THE RACE AND GENDER OF INDIVIDUALS IN FAMILIES RECEIVING
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM;

(8) THE HOUSEHOLD SIZE FOR FAMILIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE
UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM;

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 446 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(9) THE NUMBER OF FAMILIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER THE
STATE PROGRAM, BASED ON THE PREFERENCES LISTED IN § 4–2905(B) 4–2906 OF
THIS SUBTITLE;

(10) THE LENGTH OF TIME THAT EACH FAMILY HAS RECEIVED
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE PROGRAM;

(11) THE AVERAGE LENGTH OF TIME FROM APPLICATION INTO THE
STATE PROGRAM AND RECEIPT OF HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS;

(12) ANY REFERRALS MADE FOR FAMILIES UNDER THE STATE
PROGRAM FOR WRAPAROUND SERVICES, INCLUDING JOB TRAINING; AND

(13) ANY RESOURCES USED TO ADVERTISE THE STATE PROGRAM;

(14) THE DISABILITY STATUS OF HOUSEHOLDS SERVED; AND

(15) THE NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS IN WHICH STATE PROGRAM
ASSISTANCE ENDED WITHOUT THE HOUSEHOLDS HAVING RECEIVED FEDERAL
HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS.

4–2921.

THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14