START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 806 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 806 
(Senators Kelly and Hettleman) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange and Maryland Department of Health - 
Health Care and Dental Care Coverage for Undocumented Immigrants - Report 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) to develop a report comparing options for offering affordable 
health care and dental care coverage to State residents who are ineligible for Medicaid, the 
Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), or qualified health plans (QHPs) or 
stand-alone dental plans through MHBE due to immigration status. MHBE and MDH must 
report their findings and recommendations to specified committees of the 
General Assembly by October 31, 2023. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHBE and MDH can develop the report and submit their findings and 
recommendations with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.      
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The report must include a comparison of the cost to the State, the impact 
on the uninsured, potential benefits designs, and implementation considerations for: 
 
 
offering health care and dental care coverage through (1) Medicaid and MCHP for 
individuals who are technically and financially eligible for those programs but for 
their immigration status and (2) QHPs and stand-alone dental plans to individuals 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 806/ Page 2 
technically and financially eligible to purchase coverage through MHBE but for 
their immigration status; and 
 
offering health care and dental care coverage to (1) all eligible individuals; (2) only 
individuals age 21 and younger; (3) only individuals who are at least age 65; and 
(4) only low-income individuals.  
 
Current Law:  In most cases, a noncitizen must be a qualified alien to receive Medicaid 
coverage. Medicaid covers emergency services only for lawfully present immigrants who 
remain ineligible for Medicaid, as well as undocumented immigrants. Chapter 28 of 2022 
requires Medicaid to provide comprehensive medical care and other health care services to 
noncitizen pregnant women who would be eligible for Medicaid but for their immigration 
status and to their children up to the age of one. MDH currently provides Medicaid 
coverage to any newborn from birth to age one if the child’s mother was covered by 
Medicaid for the child’s date of birth. When the newborn is added to the mother’s Medicaid 
case, the newborn receives coverage for a full year regardless of changes in family income.   
 
MHBE was created during the 2011 session to provide a marketplace for individuals and 
small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage. Through the Maryland Health 
Connection, Maryland residents can shop for health insurance plans, compare rates, and 
determine their eligibility for federal advance premium tax credits (APTCs), cost-sharing 
reduction plans, and public assistance programs such as Medicaid. MHBE is funded in part 
from a mandated $32.0 million diversion of premium tax revenues that would otherwise 
go to the general fund. However, any of these special funds that remain unspent at 
fiscal year closeout revert to the general fund.  
 
MHBE submitted a report in response to the 2021 Joint Chairmen’s Report, on costs, 
feasibility, and a review of activity in other states to serve individuals ineligible for 
Medicaid or QHPs without APTCs. The report noted that the largest population of 
non-incarcerated individuals ineligible for Medicaid or QHP coverage are undocumented 
immigrants.  
 
Additional Comments:  On December 9, 2022, the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services and the U.S. Department of the Treasury approved Washington’s application for 
a State Innovation Waiver to expand access to QHPs, stand-alone qualified dental plans, 
and a state affordability program (Cascade Care Savings) to Washington residents 
regardless of immigration status. The waiver is effective January 1, 2024, through 
December 31, 2028. California previously submitted a waiver application that would have 
permitted undocumented immigrants to purchase coverage through the state exchange 
without subsidies, but the application was withdrawn. California’s Medicaid program now 
covers income-eligible individuals of all ages, regardless of immigration status. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 806/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 363 (Delegate Cullison) - Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3