START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 846 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 846 
(Senator King) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Libraries - Circulation Records - Inspection, Use, or Disclosure Requirement 
Revision 
 
 
This bill alters the circumstances under which libraries must permit the inspection, use, or 
disclosure of the circulation record of an individual. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State government finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local library system finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Generally, a free association, school, college, or university 
library in the State must prohibit the inspection, use, or disclosure of any circulation record 
or other item, collection, or grouping of information about an individual that:   
 
 
is maintained by a library; 
 
contains an individual’s name or the identifying number, symbol, or other 
identifying particular assigned to the individual; and 
 
identifies the use a patron makes of that library’s materials, services, or facilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 846/ Page 2 
Inspection, use, or disclosure of the circulation record of an individual is permitted only in 
connection with specified activities. 
 
The bill substitutes references to “free association” libraries with “public” libraries and 
replaces the current inspection, use, and disclosure requirement. 
 
Under the bill, inspection, use, or disclosure of the circulation record of an individual is 
permitted only (1) if necessary for the reasonable operation of the library; (2) on written 
consent of the individual; or (3) by subpoena or court order. 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Talbot counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland 
School for the Deaf; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City Community 
College; Maryland State Library Agency; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland; Maryland Independent College and University Association; 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2023 
Third Reader - March 10, 2023 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2