START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 830 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 830 
(Senator Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation and 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Environmental Health Specialists and Well and Septic Systems Permitting - 
Studies (Environmental Health Systems Support Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill requires two studies related to environmental health specialists and well and septic 
systems permitting. First, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in consultation with the Board of Environmental 
Health Specialists (BEHS), must conduct a study on staffing needs for environmental 
health specialists in local health departments (LHDs). MDE and MDH must submit a report 
of their findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2023. Second, MDE, in consultation with the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) and the University of Maryland Agriculture and Food Systems (AgFS) 
Extension Program, must study the implications of the delegation of MDE’s well and septic 
systems permitting authority to MDH. MDE must submit an interim report of its findings 
and any recommendations for legislative or administrative changes to the Governor and 
the General Assembly by December 1, 2023; a final report is due by December 1, 2024. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State finances are not materially affected. Affected State agencies can 
implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local finances are not directly affected. It is assumed that local approving 
authorities can provide any necessary data and information with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 830/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Study on Staffing Needs for Environmental Health Specialists in Local Health Departments 
 
MDE and MDH, in conjunction with BEHS, must conduct a study on staffing needs for 
environmental health specialists in LHDs. The study must include (1) an analysis of the 
educational and licensing requirements for environmental health specialists, as specified; 
(2) an analysis of the competitiveness of wages for current environmental health specialists 
compared to other states’ specialists and specialists in the private sector; and (3) an analysis 
of the feasibility of establishing an apprenticeship program for environmental health 
specialists. MDE and MDH must submit a report of their findings and recommendations 
to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2023. 
 
Study on the Delegation of Well and Septic Systems Permitting Authority 
 
MDE, in consultation with DLS and AgFS, must study the implications of delegating 
MDE’s authority related to well and septic systems permitting to MDH. The study must 
address (1) the benefits of and issues with the existing system, as specified; (2) lessons that 
can be drawn from other states’ administrative structure and accountability measures; and 
(3) the optimal long-term staff organization structure to best address issues of delays, 
communication, and customer service. In conducting the study, MDE must consult with 
representatives from impacted stakeholder groups. MDE must submit an interim report of 
its findings and any recommendations for legislative or administrative changes to the 
Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2023. By December 1, 2024, 
MDE must submit a final report of its findings and any recommendations for legislative or 
administrative changes to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Environmental Health Specialists 
 
BEHS was created in 1969 to ensure that individuals practicing in Maryland as 
environmental health specialists meet minimum professional standards. The nine-member 
board regulates licensed environmental health specialists as well as environmental health 
specialists in training (individuals who meet the educational requirements for licensure but 
are obtaining relevant supervised experience); oversees approval of certificates of 
eligibility for obtaining employment (for those individuals who meet the educational 
requirements for licensure and are ready to begin obtaining relevant supervised experience 
but have not yet begun); approves continuing education courses for licensees; and 
occasionally imposes disciplinary sanctions. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 830/ Page 3 
Septic Systems Permitting 
 
MDE delegates the authority to issue permits to construct and repair conventional 
septic systems to local approving authorities. Pursuant to current regulations, a person may 
not construct or attempt to construct a septic system without first obtaining a permit from 
the appropriate approving authority. A person also may not alter a septic system or cause 
it to receive any increase in flow or change in the character of wastewater unless permitted. 
A person must obtain an appropriate septic system permit, well construction permit, public 
or private water supply system permit, or public or private sewerage permit before 
constructing or altering any structure, residence, floating home, or commercial 
establishment that is served or planned to be served by a septic system or a private water 
supply system. Local approving authorities, generally LHDs, conduct inspections. 
 
Water Well Construction Permitting 
 
MDE’s water well construction program regulates the permitting and installation of water 
wells in the State, including for potable and nonpotable supply wells. Wells must be 
installed by a Maryland-licensed well driller, and the licensed well driller must obtain a 
well construction permit prior to drilling. MDE delegates authority to enforce the 
State’s water well construction regulations to LHDs and other local approving authorities. 
Licensed well drillers apply to the local approving authority to obtain a well construction 
permit prior to drilling. After obtaining a permit to drill, the well driller must also submit 
a completion report to the approving authority. If the well is to be used as a potable water 
supply, a Certificate of Potability is required before the well is put into service. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Higher Education Commission; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 830/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4