START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 578

Chapter 578

(Senate Bill 801)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Cybersecurity – Cyber Maryland Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Cyber Maryland Program in the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation to increase the cybersecurity workforce in the State, build
an advanced cybersecurity workforce, and carry out other purposes related to the
cybersecurity workforce in the State; establishing the Cyber Maryland Fund;
establishing the Cyber Maryland Board; requiring the Maryland Higher Education
Commission, in consultation with a certain organization, to expand the Cyber
Warrior Diversity Program under certain circumstances on or before a certain date
each year; repealing the requirement that the Commission allocate certain funds to
certain institutions in the Cyber Warrior Diversity Program on a certain basis;
establishing requirements related to unexpended funds allocated by the Commission
under the Cyber Warrior Diversity Program; and generally relating to the Cyber
Maryland Program.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–496
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 11–1401(a), (c), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 11–1402 and 11–1405
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–496.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 578 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “BOARD” MEANS THE CYBER MARYLAND BOARD.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE CYBER MARYLAND PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A CYBER MARYLAND PROGRAM IN THE CORPORATION.

(C) THE PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM ARE TO:

(1) CREATE AND EXECUTE A TALENT PIPELINE THAT MATERIALLY
REDUCES WORKFORCE VACANCIES BY JULY 1, 2026;

(2) SERVE AS A ONE–STOP SHOP FOR EMPLOYERS SEEKING TO
LEVERAGE CYBER WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS OFFERED BY THE STATE
AND ITS PARTNERS;

(3) INFORM CYBERSECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS
OPERATED BY PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ENTITIES WITH INDUSTRY–DRIVEN NEEDS;

(4) BUILD THE MOST ADVANCED LOCAL AND STATE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY WORKFORCE IN THE NATION, WHICH, TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT
POSSIBLE, REFLECTS THE RACIAL, GENDER, ETHNIC, AND GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY
OF THE STATE;

(5) COORDINATE AND ACCELERATE CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH AND
INNOVATION IN THE STATE; AND

(6) SUPPORT THE EFFORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE THE STATE GOVERNMENT’S CYBERSECURITY POSTURE,
INCLUDING STATE AGENCIES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS, AND CRITICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE.

(D) THE PROGRAM SHALL:

(1) CONDUCT ONGOING RESEARCH BY COLLABORATING WITH THE
CYBERSECURITY ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND, INC., CYBERSECURITY TALENT
ADVISORY BOARD TO COLLECT AND ANALYZE REAL–TIME INDUSTRY DATA TO
IDENTIFY CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE NEEDS AS DESCRIBED IN THE U.S.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE TALENT PIPELINE MANAGEMENT APPROACH;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 578

(2) USE THE RESULTS OF THE RESEARCH DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION TO INCREASE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF EXISTING STATE
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE PROGRAMS FOR EMPLOYERS IN THE STATE;

(3) FACILITATE PARTNERSHIPS FOR NEW TRAINING AND EDUCATION
PROGRAMS TO ADDRESS THE WORKFORCE NEEDS IDENTIFIED UNDER ITEM (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION;

(4) DEVELOP A STATEWIDE STRATEGIC PLAN FOR CYBERSECURITY
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, USING THE RESULTS OF THE RESEARCH DESCRIBED IN
ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND WITH INPUT FROM THE CYBERSECURITY
ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND, INC., CYBERSECURITY TALENT ADVISORY BOARD ON
OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2023;

(5) ADMINISTER AND MANAGE THE CYBER MARYLAND FUND; AND

(6) ENSURE THAT OUTCOMES OF THE PROGRAM ARE INCLUSIVE AND,
TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE, REFLECT THE RACIAL, GENDER, ETHNIC,
AND GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

(E) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE CYBER MARYLAND
FUND.

(2) THERE IS A CYBER MARYLAND FUND.

(3) THE PURPOSES OF THE FUND ARE TO:

(I) ACHIEVE THE PURPOSES IDENTIFIED UNDER SUBSECTION
(C) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(II) SUPPORT INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO MEETING
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE NEEDS.

(4) THE PROGRAM SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(5) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(6) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 578 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND; AND

(II) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(7) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR:

(I) ADMINISTERING THE PROGRAM; AND

(II) PROVIDING GRANTS TO ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY
SCHOOLS, INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, INCLUDING COMMUNITY
COLLEGES, FOR–PROFIT CORPORATIONS, AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS TO
OPERATE CYBERSECURITY PROGRAMS BASED ON THE STRATEGIC PLAN OF THE
PROGRAM.

(8) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(9) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(10) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF $250,000 FOR THE FUND.

(11) FOR SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING, FOR FISCAL
YEAR 2025 AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, $250,000 OF THE FUND SHALL BE USED
FOR IMPLEMENTING THE U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE TALENT PIPELINE
MANAGEMENT APPROACH.

(12) (I) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET
BILL AN APPROPRIATION IN AN AMOUNT SUFFICIENT FOR HIRING INDIVIDUALS TO
CONDUCT THE DUTIES OF THE PROGRAM, INCLUDING AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
AND AT LEAST ONE ADMINISTRATOR.

(II) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL:

1. BE APPOINTED BY THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 578

2. HAVE RELEVANT QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERIENCE
WITH THE ACTIVITIES AND PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM; AND

3. SERVE AT THE PLEASURE OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER.

(F) (1) THERE IS A CYBER MARYLAND BOARD.

(2) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(I) THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF DELEGATES COCHAIRS OF THE
JOINT COMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, AND
BIOTECHNOLOGY;

(II) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(III) THE SECRETARY OF LABOR, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(IV) THE MARYLAND SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, OR
THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(V) THE SECRETARY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, OR THE
SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(VI) THE CHAIR OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE
CYBERSECURITY ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND, INC., OR THE CHAIR’S DESIGNEE;

(VII) THE CHAIR OF THE MARYLAND WORKFORCE ASSOCIATION,
OR THE CHAIR’S DESIGNEE;

(VIII) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE
GOVERNOR:

1. FIVE MEMBERS FROM THE PRIVATE SECTOR WITH
CYBERSECURITY NEEDS;

2. ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION WITH EXPERTISE IN CYBERSECURITY TALENT DEVELOPMENT;

3. ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A COMMUNITY
COLLEGE;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 578 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A 4–YEAR, PUBLIC
HBCU COLLEGE;

5. ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A 4–YEAR, PUBLIC
COLLEGE; AND

(IX) THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, OR THE CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER’S DESIGNEE.

(3) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD SHALL ELECT A CHAIR FROM AMONG THE MEMBERS OF
THE BOARD.

(II) THE CHAIR MAY NOT BE:

1. A STATE EMPLOYEE; OR

2. THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.

(4) THE BOARD SHALL:

(I) PROVIDE INPUT REGARDING THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
STATEWIDE CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIC PLAN
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(4) OF THIS SECTION;

(II) ASSIST THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF THE
PROGRAM WITH STAKEHOLDER OUTREACH AND ENGAGEMENT;

(III) HELP THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE PROGRAM
EXPLORE SYNERGIES WHERE APPROPRIATE WITH CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS BY REGIONAL AND COUNTY WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
ENTITIES;

(IV) COORDINATE AS NECESSARY WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(V) PROVIDE OTHER ADVICE AND SUPPORT FOR THE PROGRAM.

(5) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(I) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
BOARD; BUT

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 578

(II) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER
THE STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

(6) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE AN APPOINTED MEMBER OF THE
BOARD FOR INCOMPETENCE, MISCONDUCT, OR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES
OF THE POSITION.

(G) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2026, THE
PROGRAM, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE CORPORATION, SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT
ON THE OPERATION AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM TO THE GOVERNOR AND,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

Article – Education

11–1401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “Governing entity” means:

(1) The Board of Trustees of Baltimore City Community College;

(2) The President of Bowie State University;

(3) The President of Coppin State University;

(4) The Board of Regents of Morgan State University;

(5) The President of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore; and

(6) The President of the University of Maryland Baltimore County
Training Centers.

(d) “Program” means a Cyber Warrior Diversity Program.

11–1402.

(a) There is a Cyber Warrior Diversity Program at:

(1) Baltimore City Community College;

(2) Bowie State University;

(3) Coppin State University;
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 578 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) Morgan State University;

(5) The University of Maryland Eastern Shore; and

(6) The University of Maryland Baltimore County Training Centers that
are located in the State.

(b) The purpose of each Program is to train students in computer networking and
cybersecurity.

(c) The governing entity at each institution is responsible for administering the
Program at that institution.

(D) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2024, THE
COMMISSION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE CYBERSECURITY ASSOCIATION OF
MARYLAND, INC., SHALL, IF APPLICABLE, EXPAND THE PROGRAM TO
ACCOMMODATE ANY CHANGES IN CERTIFICATION TRENDS IDENTIFIED UNDER §
10–496 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

11–1405.

(a) Subject to the requirements of this section, for fiscal year 2020 and each fiscal
year thereafter, the Governor shall include in the annual State operating budget an
appropriation of $2,500,000 for the Commission to provide grants to Baltimore City
Community College, Bowie State University, Coppin State University, Morgan State
University, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, and the University of Maryland
Baltimore County Training Centers for the Program established under this section.

(b) Grants provided under subsection (a) of this section shall be in the amount of:

(1) At least $10,000 per student at:

(i) Baltimore City Community College;

(ii) Bowie State University;

(iii) Coppin State University;

(iv) Morgan State University; and

(v) The University of Maryland Eastern Shore; and

(2) $500 per student at the University of Maryland Baltimore County
Training Centers, for the purpose of participation in job apprenticeship events.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 578

(c) On or before December 15, 2019, and each December 15 thereafter, the
governing entities shall notify the Commission of the number of students enrolled in each
institution’s Program for the current academic year.

(d) [(1)] The funding provided in each fiscal year in accordance with this section
shall supplement, but not supplant, any funds that would otherwise be provided for each
institution.

[(2) The Commission annually shall allocate funds to Baltimore City
Community College, Bowie State University, Coppin State University, Morgan State
University, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, and the University of Maryland
Baltimore County Training Centers on a pro rata basis according to the most recent
enrollment data required under subsection (c) of this section.]

(E) NOTWITHSTANDING § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, AT THE END OF EACH FISCAL YEAR, ANY UNEXPENDED
FUNDS ALLOCATED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) REVERT TO THE COMMISSION TO BE ALLOCATED UNDER THIS
SECTION FOR THE UPCOMING FISCAL YEAR; AND

(2) BE USED TO SUPPLEMENT, BUT NOT SUPPLANT, THE AMOUNT
REQUIRED TO BE APPROPRIATED TO THE COMMISSION TO BE ALLOCATED UNDER
THIS SECTION FOR THE UPCOMING FISCAL YEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) In this section, “Program” means the Cyber Maryland Program established
under § 10–496 of the Economic Development Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

(b) It is the intent of the General Assembly that:

(1) the Program immediately consider the Cybersecurity Pathways Across
Maryland from the U.S. Department of Labor’s Trade Adjustment Assistance Community
College & Career Training (2014–2018) as an immediate, proven, and scalable mechanism
to fill jobs; and

(2) in implementing the plan required under § 10–496(d)(4) of the
Economic Development Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, the Program consider:

(i) the role and scale of the following programs:

1. K–12 Career Pathways & Teacher Externships;

2. the Maryland Technology Internship Program;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 578 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. the Maryland EARN Program;

4. the Maryland Apprenticeship & Training Program; and

5. the Cyber Warrior Diversity Program; and

(ii) the development of cyber range scenarios and provision of cyber
range training through appropriate partners.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, for fiscal year 2025 and each
year thereafter, funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account may be transferred by budget
amendment in accordance with § 7–310 of the State Finance and Procurement Article to
implement this Act.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10