START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 747

Chapter 747

(Senate Bill 841)

AN ACT concerning

Local School Systems – Student Field Trips – Funding

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to include a certain amount of funding in the
annual budget bill for the State Department of Education to provide grants to local
school systems for expenses related to certain student field trips; and generally
relating to funding for local school systems for student field trips.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–132
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–132.

(A) IN THIS SECTION:

(1) “MUSEUM OF CULTURAL IMPORT” MEANS A MUSEUM THAT
PROVIDES HISTORIC AND SOCIOLOGICAL LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES ON THE
HISTORY AND CULTURE OF AN OPPRESSED AND HISTORICALLY
UNDERREPRESENTED COMMUNITY, LEAVING ATTENDEES WITH A DEEPER
UNDERSTANDING OF THE COMMUNITY AND ALL PEOPLE’S SHARED HUMANITY; AND

(2) “MUSEUM OF CULTURAL IMPORT” INCLUDES:

(I) THE UNITED STATES HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM;

(II) THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY
AND CULTURE;

(III) THE JEWISH MUSEUM OF MARYLAND; AND

(IV) THE REGINALD F. LEWIS MUSEUM OF MARYLAND AFRICAN
AMERICAN HISTORY AND CULTURE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 747 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION OF $500,000 FOR THE DEPARTMENT TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS FOR ANY RELATED EXPENSES FOR STUDENT FIELD TRIPS
TO:

~~(1)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UNITED~~ ~~STATES~~ ~~HOLOCAUST~~ ~~MEMORIAL~~ ~~MUSEUM;~~

(2) THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY AND
~~CULTURE;~~

(3) THE JEWISH MUSEUM OF MARYLAND; AND

(4) THE REGINALD F. LEWIS MUSEUM OF MARYLAND AFRICAN
AMERICAN HISTORY AND CULTURE.

(B) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, SHALL SUBMIT
A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FOR THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR ON:

(1) THE NAME OF EACH SCHOOL THAT RECEIVED A GRANT;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF EACH GRANT;

(3) THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS AND THEIR GRADE LEVEL WHO
BENEFITED FROM THE GRANT;

(4) THE DESTINATION OF THE FIELD TRIP; AND

(5) THE TYPE OF EXPENSES FOR WHICH THE GRANT WAS USED
MUSEUMS OF CULTURAL IMPORT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2