START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 858 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 858 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Firearm Safety - Storage Requirements and Youth Suicide Prevention (Jaelynn's 
Law) 
 
 
This bill modifies and expands (1) an existing prohibition relating to a child’s access to 
firearms and (2) an existing prohibition relating to possession of a regulated firearm. In 
addition, the bill requires the Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services to develop a 
youth suicide prevention and firearm safe storage guide by January 1, 2024. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must post the guide on its website and make an electronic 
version of the guide available to families, health and social services providers, and other 
interested entities, as specified. MDH must provide grants to local school systems, local 
health departments, and nonprofit agencies to support the education of families on the safe 
storage practices recommended in the guide. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDH increase by $50,000 in FY 2024 only, 
as discussed below. Minimal increase in general fund revenues and potential minimal 
increase in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s expanded application of existing 
penalties. Grant-related expenditures for MDH cannot be reliably estimated, as discussed 
below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$50,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s expanded application of existing penalties. Local revenues and expenditures increase 
if MDH grants are available, as discussed below. Affected local government agencies can 
likely distribute the guide using existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 858/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Access to a Firearm (§ 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article):  The bill modifies and expands 
the existing prohibition on access to a firearm by an unsupervised child (defined as an 
individual younger than age 16) by establishing that a person may not store or leave a 
loaded firearm in a location where the person knew or should have known that an 
unsupervised minor (defined in existing statute as an individual younger than age 18) has 
access to the firearm. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by the existing 
penalty of a maximum fine of $1,000. The bill alters the existing statutory exceptions to 
reflect application of the statute to a minor (rather than a child). 
 
Youth Suicide Prevention and Firearm Safe Storage Guide:  The Deputy Secretary for 
Public Health Services must establish a stakeholder advisory committee to make 
recommendations regarding the development of a youth suicide prevention and firearm 
safe storage guide. 
 
On or before January 1, 2024, the Deputy Secretary of Public Health Services must develop 
a guide that (1) provides a description of the firearm and ammunition requirements for 
safely storing firearms under State law; (2) identifies the risks associated with unsafe 
firearm storage for minors, including suicide, death, or serious bodily injury from 
accidental discharge, and shooting incidents involving minors; and (3) incorporates best 
practices for firearm and ammunition safe storage. MDH must (1) post the guide on its 
website; (2) make an electronic version of the guide available to families, health and social 
services providers, and any other entities with an interest in youth suicide prevention or 
firearms storage, including several specified entities and specified instructors; and 
(3) provide grants to local school systems, local health departments, and nonprofit agencies 
to support the education of families on the safe storage practices recommended in the guide. 
 
Required Reports:  By December 31, 2024, 2025, and 2026, the Deputy Secretary for 
Public Health Services must report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the 
bill’s provisions, as specified. 
 
Prohibition on Possession – Regulated Firearms:  A person may not possess a regulated 
firearm if the person (1) has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a second or 
subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article (access to a firearm by a minor 
under the bill) or (2) has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a violation of 
§ 4-104 if the violation resulted in the use of a loaded firearm by a minor causing death or 
serious bodily injury to the minor or another person. In addition, a person who has been 
convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 may not possess a regulated 
firearm for five years following the date of the conviction. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 858/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Access to a Firearm:  A person may not store or leave a loaded firearm in a location where 
the person knew or should have known that an unsupervised child (defined as an individual 
younger than age 16) would gain access to the firearm. A violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 
The prohibition does not apply if: 
 
 
the child’s access to a firearm is supervised by an individual at least age 18; 
 
the child’s access to a firearm was obtained as a result of an unlawful entry; 
 
the firearm is in the possession or control of a law enforcement officer while the 
officer is engaged in official duties; or 
 
the child has a certificate of firearm and hunter safety issued under applicable 
provisions of the Natural Resources Article. 
 
A violation may not (1) be considered evidence of negligence; (2) be considered evidence 
of contributory negligence; (3) limit liability of a party or an insurer; or (4) diminish 
recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a firearm 
or ammunition. A party, witness, or lawyer may not refer to a violation during a trial of a 
civil action that involves property damage, personal injury, or death.  
 
Prohibitions on Possession – Regulated Firearms:  Generally, a person is prohibited from 
possessing a regulated firearm if the person: 
 
 
has been convicted of a disqualifying crime; 
 
has been convicted of a violation classified as a common law crime and received a 
term of imprisonment of more than two years; 
 
is a fugitive from justice; 
 
is a habitual drunkard; 
 
is addicted to a controlled dangerous substance or is a habitual user; 
 
suffers from a mental disorder and has a history of violent behavior against the 
person or another; 
 
has been found incompetent to stand trial; 
 
has been found not criminally responsible; 
 
has been voluntarily admitted for more than 30 consecutive days to a facility that 
provides treatment or other services for mental disorders; 
 
has been involuntarily committed to a facility that provides treatment or other 
services for mental disorders; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 858/ Page 4 
 
is under the protection of a guardian of the person or property of a disabled person 
appointed by a court, except for cases in which the appointment of a guardian is 
solely a result of a physical disability; 
 
is a respondent against whom a current non ex parte civil protective order has been 
entered in this State or an order for protection has been issued by a court of another 
state or a Native American tribe and is in effect; or 
 
if younger than age 30 at the time of possession, has been adjudicated delinquent by 
a juvenile court for an act that would be a disqualifying crime if committed by an 
adult. 
 
In addition, a person is prohibited from possessing a regulated firearm if the person was 
previously convicted of (1) a crime of violence; (2) a violation of specified controlled 
dangerous substances laws; or (3) an offense under the laws of another state or the 
United States that would constitute one of these crimes if committed in this State. 
 
Prohibited possession of a regulated firearm is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment 
for up to five years and/or a $10,000 maximum fine. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally from monetary penalties 
imposed in the District Court for violations of the bill’s expanded prohibitions. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH advises that Public Health Services falls within the Prevention and Health Promotion 
Administration (PHPA) and that PHPA does not handle firearm safety or suicide 
prevention. Thus, additional resources are needed to produce the youth suicide prevention 
and firearm safety guide. In addition, the short timeframe within which the guide must be 
developed necessitates hiring an outside consultant. Accordingly, general fund 
expenditures likely increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2024 only for MDH to contract with an 
outside entity to develop the required guide and lead the stakeholder advisory committee. 
MDH can likely handle the reporting requirements with existing resources. 
 
Although the bill requires MDH to provide grants to local school systems, local health 
departments, and nonprofit agencies to support the education of families on the safe storage 
practices recommended by the guide, the bill does not identify a funding source and no 
funding is specifically provided for this purpose in the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly. If grant funding is made available and MDH has to administer a grant 
program, general fund expenditures for MDH increase further. The extent to which this 
occurs cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 858/ Page 5 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded 
application of an existing incarceration penalty due to more people being committed to 
State correctional facilities and increased payments to counties for reimbursement of 
inmate costs. The number of people convicted under the bill’s provisions is expected to be 
minimal. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$4,970 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For persons sentenced to a term 
of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the discretion to order that the 
sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional facility. The State provides 
assistance to the counties for locally sentenced inmates and for (1) inmates who are 
sentenced to and awaiting transfer to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced inmates 
confined in a local detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) inmates who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local revenues may increase minimally from monetary penalties 
imposed in the circuit courts. Local revenues increase to the extent MDH provides grant 
funding and local school systems and local health departments are awarded grants under 
the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally as a result of incarceration 
penalties imposed for violations of the bill’s expanded prohibitions. Counties pay the full 
cost of incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. A 
$45 per diem State grant is provided to each county for each day between 12 and 18 months 
that a sentenced inmate is confined in a local detention center. Counties also receive an 
additional $45 per day grant for inmates who have been sentenced to the custody of the 
State but are confined in or who receive reentry or other prerelease programming and 
services from a local facility. Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have 
ranged from approximately $90 to $300 per inmate in recent years. 
 
Local expenditures increase to the extent MDH provides grant funding and local 
jurisdictions are awarded grants under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 858/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  The Administrative Office of the Courts advises that during 
fiscal 2022, there were 69 violations and 1 guilty disposition in the District Court and 
45 violations and 4 guilty dispositions in the circuit courts under § 4-104 of the Criminal 
Law Article. The Division of Parole and Probation opened three cases in fiscal 2022 for 
the same offense. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 659 and SB 676 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 307 (Delegate Bartlett, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester counties; Towns of 
Bel Air and Leonardtown; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2023 
Third Reader - March 30, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6