START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 962 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 962 
(Anne Arundel County Senators) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Residency Requirement 
 
 
This bill alters the residency requirement for an alcoholic beverages license on behalf of a 
partnership, corporation or club, or limited liability company in Anne Arundel County and 
establishes that an individual who is a resident of the State at the time of the application 
satisfies the applicable residency requirement, as specified. The license remains valid only 
for as long as the resident applicant remains a resident of the State. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Anne Arundel County 
operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Applicants seeking an alcoholic beverages license on behalf of a 
partnership, corporation or club, or limited liability company in Anne Arundel County have 
specific residency requirements. 
 
For a partnership, each of the partners must (1) reside in the jurisdiction or municipality 
where the business is located at the time the application is filed and (2) remain a resident 
of the jurisdiction or municipality where the business is located for the duration of time the 
license is in effect. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 962/ Page 2 
For a corporation or club, unless otherwise specified, a license on behalf of a corporation 
or club must be applied for and issued to three officers of the corporation or club as 
individuals. At least one of the three officers must (1) be a resident of the jurisdiction or 
municipality at the time the application is filed and (2) remain a resident of the jurisdiction 
or municipality for the duration of time the license is in effect. 
 
For a limited liability company, if a limited liability company has fewer than 
three authorized individuals, each authorized individual must apply for the license. If the 
limited liability company has three or more authorized individuals, three authorized 
individuals must apply for the license. At least one of the authorized individuals must (1) be 
a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality at the time the application is filed and 
(2) remain a resident of the jurisdiction or municipality for the duration of time the license 
is in effect. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 17, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2