START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 928 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 928 
(Senator Griffith) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Insurance – Credit for Reinsurance Model Law – Reciprocal Jurisdictions 
 
   
This bill expressly prohibits the Maryland Insurance Commissioner from removing a 
reciprocal jurisdiction (generally meaning a jurisdiction that is part of a certain 
international agreement) from the list of jurisdictions authorized to operate in the State 
without the need to post collateral.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 100 and 101 of 2020 adopted changes made to 
the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Model Act #785 “Credit for 
Reinsurance Model Law.” In particular, the Acts implemented provisions of the covered 
agreements between the United States, the European Union (EU), and the United Kingdom. 
States were required to adopt the changes by October 1, 2022, or face federal preemption 
by the Federal Insurance Office (FIO).  
 
Among other things, the Acts required the Insurance Commissioner to create and publish 
a list of reciprocal jurisdictions that are part of the international agreement and that meet 
other specified requirements. Reciprocal jurisdiction means a jurisdiction that is:  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 928/ Page 2 
 
outside the United States that is subject to an in-force covered agreement with the 
United States, each within its legal authority or, in the case of a covered agreement 
between the United States and the EU, is a member state of the EU;  
 
in the United States and meets the requirements for accreditation under the NAIC 
financial standards and accreditation program; or  
 
otherwise a qualified jurisdiction, as defined by State law and regulation. 
 
Under the agreement, and the Acts implementing the agreement, these jurisdictions are 
allowed to operate in the State under specified conditions.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Insurance Administration advises that the bill 
corrects an inconsistency perceived by FIO between Chapters 100 and 101 and the NAIC 
model law the Acts were meant to implement. The bill corrects this inconsistency by 
expressly prohibiting the Insurance Commissioner from removing a reciprocal jurisdiction 
that is the subject of a covered agreement from the list of jurisdictions allowed to operate 
without the need to post collateral in the State.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2