START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 968 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 968 
(Senators King and Elfreth) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Income Tax - Captive Real Estate Investment Trusts - Alterations 
 
 
This bill modifies the definition of a “captive real estate investment trust (REIT)” for 
purposes of the Maryland income tax addition modification for the amount of the federal 
dividends paid deduction claimed by a captive REIT. Specifically, the bill excludes from 
the definition of a captive REIT a corporation, trust, or association that otherwise meets 
the ownership requirements for status as a captive REIT and is more than 50% owned or 
controlled by (1) an entity organized as a trust in which a listed Australian property trust 
owns or controls, directly or indirectly, 75% or more of the voting power or value of the 
beneficial interests or shares of the trust or (2) a qualified foreign entity, as defined by the 
bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues, Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues, 
and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures may decrease by an 
indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues may decrease by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Qualified foreign entity” means a corporation, trust, association, or 
partnership that is organized under the laws of a foreign government and:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 968/ Page 2 
 
at least 75% of the total asset value of the entity at the close of the entity’s taxable 
year is represented by real estate assets, as defined in § 856 of the Internal Revenue 
Code (IRC), cash and cash equivalents, and U.S. government securities; 
 
is not subject to tax on amounts distributed to the entity’s beneficial owners or is 
exempt from entity-level taxation; 
 
on an annual basis, distributes at least 85% of the taxable income of the entity, as 
computed in the jurisdiction in which the entity is organized, to the holders of the 
shares or certificates of the beneficial interests of the entity; 
 
of which not more than 10% of the voting power or value of the beneficial interests 
or shares of the entity is owned or controlled directly, indirectly, or constructively 
by a single entity or individual, or the beneficial interests or shares of the entity are 
regularly traded on an established securities market; and 
 
the entity is organized in a foreign country that has a tax treaty with the 
U.S. government. 
 
Current Law:  A corporation, trust, or association that operates as a vehicle for investment 
in real estate and meets various specified requirements may qualify for treatment as a 
REIT for federal income tax purposes. To qualify for REIT status, a corporation, trust, or 
association must, among other requirements, derive at least 95% of its gross income from 
specified passive income sources and at least 75% of its income from specified real estate 
sources. 
 
In general, for purposes of computing federal taxable income, a REIT that distributes at 
least 90% of its income to shareholders and otherwise meets all applicable requirements 
may deduct the amount of dividends paid during the taxable year. Thus, such dividends are 
subject to income tax only at the shareholder level. 
 
Maryland’s income tax generally conforms to the federal tax treatment of REITs, except 
in the case of “captive REITs,” which are more than 50% owned or controlled by a single 
entity. Chapters 583 and 584 of 2007 disallowed the dividends paid deduction for captive 
REITs for purposes of Maryland corporate income tax. Thus, a REIT that meets the 
definition of a captive REIT must add back to income the amount of its federal dividends 
paid deduction for purposes of Maryland’s corporate income tax. 
 
The Acts defined a captive REIT as a corporation, trust, or association:   
 
 
that is considered a REIT for the taxable year under § 856 of the IRC; 
 
that is not regularly traded on an established securities market; and 
 
where more than 50% of the voting power or value of the beneficial interests or 
shares, at any time during the last half of the taxable year, is owned or controlled, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 968/ Page 3 
directly or indirectly, by a single entity that is subject to the provisions of 
Subchapter C of Chapter 1 of the IRC. 
 
The Acts expressly excluded from the definition of a captive REIT:   
 
 
a corporation, trust, or association that meets the ownership requirements for status 
as a captive REIT and is more than 50% owned or controlled by (1) a REIT other 
than a captive REIT; (2) a person exempt from taxation under § 501 of the IRC; or 
(3) a listed Australian property trust; or 
 
subject to regulations, a REIT that is intended to become regularly traded on an 
established securities market, as specified. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill’s changes, which narrow the definition of a captive 
REIT for Maryland income tax purposes, are based on provisions of the Multistate Tax 
Commission’s Proposed Model Statute for Taxation of Captive Real Estate Investment 
Trusts as amended by the Multistate Tax Commission’s Executive Committee on 
January 3, 2008. Under the bill, fewer REITs may be considered captive REITs subject to 
the Maryland addition modification for the amount of the federal dividends paid deduction 
claimed by a captive REIT. 
 
Thus, beginning in fiscal 2024, general fund, HEIF, and TTF revenues decrease to the 
extent the bill exempts additional REITs from the addition modification for captive REITs 
and reduces the corporate income tax liability of affected entities. A portion of 
TTF revenues from the corporate income tax are used to provide transportation capital 
grants to local governments (local highway user revenues); thus, local highway user 
revenues and corresponding TTF expenditures may also decrease beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 
A preliminary analysis by the Comptroller’s Office indicates that most REITs subject to 
the existing addition modification would not be impacted by the bill’s changes. However, 
the Comptroller’s Office advises that a thorough examination of the individual corporate 
structures of potentially affected entities is required in order to fully analyze the bill’s 
potential impact on corporate income tax revenues. Thus, a precise estimate of the bill’s 
effect on State and local finances cannot be determined at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 968/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Multistate Tax Commission; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 15, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4