START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 493

Chapter 493

(Senate Bill 922)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Construction Education and Innovation Fund – Funding – Alteration

FOR the purpose of altering the amount of a certain appropriation the Governor is required
to include in the annual budget bill for the Maryland Construction Education and
Innovation Fund for certain fiscal years; and generally relating to funding for the
Maryland Construction Education and Innovation Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–1302(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–1302(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2022 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

11–1302.

(a) There is a Construction Education and Innovation Fund.

(d) The Fund consists of:

(1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

(2) money made available to the Fund through federal programs or private
contributions;

(3) money derived by the Center; or

(4) any other money made available to the Center for the Fund.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 493 2023 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) (1) For fiscal year 2018 [and each fiscal year thereafter] THROUGH
FISCAL YEAR 2024, the Governor shall include in the annual [State] budget BILL an
appropriation to the Fund of $250,000 to support the operation of the Center.

(2) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER
THROUGH FISCAL YEAR 2029, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL
BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND OF $625,000 TO SUPPORT THE
OPERATION OF THE CENTER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023.

Approved by the Governor, May 8, 2023.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2