START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 974 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 974 
(Senator Bailey, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State-Owned Nursing Homes - Deficiencies, Citations, and Fines - Contractor 
Reporting Requirements 
 
   
This emergency bill requires a contractor operating a State-owned nursing home to 
promptly provide notice of a deficiency or enforcement action by a “monitoring agency” 
to specified entities. Within 30 days after receiving a citation or fine from a monitoring 
agency, the contractor must also provide specified entities with (1) a statement of the 
deficiencies found by the monitoring agency; (2) a plan of correction; and (3) all 
communications from the monitoring agency regarding survey activities conducted at the 
nursing home. By January 1, 2024, and annually thereafter, the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on all federal and 
State survey activities conducted and enforcement actions imposed during the immediately 
preceding 12-month period at each State-owned nursing home that is operated by a 
contractor.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.          
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Monitoring agency” means the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services or the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) within MDH. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 974/ Page 2 
Notice of a deficiency or enforcement action and related documentation must be provided 
to the Governor, the State agency overseeing the nursing home, specified committees of 
the General Assembly, and the members of the General Assembly who represent the 
district in which the nursing home is located. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions  
 
“Deficiency” means a condition existing in a nursing home or an action or inaction by the 
nursing home staff that results in a potential for more than minimal harm, actual harm, or 
serious and immediate threat to one or more residents. “Actual harm deficiency” means a 
condition existing in a nursing home or an action or inaction by the nursing home staff that 
has caused physical or emotional injury or impairment to a resident. “Serious and 
immediate threat” means a situation in which immediate corrective action is necessary 
because a nursing home’s noncompliance with one or more State regulations has caused or 
is likely to cause serious injury, harm, impairment to, or death of a resident receiving care 
in the nursing home. 
 
“Nursing home” means a facility (other than a facility offering domiciliary or personal 
care) which offers nonacute inpatient care to patients suffering from a disease, chronic 
illness, condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease requiring maximal 
nursing care without continuous hospital services and who require medical services and 
nursing services rendered by or under the supervision of a licensed nurse together with 
convalescent, restorative, or rehabilitative services.  
 
Office of Health Care Quality 
      
OHCQ generally makes an unannounced site visit and conducts a full survey of each 
licensed nursing home at least once per year. After a nursing home complaint alleging 
actual harm, OHCQ must initiate an investigation within 10 business days. If MDH 
receives a complaint alleging immediate jeopardy to a resident, it must make every effort 
to investigate the complaint within 24 hours, and no later than 48 hours, after receiving the 
complaint. 
 
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home 
 
The Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) manages one veterans home, 
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH) in St. Mary’s County. CHVH provides assisted 
living and skilled nursing care for eligible veterans and their spouses who are either unable 
to care for themselves because of a disability or advancing age, or who have requirements 
for nursing home care. Clinical care and health care management at CHVH are provided 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 974/ Page 3 
by a private contractor but are overseen by MDVA staff. The facility is Medicare and 
Medicaid certified and is inspected annually.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1301 (Delegate Crosby, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Veterans 
Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - April 4, 2023 
Third Reader - April 8, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3