START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 910 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 910 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program – Definitions – Therapy Horse 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “therapy horse” under the Maryland Veterans Service 
Animal Program by removing the requirement that a stable be a premier accredited 
member center of the Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship, International 
(PATH, Intl.) to determine if a horse is appropriate for interactions with veterans. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 416 of 2017 established the Maryland Veterans Service Animal 
Program and Fund. The program is designed to refer eligible veterans to selected nonprofit 
training organizations to be paired with “service dogs” or “support dogs” and facilitate 
their training. The Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs must select at least 
one nonprofit training entity that meets specified qualifications to carry out elements of the 
program. 
 
Chapter 465 of 2019 expanded the program to include nonprofit training entities that use 
trained therapy horses for interaction with veterans. Under the program, “therapy horse” 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 910/ Page 2 
includes, among other things, a horse determined appropriate for interactions with veterans 
by a stable licensed by the State that is a PATH, Intl. premier accredited member center. 
 
Revenue from the fund may be used only to pay a nonprofit training entity and for 
administrative costs of the program. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in 
accordance with the State budget. At the close of fiscal 2022, there was $13,451 in the 
fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2