START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 944 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 944 
(Senator Waldstreicher) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Historical Trust - Warner Manor in the Town of Kensington - 
Extinguishment or Termination of Easement 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Historical Trust (MHT) to, by July 1, 2023, extinguish or 
terminate a specified easement, dated June 28, 2010, granted by Montgomery County to 
MHT, on the parcel of land known as Warner Manor (also known as Brainard Warner 
House and/or Circle Manor) in the Town of Kensington. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill can be implemented by MHT with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MHT is given various authority and duties under State law, including: 
 
 
the authority (1) to make contracts, leases, or other agreements necessary or 
incidental to the performance of the duties of the trust and (2) to preserve, restore, 
rehabilitate, reconstruct, protect, document, excavate, salvage, exhibit, and interpret 
historic properties; and 
 
the duty to carry out programs and activities to protect, preserve, and encourage the 
preservation of historic properties. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 944/ Page 2 
MHT describes a preservation easement as a contractual agreement between a property 
owner and a qualified organization in which the owner typically agrees to relinquish partial 
development rights, to maintain the property, to provide limited public access, and to obtain 
prior approval for any changes or alterations. In exchange, the easement-holding 
organization promises to ensure compliance with the terms of the easement to protect the 
property for future generations. MHT indicates that the State’s historic preservation 
easements are managed by MHT, which works with property owners to develop easement 
terms, review and approve any changes or alterations to the property, and advise owners 
on the best preservation methods. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission; Maryland Department of Planning; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2