START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 911 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 911 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Fishing Licenses and Stamps - Exemptions 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to issue an 
annual recreational fishing license exemption to a governmental entity or a nonprofit 
organization to provide fishing clinics and instructional opportunities to specified 
individuals, allowing the individuals to participate in the clinics and instructional 
opportunities without being licensed. The bill also alters a reporting requirement that 
applies to the bill’s exemption as well as an existing exemption. Finally, the bill authorizes 
DNR to adopt related regulations. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material effect in FY 2023. Special fund revenues may increase 
beginning in FY 2024, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill adds to existing provisions authorizing certain recreational fishing 
license exemptions for governmental entities and/or nonprofit organizations. Specifically, 
the bill authorizes DNR to issue an annual license exemption to a governmental entity or a 
nonprofit organization to provide fishing clinics and instructional opportunities to 
(1) individuals who are serving or have served in the U.S. Armed Forces; (2) individuals 
who are participating in a physical or mental wellness outdoor event; (3) individuals who 
are participating in a special needs outdoor event; (4) individuals who are acting under the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 911/ Page 2 
authority of a scientific collection permit (issued to a properly accredited person who has 
demonstrated a legitimate scientific or educational need to collect fish, fish eggs, shellfish, 
or aquatic invertebrates from the wild for scientific or educational purposes); or 
(5) residents of the State who are underserved with respect to fishing opportunities, as 
determined by DNR in regulation. 
 
An individual covered under the license exemption may (1) engage in angling on the 
nontidal waters of the State without holding an angler’s license; (2) engage in angling for 
trout on the nontidal waters of the State without holding a trout stamp; and (3) fish for 
finfish in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries or in the State waters of the Atlantic Ocean 
and the Atlantic coastal bays and their tributaries without holding a Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing license. The primary caregiver or representative of the governmental 
entity or nonprofit organization attending to or instructing an individual is also included in 
the license exemption. 
 
A governmental entity or nonprofit organization must apply for the exemption on a form 
provided by DNR, and the primary caregiver or representative of the governmental entity 
or nonprofit organization must have in possession the letter of exemption from the Director 
of the Fisheries Service while the organization is engaged in fishing activity. 
 
The bill modifies an existing requirement that a governmental entity or a nonprofit 
organization submit a report to DNR by January 1 of the year following the exemption 
period – which, under the bill, applies to both the new exemption authorized by the bill and 
an existing annual license exemption (discussed below under Current Law) – so that statute 
requires the governmental entity or nonprofit organization to provide event and participant 
information as required by DNR rather than specifying that the information submitted be 
(1) the locations fished under the exemption; (2) the dates the exemption was used; and 
(3) the number of individuals who were covered by the exemption. 
 
The bill also authorizes DNR to adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provision 
authorizing the new exemption, as well as specified existing provisions authorizing 
exemptions. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Existing Exemptions for Governmental Entities and Nonprofit Organizations 
 
DNR may issue (1) a one-day license exemption to a nonprofit organization to take 
individuals with physical or mental disabilities fishing from shore in the tidal or nontidal 
waters of the State and (2) an annual license exemption to a governmental entity or a 
nonprofit organization to take individuals with physical or mental disabilities who are 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 911/ Page 3 
serving or have served in the armed forces of the United States fishing in the tidal or 
nontidal waters of the State. 
 
An individual covered under the license exemptions may (1) engage in angling on the 
nontidal waters of the State without holding an angler’s license; (2) engage in angling for 
trout on the nontidal waters of the State without holding a trout stamp; and (3) fish for 
finfish in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries or in the State waters of the Atlantic Ocean 
and the Atlantic coastal bays and their tributaries without holding a Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing license. The primary caregiver or representative of the governmental 
entity or nonprofit organization attending to a disabled individual is also included in the 
license exemptions. 
 
The primary caregiver or representative of the governmental entity or nonprofit 
organization must have in possession the letter of exemption from the Director of the 
Fisheries Service while the organization is engaged in fishing activity. 
 
For the annual license exemption, the governmental entity or nonprofit organization must 
submit a report to DNR by January 1 of the year following the exemption period that states 
(1) the locations fished under the exemption; (2) the dates the exemption was used; and 
(3) the number of individuals who were covered by the exemption. 
 
Angler’s Licenses, Trout Stamps, and Sport Fishing Licenses 
 
Subject to certain exceptions:   
 
 
any person age 16 or older must secure an angler’s license to fish in the nontidal 
waters of the State;  
 
a person may not fish or possess trout in an area established by DNR as an area 
where a trout stamp is required, unless the person first obtains a trout stamp in 
addition to an angler’s license; and 
 
a person may not fish for finfish in the Chesapeake Bay or in its tributaries up to 
tidal boundaries or in State waters of the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic coastal 
bays and their tributaries without first obtaining a Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport 
fishing license or a specified registration. 
 
The fees for annual resident angler’s and Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing licenses 
are $20.50 and $15.00, respectively. The fee for a trout stamp is $5 for residents. Lower 
fees apply for short-term, seven-day licenses and higher fees apply for annual nonresident 
licenses and for trout stamps for nonresidents. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues may increase, beginning in fiscal 2024, to the 
extent that participants in fishing clinics and instructional opportunities held under the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 911/ Page 4 
bill’s license exemption subsequently purchase an angler’s license, trout stamp, 
and/or Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license to fish on their own. The extent of 
any increase cannot be reliably estimated, but DNR indicates that the increase in revenues 
may be meaningful. DNR indicates that events/opportunities held under the existing license 
exemptions (discussed under Current Law) serve approximately 800 individuals on 
average and the bill allows for fishing clinics and instructional opportunities to be offered 
to a broader range of individuals. 
 
The bill is not expected to result in any decrease in revenues. The license exemption is not 
expected to cause any individuals to forego purchasing a license they otherwise would have 
purchased. 
 
Angler’s license and trout stamp fee revenues are deposited in the Fisheries Management 
and Protection Fund and Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license fee revenues are 
deposited in the Fisheries Research and Development Fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4