START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 45 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 45 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Labor and Employment - Mandatory Meetings on Religious or Political Matters - 
Employee Attendance and Participation (Maryland Worker Freedom Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits employers and their agents, representatives, and designees from taking 
or threatening to take specified adverse actions against an employee – or refusing to hire 
an applicant for employment – because the employee or applicant declines to attend, 
participate in, or listen to communications in an employer-sponsored meeting regarding 
the employer’s opinion on religious or political matters, as defined by the bill. The bill 
authorizes the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to enforce the bill, as specified. 
Additionally, the commissioner must develop and make available a poster and model notice 
by November 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $131,600 in FY 2027 for staffing; the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) can develop a poster and model notice with 
existing resources. Although the bill likely applies to the State as an employer, it likely has 
no material effect on expenditures (all funds), as discussed below. The bill’s penalty 
provisions are not anticipated to materially affect general fund revenues. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
131,600 
151,900 
159,000 
166,100 
173,100 
Net Effect 
($131,600) 
($151,900) 
($159,000) 
($166,100) 
($173,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Although the bill likely applies to local governments as employers, it likely 
has no material effect on local governmental finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 45/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Political matters” means matters relating to elections for political office; 
political parties; proposals to change legislation, regulations, or public policy; or the 
decision to join or support a political party or potential civic, community, fraternal, or labor 
organization. “Religious matters” means matters relating to religious belief, affiliation, and 
practice or the decision to join and support a religious organization or association. 
 
Exemptions  
 
The bill does not apply to an employer that:   
 
 
is a religious corporation, organization, or association, or a specified religious 
educational institution or society or is exempt from employment discrimination 
protections under federal or State law; 
 
is a political organization communicating its political tenets or purposes; 
 
is an educational institution where political or religious matters are part of the 
regular coursework; 
 
is a nonprofit, tax-exempt training program where political and religious matters 
relate to the program’s mission; 
 
requires employees to undergo training to comply with federal or State law, as 
specified; or 
 
is a governmental unit holding a new employee orientation. 
 
Employer Rights  
 
An employer is not prohibited from:   
 
 
communicating information that the employer is required to communicate by law; 
 
conducting a meeting that involves religious or political matters if attendance and 
participation are voluntary; 
 
communicating information necessary for employees to perform their job duties; 
 
if the employer is an institution of higher education, meeting with or participating 
in communications with employees that are part of coursework, a symposium, or an 
academic program at the institution; or 
 
communicating to its employees information related to a policy of the employer or 
a law that the employer is responsible for administering at a governmental unit.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 45/ Page 3 
Penalties 
 
If the prohibitions above are violated, an employee may file a written complaint with the 
commissioner within 180 days of the alleged violation. The commissioner must investigate 
the complaint and attempt resolve the matter informally through mediation.  
 
If the issue is not resolved through meditation and the commissioner determines a violation 
has occurred, the Commissioner may assess a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for an initial 
violation and $25,000 for a subsequent violation. In addition to civil penalties, the 
commissioner may issue a cease-and-desist order or award other appropriate relief such as 
(1) injunctive relief; (2) compensatory damages; (3) affirmative relief; as specified; or  
(4) reasonable attorney’s fees and other costs. The commissioner may file a petition in the 
circuit court for any county to seek enforcement of an order issued under this bill.  
 
Notice Requirements  
 
By November 1, 2026, the Commissioner must develop and make available a poster and 
model notice that summarize the rights established under the bill, including instructions on 
how to file a complaint. These materials must be provided in English and any other 
languages commonly used by employees in the State.  
 
Each employer must notify its employees of their rights and protections by displaying the 
developed poster or notice in a conspicuous place accessible to all employees. The 
commissioner must consider an employer’s failure to comply with the notice requirement 
as an aggravating factor when awarding relief for violations.  
 
Current Law:  The State does not have protections for employees who decline to attend 
employer meetings. 
 
Unlawful Discrimination 
 
State law generally prohibits an employer with at least 15 employees from discharging, 
failing or refusing to hire, or otherwise discriminating against any individual with respect 
to the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because 
of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, genetic information, military status, or disability. The State and local 
governments are considered employers. 
 
State Expenditures:  MD Labor anticipates an increased workload due to the requirements 
that it (1) investigate complaints alleging violations of the bill and (2) assess and adjudicate 
penalties. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $131,588 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate includes the cost of 
hiring one wage and hour investigator and a half-time assistant attorney general. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including 
rent. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 45/ Page 4 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$109,433 
Operating Expenses 
    22,145 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$131,588 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Although the bill does not explicitly define “employer” to include State and local 
governments, it does include references to government employers, which likely means that 
they are included in the bill’s prohibitions. This analysis assumes that State employers 
generally comply with the bill’s prohibitions, resulting in no meaningful effect on State 
expenditures. 
 
Local Expenditures:  As with the State, the bill likely applies to local governments as 
employers. Similarly, this analysis assumes that local governments comply with the bill’s 
prohibitions as employers, resulting in no meaningful effect on local expenditures. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill prohibits an employer from taking adverse actions 
against employees and from refusing to hire an applicant for employment under specified 
conditions. It further allows an employee to file a complaint with the commissioner for a 
violation of the bill but does not authorize an applicant for employment to also file a 
complaint. Therefore, the bill is unenforceable as it relates to violations involving 
applicants for employment. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the bill takes effect October 1, 2026, 
and MD Labor is required to provide the posters and model notices to all employers  
one month later, by November 1, 2026. To the extent that MD Labor cannot complete the 
poster and notice and procure printing services during that month, it may not be able to 
meet the bill’s deadline. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 417 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Office of the Attorney General; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 45/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5