START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 85 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 85 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Corporations and Associations - Cooperative Limited Equity Housing 
Corporations - Establishment 
 
 
This bill authorizes a Maryland nonstock corporation to convert to a cooperative limited 
equity housing corporation (CLEHC) and establishes specified procedures and 
requirements for the conversion. The bill prohibits a county or municipality from imposing 
restrictions on a CLEHC, including restricting the sale of residential rental facilities to a 
Maryland nonstock corporation that plans to convert to a CLEHC. The Department of 
Housing and Community Development (DHCD) may establish (1) additional rights and 
requirements for a CLEHC, as specified and (2) a program to provide grants to Maryland 
nonstock corporations to promote the establishment of CLEHCs. The bill takes effect 
October 1, 2027.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. The State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) did not respond to a request for information on the fiscal and 
operational impact of the bill. However, general fund expenditures are assumed to 
increase, likely by at least $278,400, in FY 2028 only for one-time programming costs, as 
discussed below. State expenditures potentially increase further for staff and grant awards, 
as discussed below. Potential minimal increase in filing fee revenues.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 85/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Conversion” means the transition of a property from a residential rental facility to a 
property owned by a CLEHC for use by members of the CLEHC. 
 
“Cooperative interest” means the ownership interest in a CLEHC that is coupled with a 
possessory interest in real or personal property owned by the CLEHC and evidenced by a 
membership certificate. 
 
“Cooperative limited equity housing corporation” means a Maryland nonstock corporation 
qualified in the State, having only one class of membership, in which each member, by 
virtue of the member’s membership, has a cooperative interest in the corporation. 
 
“Low‐income household” means a household with an income that does not exceed 80% of 
the area median income for a household of the same size. 
 
“Occupancy agreement” means an agreement between the CLEHC and a member in which 
a member has an exclusive possessory interest in a unit and a possessory interest in 
common with other members of the portion of the cooperative project not constituting 
units, and that creates restrictions and obligations similar to a legal relationship of landlord 
and tenant. 
 
“Residential rental facility” means property containing at least five dwelling units leased 
for residential purposes. 
 
“Unit” means a portion of the cooperative project leased for exclusive occupancy by a 
member under an occupancy agreement. 
 
Conversion of a Maryland Nonstock Corporation 
 
A Maryland nonstock corporation may be organized for the purpose of converting to a 
CLEHC after acquiring ownership of a residential rental facility. On the acquisition of a 
residential rental facility, a nonstock corporation may hold a vote to convert to a CLEHC 
after providing notice informing the members that an election to convert the nonstock 
corporation to a CLEHC will be held no later than 60 days after the delivery of the notice. 
A copy of the documents to be submitted to SDAT must be included with the notice. A 
vote to convert from a nonstock corporation to a CLEHC must require an affirmative vote 
of a majority of the total members, and a vote must be conducted in accordance with the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 85/ Page 3 
corporation’s governing documents. If a vote to convert fails, the nonstock corporation 
may not attempt to convert to a CLEHC for at least 12 months after the date of the failed 
vote. After conversion, votes must be assigned so that each unit has one vote.  
 
Establishment of a Cooperative Limited Equity Housing Corporation 
 
Following an affirmative vote to apply for conversion to a CLEHC, a nonstock corporation 
must (1) prepare and submit to SDAT articles of incorporation, including the name and 
location and statement of the purposes of the CLEHC, and any other documents or 
information required by SDAT, and (2) maintain the following:   
 
 
the name and address of the members of the nonstock corporation; 
 
a disclosure statement including, among other things, (1) a statement of the form of 
ownership of all real and personal property that is intended to be owned or leased 
by the CLEHC; (2) a description of the voting and other rights in the CLEHC; (3) a 
statement of any fees (or known or anticipated common charges) required, or that 
may be imposed, by the CLEHC, as specified; (4) a statement of the ownership 
interest associated with each unit and the underlying debt responsibility associated 
with each unit on a pro rata basis, if applicable; and (5) copies of the proposed or 
final contract of sale for the resident rental facility;  
 
an annual operating budget, including insurance, maintenance, reserves, and general 
expenses; 
 
bylaws; and 
 
a subscription agreement. 
 
The bill specifies that required statements may be summarized or produced in a collection 
of documents that effectively conveys the required information.  
 
Within 30 days after receipt of the documents and information, SDAT must (1) accept the 
documents for record, or (2) if the documents and information do not meet the 
requirements, deny the documents for record and notify the nonstock corporation of the 
basis for the denial. Upon receipt of the denial, the nonstock corporation may resubmit the 
documents and information to meet the requirements to convert to a CLEHC.  
 
Notice to Vacate 
 
After a nonstock corporation is converted to a CLEHC, the CLEHC must provide written 
notice of the conversion and requirements to vacate to all households, and must offer the 
opportunity to acquire a cooperative interest and become a member of the CLEHC to each 
household that has lawfully resided in the residential rental facility (1) on the date of the 
conversion and (2) for at least 180 days prior to the date of the conversion. If an eligible 
household does not accept the offer within 89 days, the offer must be deemed rejected. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 85/ Page 4 
The bill generally prohibits a CLEHC from requiring a household to vacate earlier than  
90 days. Furthermore, a household may not be required to vacate a unit earlier than 
12 months following receipt of the written notice to vacate if, on the date of the notice,  
(1) a member of the household is a disabled person or a senior citizen who has been a 
member of the household for at least 12 months immediately preceding receipt of the notice 
to vacate and (2) the household is a low‐income household; notifies the CLEHC of the 
intent to remain in the unit for a period of more than 90 days; and submits the notice to the 
CLEHC within 30 days after receiving the notice to vacate. 
 
A household may be required to vacate the premises before the expiration of any minimum 
time period specified above if the household (1) breaches a covenant in the lease occurring 
before or after the notice to vacate is given or (2) fails to pay rent before or after the notice 
to vacate is given. 
 
A low‐income household required to vacate a unit must receive reimbursement from the 
CLEHC for moving expenses that are actually and reasonably incurred and are at least 
$375 but less than $751.  
 
Sale of Cooperative Interest 
 
The appreciation and resale of a cooperative interest may not exceed the cost paid by the 
member for the initial cooperative interest, adjusted for inflation plus the cost of 
improvements to the cooperative interest made by the member that were approved by the 
CLEHC. A cooperative interest may be sold only to (1) a low‐income household; (2) a 
moderate‐income household; or (3) an eligible household that receives and accepts an offer 
to acquire a cooperative interest, as specified.  
 
A CLEHC must have (1) at least 75% of the members in a low‐income household and  
(2) all other members in a medium‐income household. This membership composition does 
not include a household that acquired a cooperative interest following an offer, as specified.  
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
DHCD may (1) to the extent applicable to and not inconsistent with the bill’s provisions, 
and using a standardized methodology, establish additional rights and requirements for a 
CLEHC and its members based on an individualized assessment of the cooperative; 
(2) base the determination on the rights and requirements for cooperative housing 
corporations and their members under applicable State law; and (3) establish a program to 
provide grants to Maryland nonstock corporations to promote the establishment of 
CLEHCs.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 85/ Page 5 
Required Regulations 
 
SDAT and DHCD must adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions. 
 
Local Government – Prohibitions 
 
A county or municipality may not impose restrictions on a CLEHC, or the conversion of a 
nonstock corporation to a CLEHC, including a restriction on the sale of residential rental 
facilities to a nonstock corporation planning to convert to a CLEHC.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Nonstock Corporation 
 
Under the Corporations and Associations Article, the charter of a nonstock corporation 
must provide that the corporation has no authority to issue capital stock. Statute specifies 
that if the charter or bylaws of a nonstock corporation do not provide for members or the 
nonstock corporation has no members, the board of directors constitutes the members of 
the nonstock corporation, and when meeting as directors, may exercise the rights and 
powers of members. 
 
A Maryland nonstock corporation may convert only into a foreign corporation that does 
not have authority to issue stock. The conversion must be completed in accordance with 
requirements under Title 3 of the Corporations and Associations Article. 
 
SDAT’s filing fee for articles of incorporation for a nonstock corporation is $120; the filing 
fee for articles of conversion is $100. 
 
Maryland Cooperative Housing Corporation Act 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation (stock or nonstock) 
that owns real property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; rather, 
the person owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for 
residential use. Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the 
Corporations and Associations Article. 
 
Under the applicable statute, a conversion is the creation of a cooperative housing 
corporation from a property that was immediately previously a “residential rental facility” 
(a property containing at least 10 dwelling units leased for residential purposes). Statute 
includes extensive requirements for such conversions. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 85/ Page 6 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures are assumed to increase by at least 
$278,400 in fiscal 2028 only for one‐time programming costs at SDAT, reflecting the bill’s 
effective date of October 1, 2027. This estimate reflects the information provided by SDAT 
for a similar bill last year. 
 
While DHCD can promulgate regulations using existing resources, general fund 
expenditures increase to the extent DHCD uses its authorization under the bill to create a 
program to provide grants to nonstock corporations to establish CLEHCs. This analysis 
does not explicitly account for any specific expenditures associated with the grant program, 
as sufficient information is not available at this time to reliably estimate an appropriate 
level of funding for the program. To the extent the grant program is implemented, general 
fund expenditures for DHCD increase to make grant awards and for additional 
administrative staff potentially needed to oversee the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 927 and HB 1052 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 511 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6