START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 71 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 71 
(Delegate Sample-Hughes) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Psychiatric Rehabilitation Program 
Services - Reimbursement (Youth Psychiatric Rehabilitation Parity Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to adopt regulations 
requiring Medicaid to reimburse a psychiatric rehabilitation program (PRP) for community 
psychiatric support services for a minimum of six and a maximum of 30 services per month. 
Reimbursement must be provided for services delivered on-site or off-site to an individual 
(1) with a serious emotional disturbance or a serious and persistent mental disorder;  
(2) whose functioning is severely impaired; and (3) who is living with a parent, guardian, 
or relative who is legally responsible for the individual’s care. MDH must adopt the 
regulations by December 1, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $74.7 million (60% federal 
funds, 40% general funds) annually beginning in FY 2027 for additional reimbursement of 
PRP services, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. This bill 
increases the cost of an entitlement program beginning in FY 2027. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$44.8 
$44.8 
$44.8 
$44.8 
$44.8 
GF/FF Exp. 
$74.7 
$74.7 
$74.7 
$74.7 
$74.7 
Net Effect 
($29.9) 
($29.9) 
($29.9) 
($29.9) 
($29.9) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent local governments provide PRP services, local expenditures 
may increase to adjust current service delivery processes. Local revenues increase to the 
extent Medicaid is billed for such services. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 71/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid PRP provides community-based psychiatric rehabilitation 
services to facilitate recovery by supporting individuals to develop skills and access 
resources necessary for full participation in the community. Services are billed monthly, 
with reimbursement rates varying by setting and the number of encounters per month. For 
example, there is a rate for two or more encounters per month (the base rate) and separate 
monthly rates based on the number of encounters up to six (the highest rate). Currently, 
Medicaid PRP providers may bill for a minimum of two encounters per month with no 
maximum. Additional services can be authorized based on medical necessity. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill increases the minimum number of services that must be 
provided to individuals receiving PRP services from two to six and institutes a maximum 
of 30 monthly PRP services. Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $74.7 million 
(60% federal funds, 40% general funds) on an annual basis. Federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. This estimate is based on the following information and assumptions: 
 
 
Requiring a minimum of six PRP services places all PRP recipients into the highest 
Medicaid rate (six encounters per month), regardless of their needs. 
 
Based on the difference between the current average cost per PRP participant 
per month ($1,062) and the monthly rate for six encounters ($1,206), per participant 
costs increase by $143.88 per month. 
 
In fiscal 2025, 64,902 Medicaid participants received PRP services for an average 
of eight months per year. 
 
To the extent Medicaid does not implement the required regulations until after they are 
promulgated, Medicaid costs increase by a lesser amount. For example, if the regulations 
are implemented effective January 1, 2027, Medicaid expenditures increase by an 
estimated $37.4 million (60% federal funds, 40% general funds) in fiscal 2027. 
 
Future years assume no change in the number of PRP recipients, in the average number of 
months services are received per participant, or to underlying PRP rates. 
 
Medicaid advises that increasing the minimum number of PRP services from two to six 
may not align with medical necessity and Medicaid does not reimburse for services that 
are not medically necessary. 
 
Establishing a maximum of 30 monthly PRP services does not have a definitive 
fiscal impact. However, Medicaid advises that it may conflict with (1) federal Early and 
Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment provisions, which entitle beneficiaries 
younger than age 22 to medically necessary services without caps on the number of such 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 71/ Page 3 
services and (2) the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act, which 
prohibits stricter limitations on behavioral health benefits relative to medical and surgical 
benefits. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business PRP providers are required to provide a minimum 
of six PRP services (up from the current two) but receive additional reimbursement. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that the December 1, 2026 deadline to promulgate 
the required regulations does not give sufficient time to develop the regulations, conduct 
an informal comment period, and secure departmental approval. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3