START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 57 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 57 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Schools - Maryland Civic Excellence Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Civic Excellence Program in which local school systems 
may choose to participate to recognize the civic readiness and civic engagement of public 
high school students. By the 2027-2028 school year, the State Board of Education (SBE), 
in consultation with experts and stakeholders, must adopt regulations to establish the 
criteria and requirements for awarding a seal of civic excellence to a qualified student who 
attends a public high school in a participating local school system. SBE’s criteria must 
include a capstone project requirement, as specified. A local school system may choose to 
participate; however, a public high school in a participating local school system may not 
opt out. A participating public school that determines that a student has fulfilled the criteria 
established in regulations must (1) award the student a Seal of Civic Excellence and 
(2) recognize the award by awarding a cord or medal or by attaching other insignia on the 
student’s high school diploma. Participating local school systems may collaborate with 
specified organizations or institutions to support program implementation. By July 1, 2028, 
and each July 1, thereafter, each participating local school system must submit to MSDE a 
report based on the most recently completed school year. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SBE can adopt regulations to establish the criteria and requirements for 
awarding students a seal of civic excellence with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent that a local school system chooses to participate, local 
expenditures may increase for staff and other related costs, and operations may be affected. 
However, any expenditures or operational effects are discretionary. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 57/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The criteria established by SBE must include a requirement that, in order 
to receive a seal of civic excellence, a student must complete a capstone project through an 
extracurricular activity that is focused on civic service in State, county, or local 
government. 
 
If a local school system chooses to participate in the program, a public high school must 
implement the program, in accordance with the regulations adopted by SBE, by 
incorporating a civic service capstone project into an extracurricular activity at the school 
that:  (1) is an existing extracurricular activity at the time the local school system chooses 
to participate in the program; or (2) is a new extracurricular activity that is supervised by a 
paid staff member. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland high schools offer special awards to students. Some of these are 
statewide recognitions including the Seal of Biliteracy. Local school systems and specific 
schools also confer departmental awards in various disciplines. According to regulations, 
to graduate, a student must complete 75 service-learning hours or complete a locally 
designed program in student service that has been approved by the State Superintendent of 
Schools. Some local school systems award a certificate or other recognition for exceeding 
this requirement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 8 and HB 72 of 2025; SB 762 of 2024 and SB 271 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 204 (Senator Kagan, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City  
Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools;  
Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 57/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3