START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 35 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 35 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Local Government - Regulatory Powers - Regulation of Invasive Trees 
 
 
This bill authorizes the governing body of a county or municipality to regulate (through an 
ordinance) listed invasive trees and trees of heaven, including by prohibiting a person from:  
(1) selling listed invasive trees or trees of heaven; (2) planting listed invasive trees or trees 
of heaven; and (3) allowing trees of heaven or other listed invasive trees to grow on the 
person’s property. The bill authorizes the governing body of a county or municipality to 
establish a bounty or native tree replacement program to incentivize the removal and 
eradication of trees of heaven and other listed invasive trees. The bill also authorizes the 
governing body of a county or municipality to provide for the enforcement of an ordinance 
adopted under the bill by requiring any damages caused by listed invasive trees or trees of 
heaven to be mitigated and establishing a civil fine. The bill defines “tree of heaven” as the 
Ailanthus altissima tree species, and “listed invasive trees” as any tree on the Maryland 
Prohibited Invasive Plant List posted by the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA). 
The bill clarifies that “invasive bamboo” refers to nonnative bamboo.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature. The impact on local government finances 
depends on the extent to which bounty or native tree replacement programs and fines are 
established, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 35/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “native tree replacement program” means a program whereby a person 
receives a native tree in exchange for removing and eradicating an invasive tree. 
 
A bounty or native tree replacement program established by a local government must 
require (1) an invasive tree to be properly identified consistent with the species page 
published by the University of Maryland Extension, and (2) the invasive species, after 
being properly identified, to be removed or eradicated according to professionally accepted 
methods or consistent with methodology on the species page published by the University 
of Maryland Agriculture Extension. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 589 and 590 of 2024 significantly altered the regulatory approach 
for controlling invasive plant species in the State by repealing the existing two-tiered 
regulatory approach and establishing a regulatory approach that generally involves:  
(1) assessments of nonnative plant species by expert assessors to determine the 
invasiveness rank of each such species; (2) the review of such assessments and related data; 
and (3) the determination by the Secretary of MDA whether such species should be 
classified as prohibited invasive plants and included on a Consolidated List of Maryland 
Invasive Plant Species or placed on a watch list.  
 
MDA and the Department of Natural Resources must each post the Consolidated List of 
Maryland Invasive Plant Species and the watch list on their respective websites. The 
University of Maryland Agriculture Extension must post a link to those lists on its website. 
MDA must also annually distribute the lists to nurseries, plant dealers, and plant brokers. 
The list can be found on MDA’s website at the following link. 
 
Regulation of Invasive Bamboo 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality may regulate (through an ordinance) 
invasive bamboo, including prohibiting a person from:  (1) selling invasive bamboo; 
(2) planting invasive bamboo; and (3) allowing invasive bamboo to grow on the property 
of the person without proper upkeep and appropriate containment measures, including 
barriers or trenches. The governing body of a county or municipality is also authorized to 
provide for the enforcement of an ordinance adopted to regulate invasive bamboo by 
requiring any damages caused by invasive bamboo to be mitigated and establishing a civil 
fine. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent local governments adopt bounty or native tree 
replacement programs authorized by the bill, expenditures may increase to account for 
administering the programs, paying out bounties, or providing replacement trees. To the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 35/ Page 3 
extent a local government implements a fine authorized by the bill, local revenues may 
increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses 
depending upon whether a county or municipal government decides to regulate trees of 
heaven and other listed invasive trees. Additional local regulations may (1) negatively 
affect small businesses that incur costs to comply with potential restrictions pertaining to 
trees of heaven and other listed invasive trees and (2) positively benefit landscaping 
businesses that are hired to remove or contain trees of heaven and other listed invasive 
trees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 266 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Baltimore, Frederick, and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
Revised - Correction - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3