START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 4 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 4 
(Delegates Miller and M. Morgan) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws – Historic Motor Vehicles – Minimum Age 
 
   
This bill establishes that a motor vehicle must be at least 25 years old to be eligible for 
registration as a Class L (historic) vehicle; accordingly, it repeals the current statutory 
requirement that limits Class L (historic) registrations to vehicles with a model year of 
1999 or earlier. The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) must reinstate, without any 
action required by the owner of a vehicle, the historic motor vehicle registration of a motor 
vehicle that, before July 1, 2025, was registered as a historic motor vehicle and that, on or 
after that date, had its historic vehicle registration suspended or revoked as a result of the 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025. The bill only applies 
prospectively. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues decrease, in total, by $1.8 million in FY 2027 and by 
$7.9 million in FY 2031, reflecting the bill’s impact on the Transportation Trust Fund 
(TTF), Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF), R Adams 
Cowley Shock Trauma Center, and Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund (MTPSF). 
MVA can make required reprogramming changes with existing resources; TTF 
expenditures are likely minimally affected, as discussed but not shown below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
($1.8) 
($3.5) 
($5.1) 
($6.5) 
($7.9) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($1.8) 
($3.5) 
($5.1) 
($6.5) 
($7.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the local finances or operations 
of any individual local jurisdiction, as discussed below.   
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 4/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In applying for a registration of a historic motor vehicle, the owner must 
certify that the vehicle for which the application is made will be maintained only for use in 
exhibitions, club activities, parades, tours, and occasional transportation. The vehicle may 
not be used for purposes such as general daily transportation, employment, etc. 
 
The BRFA of 2025 limited the definition of “historic motor vehicle” to model year 1999 
(or earlier) vehicles, repealing the previous requirement that a motor vehicle be at least 
20 years old. Accordingly, any Class L (historic) vehicles with a model year of 2000 or 
later lost eligibility for registration as a historic vehicle and, instead, must register by their 
corresponding class and weight effective July 1, 2025. Pursuant to Section 22 of the 
BRFA of 2025, the revenue increases attributable to this change must remain allocated 
within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT). Otherwise, a portion of the 
revenues collected from motor vehicle registrations is provided to local governments  
from the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle Revenue Account (GMVRA) through capital 
transportation grants.  
 
Most vehicle classes may register for one or two years. Registration fees vary based on a 
vehicle’s characteristics (e.g., class and weight, whether the vehicle is an electric drive 
vehicle, etc.) and the fees can be found on MVA’s website. The annual registration fee for 
a Class L (historic) vehicle is $55.50.  
 
Registration fees for most vehicle classes (but not Class L) also include a yearly 
$40.00 surcharge, primarily for MEMSOF (as much as $24.50). A portion of that surcharge 
($6.50) is reserved for the MTPSF, and at least $9.00 from each surcharge must be allocated 
to the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the BRFA of 2025 limited eligibility for a Class L 
(historic) registration to vehicles with a model year of 1999 or earlier. The bill repeals this 
requirement and instead authorizes a vehicle that is at least 25 years old to register as a 
Class L (historic) vehicle (assuming the owner meets the other requirements for a 
historic registration). Therefore, under the bill, additional vehicles become eligible for a 
Class L (historic) registration beginning in fiscal 2027. Specifically, vehicles with a 
model year of 2000 and 2001 become eligible effective July 1, 2026; in subsequent years, 
additional model years become eligible. 
 
As a result of this change, revenues for multiple special funds are affected. Based on data 
from current vehicle registrations, MVA estimates that approximately 18,000 additional 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 4/ Page 3 
vehicles will register as a Class L (historic) registration in fiscal 2027, and by fiscal 2031, 
approximately 80,000 additional vehicles will register as a Class L (historic) vehicle. MVA 
advises that the average annual registration fee for Class A (passenger) and Class M 
(multipurpose) vehicles (for all weight classes) is $105.83. As noted above, the annual 
registration fee for a Class L (historic) vehicle is $55.50 (i.e., $50.33 less than the average 
Class A/M annal registration fee). Moreover, Class L (historic) vehicles are exempt from 
the Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program as well as the $40.00 emergency medical 
services surcharge. Exhibit 1 shows the effect on special fund revenues based on MVA’s 
assumptions regarding the number of additional Class L (historic) registrations each year. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on Transportation Trust Fund and Other Special Fund Revenues 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
TTF Revenues  
 
($1,063,188) 
 
($2,067,310) 
 
($3,012,366) 
 
($3,898,356) 
 
($4,725,280) 
Registration Fees 
  
(905,940) 
   
(1,761,550) 
  
(2,566,830) 
  
(3,321,780) 
  
(4,026,400) 
VEIP Fees 
  
(157,248) 
   
(305,760) 
  
(445,536) 
  
(576,576) 
  
(698,880) 
EMS Surcharge Distribution 
 
($720,000) 
 
($1,400,000) 
 
($2,040,000) 
 
($2,640,000) 
 
($3,200,000) 
MEMSOF 
  
(441,000) 
   
(857,500) 
  
(1,249,500) 
  
(1,617,000) 
  
(1,960,000) 
Shock Trauma 
  
(162,000) 
   
(315,000) 
  
(459,000) 
  
(594,000) 
  
(720,000) 
MTPSF 
  
(117,000) 
   
(227,500) 
  
(331,500) 
  
(429,000) 
  
(520,000) 
Total State Revenue Impact 
 
($1,783,188) 
 
($3,467,310) 
 
($5,052,366) 
 
($6,538,356) 
 
($7,925,280) 
 
EMS:  Emergency Medical Services 
MEMSOF:  Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund 
MTPSF:  Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund 
Shock Trauma:  R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
VEIP:  Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 4/ Page 4 
 
Although the bill requires MVA to reinstate a vehicle registration that was suspended or 
revoked as a result of the BRFA of 2025, MVA advises that it did not take these actions 
for any vehicle registrations. Therefore, this provision has no fiscal impact.  
 
As discussed in more detail below, the bill may result in additional revenues being provided 
to local governments through GMVRA. While overall TTF expenditures are likely not 
meaningfully affected, MDOT may be required to redirect funding from other projects in 
its capital program to provide the grants.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Generally, a portion of the revenues from motor vehicle registration 
fees accrues to GMVRA and is provided to local governments through capital 
transportation grants. However, as noted above, the BRFA of 2025 limited eligibility for 
Class L (historic) vehicles to model year 1999 and earlier model years (instead of the 
previous requirement that a motor vehicle be at least 20 years old) and specified that the 
revenue increases attributable to that change had to remain within MDOT. Accordingly, 
local governments do not share in the ongoing higher revenues under current law.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that, while not clear, the bill’s modification 
to the BRFA’s eligibility provision likely also negates the BRFA’s requirement that the 
increase in revenues attributable to that provision remain within MDOT. As a result, 
revenues provided to local governments through GMVRA may be minimally affected. 
Further, as GMVRA revenues are distributed among all local jurisdictions in the State, the 
bill’s impact on any one individual local jurisdiction is likely negligible.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 566 (Senator Ready, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
caw/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4