START OF PAGE 1
HB0016/553328/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 16
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Phillips” and substitute
“Delegates Phillips, Simmons, Moreno, Moon, Conaway, and Williams”; in line
4, strike “altering the number of members of the Maryland Parole Commission;”; in lines
6 and 7, strike “repealing the authority of the Commission to appoint and utilize hearing
examiners;” and substitute “requiring a new commissioner to be appointed within a
certain number of days under certain circumstances; prohibiting a hearing examiner
appointed under certain authority from serving for more than a certain number of days;
altering certain requirements for hearing examiners; requiring a vote of the majority of
commissioners appointed to the Maryland Parole Commission, instead of a certain
minimum number, to approve a certain incarcerated individual for parole;”; in line 10,
after “7–205(a)” insert “and 7–307”; in the same line, strike “, 7–207, 7–302, 7–303, and
7–305”; and strike in their entirety lines 13 through 22, inclusive.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 2, in line 2, strike the brackets; in lines 2 and 3, strike “AT LEAST 15
BUT NOT MORE THAN 20”; in line 20, after “GOVERNOR” insert “, INCLUDING:

A. AT LEAST ONE MARYLAND RESIDENT WHO WAS
FORMERLY INCARCERATED IN A STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY; AND

B. AT LEAST ONE MARYLAND RESIDENT WHO IS AN
IMMEDIATE RELATIVE OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS CURRENTLY, OR WAS
FORMERLY, INCARCERATED IN A STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0016/553328/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 16
Page 2 of 3

On page 3, in line 21, strike the bracket; in the same line, after “If” insert “THERE
IS A VACANCY ON THE COMMISSION, OR IF”; in line 25, after “(2)” insert “A NEW
COMMISSIONER SHALL BE APPOINTED WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER A VACANCY.

(3)”;

in line 27, strike “(3)” and substitute “(4)”; and in the same line, after “may not” insert
“:

(I) SERVE FOR MORE THAN 90 DAYS; OR

(II)”.

On page 4 in lines 1, 4, 6, 8, 10, 22, and 29, and on page 5 in lines 12, 13, 17, 20,
21, and 23, in each instance, strike the brackets.

On page 4, in line 6, strike “(B)”; in line 8, strike “(C)”; in line 15, strike “and”; in
lines 16 and 17, strike “have training and experience in law, sociology, psychology,
psychiatry, education, social work, or criminology” and substitute “HOLD AN
UNDERGRADUATE OR ADVANCED DEGREE IN PSYCHOLOGY, PSYCHIATRY, SOCIAL
WORK, EDUCATION, OR COMMUNITY ORGANIZING OR HAVE ATTAINED THE
EQUIVALENT OF THOSE DEGREES THROUGH TRAINING OR EXPERIENCE; AND

4. HAVE TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE IN A FIELD
LISTED UNDER ITEM 3 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH OR IN LAW OR CRIMINOLOGY”;

and after line 22, insert:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0016/553328/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 16
Page 3 of 3

“(3) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
NOT MORE THAN 30% OF HEARING EXAMINERS MAY HAVE BEEN PREVIOUSLY
EMPLOYED IN THE FIELDS OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES OR LAW ENFORCEMENT.

(II) THE SECRETARY MAY NOT TERMINATE A HEARING
EXAMINER EMPLOYED ON OCTOBER 1, 2026, IN ORDER TO REACH THE
THRESHOLD REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.”.

On page 5, in lines 4 and 5, strike “life imprisonment” and substitute “NOT LESS
THAN 15 YEARS CONFINEMENT FOR A SINGLE CONVICTION”; in line 20, strike “(5)”;
in line 21, strike “(6)”; and in line 23, strike “(7)”.

On pages 5 through 9, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 25 on
page 5 through line 6 on page 9, inclusive.

On page 9, in lines 23 and 24, strike “at least six affirmative votes are” and
substitute “THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF A MAJORITY OF THE COMMISSIONERS
APPOINTED TO THE COMMISSION IS”; and strike beginning with “That” in line 30
down through the comma in line 33.
END OF PAGE 3