START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 16 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 16 
(Delegate Phillips) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Correctional Services - Maryland Parole Commission - Members and Hearing 
Examiners 
 
 
This bill increases the number of members of the Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) 
from 10 members to at least 15 but not more than 20 members and alters provisions 
governing the appointment of parole commissioners. In addition, the bill repeals MPC’s 
authority to appoint hearing examiners as well as the statutory duties of hearing examiners; 
instead, the bill grants the commission the exclusive power to hear cases for parole and 
administrative release. Finally, the bill states the intent of the General Assembly that any 
funds budgeted for hearing examiner salaries as of October 1, 2026, be re-budgeted for 
parole commissioner salaries.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by a net of approximately $1.2 million 
in FY 2027. Future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing net costs. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1,188,800 
1,269,600 
1,354,600 
1,441,100 
1,528,300 
Net Effect 
($1,188,800) 
($1,269,600) 
($1,354,600) 
($1,441,100) 
($1,528,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 16/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires the Governor to appoint MPC members from among 
nominees chosen by a panel consisting of specified individuals. The panel must submit to 
the Governor the names of at least three qualified nominees for each commissioner vacancy 
to be filled. The requirement for nomination by the panel applies only to an initial term as 
commissioner and not to any subsequent consecutive term of a sitting commissioner whose 
initial appointment to office was made pursuant to panel nomination.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Parole – Generally:  Parole is a discretionary and conditional release from imprisonment 
determined after a hearing for an incarcerated individual who is eligible to be considered 
for parole. If parole is granted, the incarcerated individual is allowed to serve the remainder 
of the sentence in the community, subject to the terms and conditions specified in a written 
parole order. 
 
MPC has jurisdiction regarding parole for eligible incarcerated individuals sentenced to 
State correctional facilities and local detention centers. Incarcerated individuals in the 
Patuxent Institution who are eligible for parole are under the jurisdiction of the 
Patuxent Board of Review. 
 
Maryland Parole Commission:  MPC is composed of 10 commissioners who are appointed 
for six-year terms by the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, with the 
approval of the Governor and the advice and consent of the Senate. Each commissioner 
must be appointed without regard to political affiliation, be a resident of the State, and have 
training and experience in law, sociology, psychology, psychiatry, education, social work, 
or criminology. Each commissioner must devote full time to the duties of MPC and may 
not have any other employment that conflicts with such devotion. The Secretary, with the 
approval of the Governor, also appoints the chairperson of the commission from among its 
members. 
 
If a commissioner is unable to perform the commissioner’s duties because of sickness, 
incapacity, or disqualification, the Secretary may appoint a hearing examiner to MPC to 
perform those duties until the commissioner is able to resume those duties or until a new 
commissioner is appointed and qualifies. When appointed to perform the duties of a 
commissioner pursuant to this authority, the hearing examiner is entitled to the same 
compensation as a commissioner. A hearing examiner appointed to perform the duties of a 
commissioner under this authority may not participate in a proceeding before the parole 
commission in which the hearing examiner participated as a hearing examiner. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 16/ Page 3 
The Secretary may also appoint the hearing examiners necessary to conduct parole release 
hearings that are not required to be heard by MPC, as provided in the State budget. Each 
hearing examiner must be appointed without regard to political affiliation, be a resident of 
the State, and have training and experience in law, sociology, psychology, psychiatry, 
education, social work, or criminology. A hearing examiner is entitled to compensation in 
accordance with the State budget. 
 
Among other powers, MPC has the exclusive power to hear cases for parole or 
administrative release in which:   
 
 
the Commissioner of Correction, after reviewing the recommendation of the 
appropriate managing official, objects to a parole; 
 
the incarcerated individual was convicted of a homicide; 
 
the incarcerated individual is serving a sentence of life imprisonment; 
 
the parole hearing is open to the public, as specified; 
 
the incarcerated individual fails to meet the requirements of the administrative 
release process, as specified; 
 
a victim requests a hearing, as specified; or 
 
MPC finds that a hearing for administrative release is necessary, as specified. 
 
In addition, MPC has the exclusive power to (1) hear exceptions to recommendations of a 
hearing examiner or a commissioner acting as a hearing examiner and (2) review 
summarily all recommendations of a hearing examiner or a commissioner acting as a 
hearing examiner to which an exception has not been filed. 
 
MPC may adopt regulations governing the conduct of proceedings before it or the hearing 
examiners and the review and disposition of written exceptions to the recommendation of 
a hearing examiner. 
 
Parole Eligibility:  Incarcerated individuals sentenced to serve less than six months are not 
eligible for parole. When incarcerated individuals serving sentences of incarceration of 
six months or more have served one-fourth of their sentences, they are entitled to be 
considered for parole, with specified exceptions. 
 
Parole Hearings:  MPC or its hearing examiners must hear cases for parole release at least 
once each month at each correctional facility in the Division of Correction and as often as 
necessary at other correctional facilities in the State at which incarcerated individuals 
eligible for parole consideration are confined. 
 
Before any hearing on parole release, MPC must give the incarcerated individual adequate 
and timely written notice of (1) the date, time, and place of the hearing and (2) the factors 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 16/ Page 4 
that MPC or the hearing examiner will consider in determining whether the incarcerated 
individual is suitable for parole. The notice must also indicate that, before the hearing, the 
incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative may, on request, 
examine any document that MPC or a hearing examiner will use in determining whether 
the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole. However, a document, or a portion of it, 
is not available for examination under specified conditions. 
 
MPC must delete the address and phone number of the victim or the victim’s designated 
representative from a document before the incarcerated individual or the incarcerated 
individual’s representative examines the document. 
 
A parole hearing must be open to the public if a victim makes a written request and 
maintains a current address on file or a victim or a victim’s representative files a 
notification request form, as specified, and within a reasonable amount of time before a 
scheduled hearing, the victim makes a written request that the hearing be open to the public. 
 
The vote of each commissioner when acting collectively or in a panel, to approve or deny 
parole, and a vote to close or restrict access to a parole hearing must be made available to 
the public. Generally, the victim or victim’s representative has the right to attend an open 
parole hearing; however, MPC or a panel of commissioners may (1) restrict the number of 
individuals allowed to attend a parole hearing because of facility physical limitations or 
security requirements; (2) deny admission or continued attendance at a parole hearing to 
an individual who is disruptive or threatens or presents a danger to the security of the 
facility in which the hearing is being held or to other attendees or participants; (3) close a 
parole hearing to deliberate on the evidence and any other relevant information received at 
the hearing; or (4) close a parole hearing on written request of the chief law enforcement 
official responsible for an ongoing criminal investigation related to the incarcerated 
individual, if the ongoing investigation could be compromised. These provisions do not 
limit MPC’s authority to hold a parole hearing through a video conference or other means 
of electronic transmission. 
 
Generally, a parole hearing is held before a single hearing examiner or a parole 
commissioner acting as a hearing examiner. However, if the incarcerated individual is 
serving a sentence for homicide or is serving a sentence of life imprisonment or if a victim 
requested that the hearing be opened to public attendance, a parole hearing is held before 
a panel of at least two commissioners. 
 
Consideration of Factors in Determining Suitability for Parole:  Each hearing examiner 
and commissioner determining whether an incarcerated individual is suitable for parole, 
and MPC before entering into a predetermined parole release agreement, must consider:   
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 16/ Page 5 
 
the circumstances surrounding the crime; 
 
the physical, mental, and moral qualifications of the incarcerated individual; 
 
the progress of the incarcerated individual during confinement, including the 
academic progress of the incarcerated individual in the mandatory education 
program, as specified; 
 
a report on a drug or alcohol evaluation that has been conducted on the incarcerated 
individual, including any recommendations concerning the incarcerated 
individual’s amenability for treatment and the availability of an appropriate 
treatment program; 
 
whether, taking into account the totality of the circumstances, including the age of 
the incarcerated individual, there is reasonable probability that the incarcerated 
individual, if released on parole, will not recidivate; 
 
whether release of the incarcerated individual on parole is compatible with public 
safety; 
 
an updated victim impact statement or recommendation, as specified; 
 
any recommendation made by the sentencing judge at the time of sentencing; 
 
any information that is presented to a commissioner at a meeting with the victim; 
 
any testimony presented to MPC by the victim or the victim’s designated 
representative; and 
 
compliance with the case plan, as specified. 
 
Proceedings Before a Hearing Examiner:  The MPC chairperson must assign hearing 
examiners, or commissioners acting as hearing examiners, as required to hear cases for 
parole. Each proceeding before a hearing examiner must be conducted in accordance with 
the following provisions: 
 
 
MPC must keep a record of each hearing conducted by a hearing examiner; 
 
a hearing examiner must determine if an incarcerated individual is suitable for 
parole in accordance with the factors and other information specified above; at the 
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing examiner must inform the incarcerated 
individual of the hearing examiner’s recommendation for parole or denial of parole. 
Within 21 days after the hearing, the hearing examiner must give to MPC, the 
Commissioner of Correction, and the incarcerated individual a written report of the 
hearing examiner’s findings and recommendation for parole or denial of parole. The 
Commissioner of Correction or the incarcerated individual may file with MPC 
written exceptions to the report of a hearing examiner no later than 5 days after the 
report is received; 
 
one commissioner assigned by the MPC chairperson must review summarily the 
recommendation of the hearing examiner. MPC, on its own initiative or on the filing 
of an exception, may schedule a hearing on the record by MPC in its entirety or by 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 16/ Page 6 
a panel of at least two commissioners assigned by the MPC chairperson. MPC or a 
panel must render a written decision on the appeal. The decision of MPC or the 
panel is final; and 
 
if an exception is not filed and MPC does not act on its own initiative within the 
five-day appeal period, the recommendation of the hearing examiner is approved. 
 
Recommendations and Decisions:  MPC may grant parole, deny parole, or decide to rehear 
the case at a future date. The hearing examiner must verbally inform the incarcerated 
individual of the hearing examiner’s recommendation immediately after the hearing and 
submit a written report of findings and recommendations to MPC, the Commissioner of 
Correction, and the incarcerated individual within 21 days after the hearing. After receiving 
the recommendation, a parole commissioner is required to review the written 
recommendations of the hearing examiner. The commissioner may either approve or 
disapprove the hearing examiner’s recommendation. If the recommendation is approved, 
the decision is sent to the incarcerated individual and to the Commissioner of Correction. 
If the recommendation is disapproved, the decision is sent to a two-commissioner panel for 
the issuance of a final decision. 
 
The incarcerated individual and the Commissioner of Correction have five days after 
receipt of the hearing examiner’s written decision to file with MPC a written exception to 
the hearing examiner’s recommendations. If an exception is not filed, the recommendation 
of the hearing examiner is adopted. If an exception is filed, MPC or a panel of at least 
two commissioners assigned by the chairperson of MPC may schedule an appeal hearing. 
The appeal hearing is on the record, and the decision of MPC or the panel is final. 
 
Decisions of a two-commissioner panel must be unanimous. When the members of a  
two-commissioner panel disagree, the chairperson of MPC must convene a three-member 
panel to hear the case. Decisions by more than two commissioners are by majority vote. 
 
MPC must inform the incarcerated individual and the appropriate correctional authority of 
MPC’s decision as soon as possible. If parole is denied, MPC must give the incarcerated 
individual a written report of its findings within 30 days after the hearing. 
 
Other Duties:  MPC also reviews cases and makes recommendations to the Governor 
concerning medical parole of an incarcerated individual serving a sentence of life 
imprisonment. In addition, MPC reviews cases concerning pardons, commutations, or 
other clemency at the request of the Governor. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires that MPC consist of at least 15 but not more than 
20 members. (Under current law, it consists of 10 members.) In addition, the bill states that 
it is the intent of the General Assembly that any funds budgeted for hearing examiner 
salaries as of October 1, 2026, be re-budgeted for parole commissioner salaries. There are 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 16/ Page 7 
currently 10 hearing examiners, and approximately $970,100 is included in the fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced for their salaries.  
 
This analysis assumes that MPC expands to 20 commissioners (from 10 commissioners) 
as a result of the bill. The analysis further assumes that as of October 1, 2026, the 
anticipated $727,576 remaining in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced for hearing 
examiner salaries is re-budgeted for parole commissioner salaries; thus, general fund 
expenditures increase by a net of approximately $1.2 million in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
10 parole commissioners as well as 11 additional employees (1 program manager, 
2 administrative officers, 4 office secretaries, and 4 clerks) to support the additional 
commissioners (shown below), less the costs of hearing examiner salaries re-budgeted for 
commissioner salaries under the bill (as discussed above). The estimate for the new staff 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions (New Commissioners/Support Staff) 
21.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$1,724,410 
Operating Expenses 
     191,956 
FY 2027 New Staff Expenditures 
$1,916,366 
 
Net future year expenditures reflect (1) for the new staff, full salaries with annual increases 
and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and 
(2) the continued reallocation of anticipated costs for hearing examiner salaries (accounting 
for growth). 
 
This analysis assumes that the Executive Director of the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission, the Public Defender of Maryland, and the State Superintendent of 
Education, appointed to the panel for the appointment of parole commissioners under the 
bill, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1156 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 16/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
me/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8