START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 49 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 49 
(Delegate Metzgar) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Abortion (Heartbeat Bill) 
 
 
This bill requires that an abortion be performed by a physician (rather than a qualified 
provider under current law) and prohibits a physician from performing, inducing, or 
attempting to perform or induce an abortion (1) before determining whether the baby has 
a detectable heartbeat and (2) if the physician determines that the baby has a detectable 
heartbeat. Accordingly, the bill repeals the current prohibition against State interference in 
a woman’s decision to terminate a pregnancy before viability or at any time under specified 
circumstances. Any person (with specified exceptions) may bring a civil action to enforce 
this prohibition against (1) any person who performs, induces, or intends to perform or 
induce a prohibited abortion or (2) any person who aides, abets, or intends to aide or abet 
the performance or induction of a prohibited abortion. If a person prevails under such an 
enforcement action, the court must award damages of at least $10,000 for each prohibited 
abortion the defendant performed or induced (and/or each abortion performed or induced 
as a result of the defendant’s aiding or abetting). The Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) must prepare and provide specified materials. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $8,787 annually to produce, 
print, and provide specified materials, as discussed below. Medicaid general fund 
expenditures decrease by up to $8.5 million in FY 2027 and up to $11.3 million on an 
annualized basis thereafter. Department of Budget and Management (DBM) expenditures 
for the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program likely decrease 
by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2027. The overall net fiscal effect on 
Medicaid and DBM is indeterminate, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase for circuit courts to the extent that additional 
civil actions are filed under the bill. Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 49/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, “physician” means an individual who is licensed to practice 
medicine in the State under Title 14 of the Health Occupations Article. 
 
Abortion – Prohibition 
 
With limited exception, a physician may not knowingly perform, induce, or attempt to 
perform or induce, an abortion on a pregnant woman (1) before determining whether the 
baby has a detectable heartbeat and (2) if the physician determines that the baby has a 
detectable heartbeat. In addition, a person may not perform or induce an abortion unless 
the abortion is voluntary and informed, as specified. 
 
To determine whether a baby has a detectable heartbeat, a physician must use a test that is 
(1) consistent with the physician’s good faith and reasonable understanding of standard 
medical practice and (2) appropriate for the estimated gestational age of the baby and the 
condition of the pregnant woman and her pregnancy. The physician must record the 
estimated gestational age, the method used to estimate the gestational age, and the test used 
for detecting a fetal heartbeat, as specified. 
 
Informed and Voluntary Consent  
 
The physician performing or inducing the abortion must inform the pregnant woman of the 
following:   
 
 
the physician’s name; 
 
the particular medical risks associated with the particular abortion procedure to be 
employed, including (1) the risks of infection and hemorrhage; (2) the potential 
danger to a subsequent pregnancy and of infertility; and (3) the possibility of 
increased risk of breast cancer following an induced abortion and the natural 
protective effect of a completed pregnancy in avoiding breast cancer; 
 
the probable gestational age of the baby at the time the abortion is to be performed 
or induced; and 
 
the medical risks associated with carrying the child to term. 
 
The physician performing or inducing the abortion (or an agent of the physician) must 
inform the pregnant woman that (1) Medicaid benefits may be available for prenatal care, 
childbirth, and neonatal care; (2) the father is liable for assistance in the support of the child 
without regard to whether the father has offered to pay for the abortion; and (3) public and 
private agencies provide pregnancy prevention counseling and medical referrals for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 49/ Page 3 
obtaining pregnancy prevention medications or devices, including emergency 
contraception for victims of rape or incest. 
 
The physician performing or inducing the abortion (or an agent of the physician) must 
provide the pregnant woman with specified printed materials provided by MDH that 
describe the baby and list agencies that offer alternatives to abortion or sonogram services 
at no cost.  
 
Before any sedative or anesthesia is administered and at least 24 hours before an abortion 
is induced or performed (with limited exception), the physician (or a qualified agent) must 
perform, display, explain, and make audible a sonogram to the pregnant woman, as 
specified. Before receiving the sonogram, the pregnant woman must sign and the 
performing/inducing physician must receive a copy of an “abortion and sonogram election” 
form, as specified. 
 
Prohibition – Exception 
 
A physician is not in violation of the above prohibition if the physician tests for the 
presence of a fetal heartbeat and does not detect a heartbeat. The prohibition does not apply 
to a physician who performs or induces an abortion if the physician believes that a medical 
emergency exists, and the performing physician executes a specified written document that 
(1) certifies the abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency and (2) specifies the 
woman’s medical condition requiring the abortion. The written document must be 
maintained in the pregnant woman’s medical record and the physician’s patient records. 
 
Prohibition – Enforcement 
 
Any person (other than an officer or employee of the State or a local governmental entity 
in the State) may bring a civil action in the appropriate venue as specified against any 
person who:   
 
 
performs or induces an abortion in violation of the specified prohibitions;  
 
knowingly engages in conduct that aids or abets the performance or inducement of 
an abortion (including paying for or reimbursing the costs of an abortion through 
insurance or otherwise) performed or induced in violation of the specified 
prohibitions; or  
 
intends to engage in either of the above. 
 
An action must be filed within four years of the date when the cause of action arose. If a 
claimant prevails in the specified civil action, the court must award (1) injunctive relief 
sufficient to prevent the defendant from violating or engaging in acts that aid or abet 
violations of the specified prohibitions; (2) statutory damages of at least $10,000 for each 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 49/ Page 4 
abortion the defendant performed or induced (and/or each abortion performed or induced 
as a result of the defendant’s aiding or abetting) in violation of the specified prohibition; 
and (3) costs and attorney’s fees.  
 
A court may not award the above specified relief if the defendant demonstrates previous 
payment of the full amount of statutory damages for the particular abortion performed or 
induced (or the particular conduct that aided and abetted an abortion performed or induced) 
in violation of the specified prohibitions. 
 
Defenses 
 
It is an affirmative defense to an action filed to enforce violation of the specified prohibition 
that a defendant who performed or induced an abortion or a defendant who aided or abetted 
the performance or induction of an abortion reasonably believes, after conducting a 
reasonable investigation, that the physician complied or would comply with the bill’s 
requirements, as specified. The defendant has the burden of proving an affirmative defense 
by a preponderance of the evidence.  
 
None of the following may be used as a defense:  (1) ignorance or mistake of law; (2) a 
defendant’s belief that the requirements of the bill are unconstitutional; (3) a defendant’s 
reliance on any court decision that has been overruled on appeal or by a subsequent court 
(even if not overruled when the defendant engaged in a violation of the specified 
prohibition); (4) a defendant’s reliance on any federal or State court decision that is not 
binding on the court in which the action is filed; (5) nonmutual issue preclusion or 
nonmutual claim preclusion; (6) the consent of the baby’s mother to the abortion; or (7) any 
claim that the enforcement of the bill or the imposition of civil liability against the 
defendant will violate the constitutional rights of third parties. 
 
Immunities 
 
In any action, claim, or counterclaim or any type of legal or equitable action that challenges 
the validity of any provision or application of this bill, (1) the State has sovereign 
immunity; (2) a political subdivision has governmental immunity; and (3) each officer and 
employee of the State or a political subdivision has official immunity. 
 
Severability 
 
Each statute that regulates or prohibits abortion is severable in each of its applications to 
every person and circumstance such that the unconstitutionality of one statute under 
one interpretation does not render other statutes or other interpretations unconstitutional. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 49/ Page 5 
In addition, the bill’s provisions are severable such that the invalidity of any provision does 
not affect other provisions. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 56 of 2022 established the Abortion Care Clinical Training 
Program to protect access to abortion care by ensuring that there are enough health 
professionals to provide abortion care and required health insurers and Maryland Medicaid 
to cover abortion services without a deductible, coinsurance, copayment, or other 
cost‑sharing requirement. Chapter 56 also established the Abortion Care Clinical Training 
Program Fund, a special fund under MDH to fund the program.  
 
For more information on the current status of abortion law on the State and federal level, 
please see Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Administrative Costs 
 
Under the bill, MDH must provide printed materials that describe the baby and list agencies 
that offer alternatives to abortion or sonogram services at no cost to the pregnant woman. 
These materials must also be accessible on a website sponsored by MDH. MDH estimates 
an annual cost of $3,535 to produce the materials and $5,252 to mail approximately 50,500 
brochures. Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by approximately $8,787 in 
fiscal 2027 and annually thereafter. 
 
Abortion Care Clinical Training Program 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $7.0 million for the program, $3.5 million 
of which comes from the program special fund, reflecting the annual mandated 
appropriation (pursuant to Chapter 56). 
 
While the bill does not explicitly alter the purpose of or mandated funding for the program, 
the bill limits the provision of abortion care services to physicians. As such, usage of the 
program and associated program funds would likely be limited to physicians only (rather 
than to other qualified providers as under current law).  
 
For a similar bill in 2024, MDH advised that it could use existing budgeted resources to 
modify the program to focus on training physicians only (rather than qualified providers), 
if necessary, under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 49/ Page 6 
Medicaid 
 
Medicaid paid for 12,858 abortions in fiscal 2025 at an average cost of $876 per abortion 
for a total cost of $11.3 million. Thus, general fund expenditures decrease by up to 
$8.5 million in fiscal 2027, based on fiscal 2025 claims. This estimate reflects the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. Based on fiscal 2025 claims, general fund expenditures 
decrease by up to $11.3 million annually thereafter.  
 
However, Medicaid has previously noted that any savings may be offset by an increase in 
costs for labor and delivery services provided to Medicaid eligible women to the extent 
that births increase under the bill. The approximate average cost for prenatal care, 
labor/delivery, and postpartum care for Medicaid beneficiaries is $36,000. Moreover, 
newborns born to Medicaid-eligible mothers are deemed automatically eligible for 
Medicaid benefits for their first year and typically retain eligibility for subsequent years. 
On average, Medicaid pays $9,700 for health care per eligible newborn annually  
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds). The extent of any increase in expenditures cannot 
be reliably estimated at this time. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
 
Department of Budget and Management 
 
DBM oversees the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. The 
bill likely results in a significant decrease in the number of abortions covered under the 
program. Thus, DBM expenditures for the program (general, federal, and special funds) 
decrease. Any potential reduction in expenditures cannot be reliably estimated as DBM has 
previously advised that it does not monitor claims data for abortion procedures.  
 
To the extent that births increase among individuals covered by the program, there is likely 
an offsetting increase in expenditures (and potentially an overall increase in expenditures) 
for labor and delivery costs and to cover additional dependents. The extent of any increase 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that currently provide abortion services are 
prohibited from doing so if a fetal heartbeat is detected. Litigation costs and damage awards 
may also increase for physicians against whom civil actions are filed.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to the American Pregnancy Association, a fetal 
heartbeat can be detected by an ultrasound as early as six weeks gestation (or six weeks 
after a patient’s last menstrual period). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 49/ Page 7 
While the bill requires that an abortion be performed by a physician, § 20-103 of the 
Health-General Article (which specifies the conditions under which a “qualified provider” 
may or may not perform an abortion on an unmarried minor) is not altered under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 108 of 2025, HB 1233 of 2024, and HB 958 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 49/ Page 8 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion 
 
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
Roe and Casey were codified in Maryland law before the Dobbs decision, thereby limiting 
its impact in the State. Section 20-209 of the Health-General Article prohibits the State 
from interfering with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the health or life of the woman or in cases of fetal defect, 
deformity, or abnormality. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may also adopt 
regulations consistent with established clinical practice if they are necessary and the least 
intrusive method to protect the life and health of the woman. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 expanded beyond physicians the types of health care providers who 
may provide abortions to include nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives, licensed certified 
midwives, physician assistants, and other qualified licensed health care providers. The Act 
also established the Abortion Care Clinical Training Program to (1) ensure there are enough 
health care professionals to provide abortion services in the State and (2) require health 
insurers and Maryland Medicaid to cover abortion services without a deductible, 
coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. Chapters 248 and 249 of 2023 
require certain health insurers that provide labor and delivery coverage to also cover 
abortion care services, with limited exceptions. 
 
Chapters 244 and 245 of 2023 proposed a constitutional amendment to (1) establish an 
individual’s fundamental right to reproductive freedom, including but not limited to the 
ability to make and effectuate decisions to prevent, continue, or end one’s own pregnancy 
and (2) prohibit the State from directly or indirectly denying, burdening, or abridging the 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 49/ Page 9 
right unless justified by a compelling State interest achieved by the least restrictive means. 
In November 2024, Maryland voters approved this constitutional amendment through a 
ballot referendum. 
 
Chapters 435 and 436 of 2025 established the Public Health Abortion Grant Program. The 
program was intended to transfer excess funds from carriers’ segregated accounts, which 
are required under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), to a 
separate fund under MDH to provide grants to improve access to abortion care clinical 
services for individuals without sufficient resources. Uncodified language in the Acts 
specified that the bills must terminate if the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) advised that the bills violate the ACA. On December 9. 2025, CMS issued 
new guidance about the use of carriers’ segregated funds. CMS subsequently notified the 
Maryland Insurance Administration that, in accordance with the guidance, the Acts exceed 
the permissible uses of the segregated funds under Section 1303 of the ACA. Therefore, 
the Acts must terminate. 
 
Maryland Shield Laws 
 
Chapters 248 and 249 generally prohibit the disclosure of mifepristone data or the 
diagnosis, procedure, medication, or related codes for abortion care and other sensitive 
health services (including reproductive health services other than abortion care) by a health 
information exchange, electronic health network, or health care provider. The Acts also 
define “legally protected health care” to mean all reproductive health services, medications, 
and supplies related to the provision of abortion care and other sensitive health services as 
determined by the Secretary of Health based on the recommendation of the Protected 
Health Care Commission. 
 
Chapters 246 and 247 of 2023 generally (1) establish additional protections for information 
related to “legally protected health care” when that information is sought by another state; 
(2) prohibit a health occupations board from taking specified disciplinary actions related 
to the provision of legally protected health care; (3) prohibit a medical professional liability 
insurer from taking “adverse actions” against a practitioner related to the practice of legally 
protected health care; and (4) prohibit specified State entities, agents, and employees from 
participating in any interstate investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or 
sanctions against a person for activity related to legally protected health care (with limited 
exception). Data related to legally protected health care is also generally protected from 
other states. 
 
State Actions Following the Dobbs Decision 
 
As of December 2025, 41 states have some type of abortion ban or gestational limit in place 
with limited exceptions. Thirteen states (Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 49/ Page 10 
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, and 
West Virginia) have implemented total abortion bans. Twenty-eight states have abortion 
restrictions based on gestational duration, including seven states that ban abortion at or 
before 18 weeks gestation and 21 states that ban abortion at some point after 18 weeks. All 
41 states have an exception for a threat to the mother’s life; 22 states have exceptions for a 
threat to the physical health of the mother; and 13 states have exceptions for a threat to the 
general health of the mother. Several states also have limited exceptions for rape (9 states), 
incest (8 states), or lethal fetal anomalies (13 states). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10