START OF PAGE 1
 
                   
  HB 11 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 11 
(Delegate Simmons) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Sheriff - Appointment of Majors 
 
 
This bill requires the Anne Arundel County Sheriff to appoint three majors at a salary to 
be determined by the Anne Arundel County Council. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by an estimated $822,300 in 
FY 2027, and by at least $730,000 annually thereafter. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
may impose a mandate on a unit of local government.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Sheriff of Anne Arundel County is required to appoint deputies at a 
salary provided by the Anne Arundel County Council. Additionally, the sheriff is 
authorized to appoint a chief deputy who serves at the discretion of the sheriff. 
 
Local Expenditures:  According to information provided by Anne Arundel County, 
expenditures increase by approximately $822,275 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate includes salaries for the newly 
appointed majors (estimated at approximately $142,000 annually) and benefits, as well as 
one-time start-up costs and ongoing operating expenses related to uniforms, vehicles, and 
other equipment. Future year expenditures generally reflect full salaries with annual 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 11/ Page 2 
increases, as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Although the bill’s 
requirement could be met while maintaining the existing number of staff at the sheriff’s 
office, this estimate reflects the county’s assumption that the new positions created under 
the bill result in an overall expansion of staff within the sheriff’s office.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 397 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2