START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 136 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader - Revised 
House Bill 136 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law - Officials of the Legislative Branch - Gifts of Food 
and Beverages 
 
 
This bill allows officials of the Legislative Branch to accept gifts of food and beverages 
from donors or sponsoring entities as part of a meal or reception only if (1) all members of 
the General Assembly are invited to the meal or reception, and (2) the event is open to the 
public. At least 14 days before holding a meal or reception for members of the 
General Assembly, a registered lobbyist must (1) provide all members with a written 
invitation to the meal or reception and (2) register the event with the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS). Within one business day of receiving an event registration, 
DLS must post information – including the date, time, and location – about all upcoming 
meals or receptions on the General Assembly website. Finally, the bill makes conforming 
changes to (1) financial disclosure requirements for officials of the Legislative Branch and 
registered lobbyists and (2) other provisions of the Maryland Public Ethics Law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and special fund expenditures by the State Ethics Commission 
(SEC) increase by a total of $50,000 only in FY 2027 for contractual information 
technology (IT) services, with expenditures divided equally between general and special 
funds. No effect on revenues. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
25,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
25,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 136/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “legislative unit” means the General Assembly, either house of the General Assembly, a 
standing committee of the General Assembly, as specified, or a county or regional 
delegation of members of the General Assembly that is recognized by a presiding officer 
of the General Assembly. 
 
With respect to the Legislative Branch, a “public official” is an individual who (1) receives 
compensation at a rate equivalent to at least Grade 16 and (2) is designated a public official 
by order of the presiding officers of the General Assembly. A “State official,” as it relates 
to the Legislative Branch, includes a member or member-elect of the General Assembly. 
An “official” is either a public official or a State official. An “employee,” as it relates to 
the Legislative Branch, is an employee of the Legislative Branch who is not an official.  
 
Gifts to Officials and Employees of the State 
 
With specified exceptions, an official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift if the 
official or employee knows or has reason to know that the gift is from an entity that:   
 
 
does or seeks to do business of any kind with the official’s or employee’s 
governmental unit; 
 
engages in an activity that is regulated or controlled by the official’s or employee’s 
governmental unit; 
 
has a specific financial interest that may be affected, in a manner distinguishable 
from the general public, by the performance or nonperformance of the official’s or 
employee’s duties; 
 
is a regulated lobbyist; or 
 
is an association, or an entity acting on behalf of an association, that is engaged only 
in representing counties or municipal corporations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 136/ Page 3 
Among other exceptions, officials of the Legislative Branch may accept food or beverages 
received and consumed in the presence of a donor or sponsoring entity as part of a meal or 
reception to which all members of a legislative unit have been invited. A legislator need 
not disclose such gifts in annual financial disclosure statements, and the sponsor of the 
event need not name individual attendees in lobbying activity reports. 
 
Financial Disclosure Provisions 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law regulating financial disclosures generally requires elected 
officials, candidates for State-elected offices, and officials to identify real estate interests, 
equity interests, and other relationships such as employment, debts, and gifts as specified 
by statute. Financial disclosures are available to the public and maintained by SEC. A State 
official or employee may not participate in a matter if the official or employee has specified 
conflicts of interest, including if the official or employee or a qualifying relative has an 
interest in the matter and the official or employee knows of the interest. 
 
Regulation of Lobbying Activity 
 
SEC administers a lobbying regulatory program including registration, disclosure, 
reporting and standards of conduct for executive, legislative and grassroots lobbying. The 
lobbyist standards are comprehensive and address a multitude of issues including 
contingent fees, campaign finance activity, improper encouragement of legislation, 
improper gifts, prohibitions against loans, concealment of clients, referrals by officials or 
employees to obtain lobbying clients, intentional misstatement of fact, and other fraudulent 
or illegal activities. More than 3,000 lobbying registrations are filed each year identifying 
the name of the lobbyist, the employer, and the topics of the activity to be lobbied. 
 
Registration and Reporting:  Legislative Unit Meals and Receptions 
 
A regulated lobbyist must, within 5 days of any meal or reception to which the lobbyist has 
invited an entire legislative unit, file a registration with DLS. The registration must include 
the date and location (but not the time) of the meal or reception and the legislative unit 
invited. DLS must publish this information in a weekly list of upcoming meals and 
receptions and must allow public inspection of each registration report during regular 
business hours. Within 14 days after the registered meal or reception, the regulated lobbyist 
must submit a report to SEC listing the total cost of the event and the name and contribution 
of each sponsor. 
 
Lobbyist Registration Fund 
 
The Lobbyist Registration Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by the 
State Treasurer. The fund consists of lobbyist registration fees collected by SEC. The fund 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 136/ Page 4 
may be used to defray the expenses of administering the Maryland Public Ethics Law as it 
relates to lobbyist activity. Any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of any fiscal year 
is reverted to the general fund of the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  To implement the bill, SEC must update/reprogram its electronic 
lobbying reporting system and its lobbyist training system to reflect the bill’s changes. The 
total cost to reprogram both systems is $50,000, which SEC advises is evenly divided 
between general funds and the Lobbyist Registration Fund. Therefore, general and 
special fund expenditures by SEC each increase by $25,000 only in fiscal 2027 for 
contractual IT services to update the agency’s website and lobbying registration systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - February 16, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4