START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 121 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 121 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - Sale for Off-Premises Consumption 
 
 
This bill authorizes specified Class B or Class D alcoholic beverages license holders in 
Baltimore County to obtain a permit from the Baltimore County Board of License 
Commissioners that authorizes the license holder to sell mixed drinks or cocktails in closed 
containers for off-premises consumption, as specified, if the board has adopted regulations 
authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Baltimore County finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board must consider the public health impacts of the sale of alcoholic 
beverages for off-premises consumption when considering whether to adopt regulations 
authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption under the bill. 
 
The bill applies only to a Class B or Class D license that authorizes the holder to sell 
alcoholic beverages for on-premises and off-premises consumption at a restaurant or bar. 
A license holder may obtain a permit from the board to sell, if authorized under the holder’s 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 121/ Page 2 
license, mixed drinks or cocktails in sealed or closed containers for off-premises 
consumption if: 
 
 
the mixed drink or cocktail is purchased along with prepared food other than 
prepackaged snacks; 
 
the individual purchasing the mixed drink or cocktail is at least 21 years old and 
provides valid identification as proof of age; and 
 
each mixed drink or cocktail sold for off-premises consumption is provided in the 
manufacturer’s original sealed container or in a container closed with a cap, cork, 
seal, or lid with no holes for straws or sipping and sold not later than 11:00 p.m. 
 
The board may not charge a license holder an additional fee for selling alcoholic beverages 
under the bill. The board may limit the quantity of alcoholic beverages that may be sold to 
an individual in a single transaction. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, Class B licenses are issued to restaurants and allow the sale of 
alcoholic beverages with food, and Class D licenses are generally issued to bars and taverns 
and allow the sale of alcoholic beverages without food. 
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business restaurant or bar that is authorized to sell 
alcoholic beverages for on and off premises consumption under the bill is likely to 
experience increased revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 72 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2