START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 160 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 160 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State and Local Government - Real Property - Confederate Naming Prohibited 
 
 
This bill prohibits a State entity or a political subdivision of the State from assigning a 
“Confederate name” to real property (including streets, buildings, parks, and subdivisions) 
owned by the State or political subdivision. The bill must be construed to apply 
prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect or application to any 
real property that has a Confederate name before the effective date of the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Confederate name” means any name that commemorates or references 
any aspect of the states in rebellion, operating as the Confederate States of America (CSA), 
from 1861 to 1865 or any person or entity that served voluntarily with or on behalf of CSA 
in any military or civilian capacity. “Political subdivision” means (1) a county; (2) a 
municipal corporation:  (3) an unincorporated town; (4) a school district; (5) a  
special district; or (6) the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission. 
“State entity” includes all units and agencies with the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial 
branches of State government. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 160/ Page 2 
Current Law:  There is no relevant State law regarding the prohibition or renaming of real 
property referencing CSA. 
 
The Commission on the Naming of Items of the Department of Defense that Commemorate 
the Confederate States of America or Any Person Who Served Voluntarily with the 
Confederate States of America (Naming Commission) was established following the 
enactment of the federal fiscal 2021 National Defense Authorization Act. Among other 
things, the Naming Commission was tasked with creating a list to identify specified names 
and information within the U.S. Department of Defense that commemorate CSA or any 
person who served voluntarily with CSA, including names, symbols, displays, monuments, 
or paraphernalia that commemorate CSA. The Naming Commission published 
three reports and they can be read here. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 566 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Baltimore, 
Carroll, 
Harford, 
Queen 
Anne’s, 
and  
St. Mary’s counties; Cities of Annapolis and Takoma Park; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); University System of Maryland; 
Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Maryland State Archives; Baltimore City Public Schools;  
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2