START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 166 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 166 
(Delegate Metzgar, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government - Henrietta Lacks Commission - Establishment (Henrietta 
Lacks Commission of Maryland Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Henrietta Lacks Commission. The State agencies represented on 
the commission must jointly staff the commission. Members of the commission may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State 
travel regulations. Annually beginning December 1, 2027, the commission must report on 
its activities to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Representatives from the State agencies represented on the commission can 
likely serve on the commission, provide supplemental staff support, and complete the 
required annual reports with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. This 
estimate does not reflect the potential cost of other actions that may be taken by the 
commission under the bill. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County may benefit, particularly Turner Station and the 
surrounding areas, to the extent the commission promotes economic development as 
specified under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The commission consists of:  (1) one member of the Senate; 
(2) one member of the House of Delegates; (3) the Secretaries of Social and Economic 
Mobility, and Commerce (or their designees); (4) the State Superintendent of Education 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 166/ Page 2 
(or their designee); and (5) representatives of the following entities, appointed by the 
Governor:  the Maryland Economic Development Commission (MEDCO), the Maryland 
Board of Tourism, and the Maryland State Archives. The Secretary of Social and Economic 
Mobility must designate the chair of the commission. The term of a member is two years. 
 
The commission must: 
 
 
promote education of the life of Henrietta Lacks and HeLa science as developed by 
the National Institutes of Health; 
 
curate a registry of significant tributes to Henrietta Lacks; 
 
work with appropriate State agencies to include tributes to Henrietta Lacks in 
State tourism campaigns; 
 
promote economic development of the Turner Station community of Dundalk; and 
 
make recommendations on implementing the goals of the commission. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 552 of 2002 prohibits a person from conducting research using a 
human subject unless the research complies with federal regulations on the protection of 
human subjects (Common Rule, 45 CFR 46). Despite any provision in federal regulations 
limiting protection to human subjects in certain research, the protections apply to all 
research using a human subject in the State. 
 
Multiple federal and State regulatory bodies have authority to oversee (or make 
recommendations and provide guidance on) life science activities, including: 
 
 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), under the 
Common Rule (45 CFR 46) which requires that federally funded research involving 
human subjects undergo ethical review (as noted above, Maryland law requires 
adherence to these regulations); 
 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), under 21 CFR 50 and 56, which 
regulate the protection of human subjects, informed consent, and Institutional 
Review Boards (IRBs) for FDA-regulated trials; 
 
the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and 
Behavioral Research, under the National Research Act of 1974, which provides 
principles that guided the establishment of the Common Rule and required the 
U.S. Public Health Service to establish regulations protecting human subjects, 
leading to the formal requirement of establishing IRBs; 
 
HHS’ Office of Civil Rights, under the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act, which protects the privacy of medical records, including human 
subjects research; 
 
IRBs (independent committees established by organizations carrying out human 
subjects research to review and monitor such research), which exist in Maryland at 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 166/ Page 3 
federal agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health, FDA, and the 
National Cancer Institute; the Maryland Department of Health; public and private 
universities; community hospitals and health care systems; and private commercial 
companies; and 
 
the State Anatomy Board, which has the right to control and distribute human bodies 
donated for medical science. 
 
Additional Comments:  Henrietta Lacks was an African American woman whose cancer 
cells are the source of the HeLa cell line, the first immortalized human cell line and one of 
the most important cell lines in medical research. Henrietta received treatment at 
Johns Hopkins Hospital in 1951. At that time, neither federal law nor hospital policy 
required that patients be informed or asked for permission before their tissues were used in 
research. 
 
Turner Station, home to Henrietta Lacks, was founded in the late 19th century because of 
a need for African American mill workers to have a place to live while the country 
remained segregated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  MEDCO; Department of Commerce; Department of Social and 
Economic Mobility; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland State Archives; State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3