START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 115 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 115 
(Delegate Wilkins, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Individuals Released From State Correctional Facilities - 
Automatic Restoration of Voter Registration 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to 
electronically transmit to the State Board of Elections (SBE), on a monthly basis, 
information on individuals released from incarceration at a State correctional facility in the 
immediately preceding month, in order for SBE to then restore the voter registration of 
such individuals who were previously registered to vote in the State before being 
incarcerated and whose new residential addresses are in the State. Notification must be sent 
to an individual notifying them of their voter registration, their eligibility to vote, and how 
to decline registration or update their address. By January 1, 2028, SBE and DPSCS must 
jointly develop and implement procedures and an electronic transmission process, that 
comply with the bill, for the restoration of voter registration for individuals released from 
incarceration at a State correctional facility. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, collectively, by $400,000 in 
FY 2027 only. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 115/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Restoration of Voter Registration 
 
The bill requires DPSCS to, on a monthly basis, electronically transmit to SBE a list that 
includes the following information for each individual who was released from incarceration 
at a State correctional facility in the immediately preceding month:  
 
 
the individual’s full name; 
 
the individual’s date of birth; 
 
the last four digits of the individual’s Social Security number, driver’s license 
number, or State-issued identification card number; 
 
the date the individual was released from incarceration; and 
 
the individual’s new residential address. 
 
On receipt of the list, SBE must (1) identify each individual on the list who was registered 
to vote in the State before being incarcerated and whose new residential address is located 
in the State and (2) promptly restore the voter registration of such individuals at their new 
residential address and give them active voter status. Irrespective of § 3-506 of the Election 
Law Article (governing access to voter registration list information) and the Public 
Information Act, the bill prohibits public disclosure of the identity of the voter registration 
agency through which a formerly incarcerated voter has registered under the bill. 
 
The bill requires SBE and DPSCS to jointly develop and implement, by January 1, 2028, 
procedures and an electronic transmission process, that comply with the bill, for the 
restoration of voter registration for individuals released from incarceration at a State 
correctional facility. 
 
Notice of Registration 
 
The bill also requires the election director of a local board of elections to enclose a notice 
with each voter notification card sent to individuals whose voter registration has been 
restored under the bill (a voter notification card is sent to a voter as evidence of voter 
registration) that includes a statement that (1) the individual has been registered to vote at 
the residential address the individual provided to a State agency; (2) the individual is 
eligible to vote in the State in all federal, State, and local elections; and (3) if the individual 
wishes to decline voter registration, or if the individual needs to update the individual’s 
residential address, the individual should contact SBE or the appropriate local board. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 115/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Voter Qualifications 
 
Under State law, with certain exceptions, an individual may register to vote if the individual 
is a citizen of the United States, is at least age 16, and is a resident of the State as of the 
day the individual seeks to register. A person who has been convicted of a felony and is 
currently serving a court-ordered sentence of imprisonment for the conviction is not 
qualified to be a registered voter. 
 
Reports on Individuals Convicted of a Felony and Sentenced to Imprisonment 
 
Each month, the clerk of the circuit court for each county and the administrative clerk for 
each District Court must report to the State Administrator of Elections the names and 
addresses of all individuals convicted, in the respective court, of a felony and sentenced to 
imprisonment with commitment papers. The information must be reported in a format and 
at times prescribed by SBE. In addition, the State Administrator must make arrangements 
with the clerk of the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to receive reports of 
names and addresses, if available, of individuals convicted of a felony in that court and 
sentenced to imprisonment with commitment papers. 
 
Voting Information/Material Provided to Released Individuals 
 
DPSCS must (1) provide each individual who is released from a correctional facility with 
a voter registration application and documentation with the individual’s discharge papers 
that informs the individual that the individual’s voting rights have been restored; (2) display 
a sign in each parole and probation office, in a conspicuous location where notices to the 
public are customarily posted, indicating that any individual who is no longer incarcerated 
has the right to vote; and (3) post a notice, in a conspicuous location on the department’s 
website, indicating that any individual who is no longer incarcerated has the right to vote. 
 
Voter Registration 
 
An individual may apply to become a registered voter through a number of means including  
(1) visiting an election board office; (2) by mail; (3) when applying for services at a voter 
registration agency (specified public and nongovernmental agencies designated by SBE, 
including agencies providing public assistance and services for individuals with 
disabilities, public higher education institutions, military recruiting offices, and 
one-stop career centers in the Maryland Department of Labor); (4) during an applicable 
transaction at automatic voter registration agencies, which are the Motor Vehicle 
Administration, the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange, local departments of social 
services, and the Mobility Certification Office in the Maryland Transit Administration; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 115/ Page 4 
(5) through SBE’s online voter registration system; or (6) at an early voting center or an 
election day polling place in their county of residence. 
 
Voter Notification 
 
The election director in the county where a voter registration applicant resides must send a 
voter acknowledgment notice, in a format prescribed by SBE, to each applicant informing 
them whether he or she is qualified to become registered and, if not qualified, the reasons 
why.  
 
A voter notification card sent to a qualified applicant may serve as a voter acknowledgment 
notice. The voter notification card must contain the name and address of the voter, the date 
of issue, and the district or ward and precinct of the voter. SBE regulations also require that 
the registered voter’s party affiliation, if any, and name and address of the appropriate 
polling place be included on the card. The card is evidence that the individual to whom it 
is issued is a registered voter on the date appearing on the card. The election director must 
issue a replacement card on request of the voter and a new card when a relevant change is 
made in the voter’s registration record if the voter continues to reside in the county. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, collectively, by 
$400,000 in fiscal 2027 only, which accounts for the bill’s January 1, 2027 effective date, 
for one-time development costs billed to the local boards of elections by SBE, in 
accordance with the State’s current cost-sharing structure with the local boards, for 
modifications in the statewide voter registration system. SBE advises that these 
modifications are needed to (1) implement new functionality enabling the reactivation of 
cancelled registrations based on external source data and (2) make changes to the voter 
notification card (generated through the voter registration system) to include the 
information required under the bill.  
 
The existing voter registration system is scheduled to be replaced prior to the 
2030 elections and SBE expects that the bill’s requirements can be integrated into the new 
system at no additional cost. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1110 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 241 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 115/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5