START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 108 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 108 
(Delegate Pasteur, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Judicial Proceedings and Finance 
 
Division of Correction - Volunteer Services Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Volunteer Services Program in the Division of Correction (DOC) 
within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS). DOC must 
establish a protocol for registering volunteers, including formerly incarcerated individuals 
and organizations led by formerly incarcerated individuals, in the program to have access 
to State correctional facilities for the purpose of assisting incarcerated individuals with 
release preparation. The protocol must require (1) DOC to maintain a record of volunteers 
registered in the program; (2) the registration of volunteers in the program to be made 
available to the public, subject to specified conditions; and (3) a volunteer in the program 
to provide to DOC a written schedule describing when the volunteer intends to access a 
State correctional facility. A volunteer in the program (1) has the right to elect whether the 
volunteer’s name is made available to the public and (2) must consent in writing if the 
volunteer elects the disclosure of the volunteer’s name to the public. DOC may not deny a 
schedule provided unless the schedule interferes with the normal function of the State 
correctional facility. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DPSCS can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. The bill 
is not otherwise expected to materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 108/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Release from Division of Correction  
 
The Commissioner of Correction must adopt regulations (1) establishing a release plan for 
incarcerated individuals upon release from confinement in a State correctional facility to 
help identify resources to assist incarcerated individuals following release, including the 
provision of transportation from the facility for an incarcerated individual upon release and 
(2) implementing provisions concerning issuance of an identification card to incarcerated 
individuals on release from confinement in a State correctional facility. 
 
Current regulations specify that, when feasible, a parole release plan must be completed 
before a parole hearing. A release plan must include the name of the parolee’s employer or 
evidence of other legitimate means of financial support, the location at which the parolee 
will reside, and the nature of any community services necessary to meet the special needs 
of the parolee. 
 
Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry 
Services 
 
Chapters 936 and 937 of 2024 established the Task Force on the Creation of a Division of 
Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services, staffed by DPSCS. The task force must 
(1) identify and assess the reentry services that exist in the State; (2) identify gaps in reentry 
services; (3) assess the markers of successful reentry; (4) ensure that the recommendations 
of the task force equally consider returning citizens regardless of gender; (5) develop a plan 
to establish a Division of Returning Citizens within DPSCS for specified purposes; and 
(6) develop a plan to expand specified services for individuals after release from 
incarceration. 
 
Chapters 112 and 113 of 2025 extended the termination date of the task force to 
June 30, 2027, and the deadline for submission of the task force’s required report to 
October 31, 2026. 
 
Performance Incentive Grant Fund 
 
The Performance Incentive Grant Fund within the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy is intended to make use of the savings from the implementation of  
Chapter 515 of 2016, the Justice Reinvestment Act, to provide grants for specified 
programs and services, including providing for pretrial risk assessments, services to reduce 
pretrial detention, diversion programs, specialty courts, reentry programs, and ensuring that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 108/ Page 3 
the rights of crime victims are protected and enhanced. Money expended from the fund for 
programs to reduce recidivism and control correctional costs is supplemental to and is not 
intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for such 
purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 61 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Cannabis Administration; Department of Social 
and Economic Mobility; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3