START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 172 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 172 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Municipalities - Enforcement Officers - Body-Worn Cameras 
 
 
This bill authorizes a municipality to adopt an ordinance or a resolution authorizing an 
“enforcement officer” to use a body-worn camera (BWC) during the course of the 
enforcement officer’s duties. A municipality that adopts such an ordinance or resolution 
must develop and publish a policy for the issuance and use of a BWC by an enforcement 
officer that is consistent with the policy published by the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission (MPTSC) for the issuance and use of BWCs by law enforcement 
officers. A municipal enforcement officer is included within the definition of “law 
enforcement officer” for purposes of making it lawful for a municipal enforcement officer, 
in the course of the officer’s regular duty, to intercept an oral communication with a body 
worn digital recording device or an electronic control device capable of recording video 
and oral communications under specified circumstances. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s exception to wiretapping and electronic surveillance provisions is 
not expected to have a material operational or fiscal impact on the Judiciary. Otherwise, 
the bill only affects local government operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect local finances for 
the circuit courts. Authorizing a municipality to adopt an ordinance or resolution that 
authorizes the use of BWCs by enforcement officers does not directly affect local finances. 
However, to the extent a municipality chooses to adopt such an ordinance or resolution as 
a result of the bill, local expenditures may increase to develop and publish a policy for the 
issuance and use of BWCs and to obtain, implement, and use BWCs in a manner consistent 
with that policy. The extent to which municipalities that already use BWCs may be affected 
by the bill’s provisions is unknown. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 172/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Enforcement officer” means an employee or agent of a municipality who 
is authorized to act as a code enforcement, parking enforcement, or traffic enforcement 
officer for the municipality. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Body-Worn Camera Policy:  Chapters 128 and 129 of 2015 established the Commission 
Regarding the Implementation and Use of Body Cameras by Law Enforcement Officers. 
Through the examination of model policies and discussion, the commission compiled a list 
of best practices for BWCs and submitted a report to the General Assembly and the Police 
Training Commission (now known as MPTSC) in September 2015. The commission’s 
report addresses (1) procedures for testing and operating equipment, including when BWCs 
must be activated and when their use is prohibited; (2) notification responsibilities of law 
enforcement officers to individuals being recorded; (3) confidentiality and ownership of 
data; (4) procedures and requirements for data storage; (5) the review of recordings by 
parties in interest; and (6) the establishment of retention periods, the release of recordings 
as required by the Public Information Act, and the development of written policies for 
BWCs usage consistent with State law and regulations issued by MPTSC. 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 128 and 129, MPTSC developed a policy for the issuance and use of 
BWCs by law enforcement officers, which incorporated the recommendations of the 
commission. 
 
Body-Worn Cameras Required:  Chapter 60 of 2021 required, by July 1, 2023, the 
Department of State Police, the Anne Arundel County Police Department, the Howard 
County Police Department, and the Harford County Sheriff’s Office to require the use of a 
BWC by each law enforcement officer employed by the law enforcement agency who 
regularly interacts with members of the public as part of the law enforcement officer’s 
official duties, subject to the agency’s policy on the use of BWCs. By July 1, 2025, a law 
enforcement agency of a county not mentioned above was required to meet these same 
requirements.  
 
A BWC that possesses the requisite technological capability must automatically record and 
save at least 60 seconds of video footage immediately prior to the officer activating the 
record button on the device. 
 
A law enforcement agency subject to the BWC requirements must develop and maintain a 
written policy consistent with the policy published by MPTSC for the use of BWCs. The 
policy must specify which law enforcement officers employed by the law enforcement 
agency are required to use BWCs. A law enforcement agency may not negate or alter any 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 172/ Page 3 
of the requirements or policies established in accordance with specified BWC-related 
provisions through collective bargaining. 
 
Wiretap Act:  Under Maryland’s Wiretap Act, it is unlawful to willfully intercept any wire, 
oral, or electronic communication. Under the Wiretap Act, “intercept” is defined to mean 
the aural or other acquisition of the contents of any wire, electronic, or oral communication 
through the use of any electronic, mechanical, or other device. However, statute does 
authorize the interception of an oral communication if all participants have given prior 
consent (sometimes called “two-party consent”). Maryland is 1 of 12 two-party consent 
states, most of which spell out clearly that the consent is required only in circumstances 
where there is a “reasonable expectation of privacy.” 
 
The Wiretap Act does provide specified exceptions. For example, the interception of an 
oral communication by a law enforcement officer or correctional officer in the course of 
the officer’s regular duty is lawful if (1) the law enforcement officer or correctional officer 
is in uniform or prominently displaying the officer’s badge or other insignia; (2) the law 
enforcement officer or correctional officer is making reasonable efforts to conform to 
standards for the use of a body-worn digital recording device or an electronic control device 
capable of recording video and oral communications; (3) the law enforcement officer or 
correctional officer is a party to the oral communication; (4) the law enforcement officer 
or correctional officer notifies, as soon as practicable, the individual that the individual is 
being recorded, unless it is unsafe, impractical, or impossible to do so; and (5) the oral 
interception is being made as part of a videotape or digital recording. 
 
The failure of a law enforcement officer or correctional officer to provide notice, as 
specified, to an individual who is being recorded in accordance with the requirements for 
lawful interception of an oral communication with a body-worn digital recording device, 
does not affect the admissibility in court of the recording if the failure to notify involved 
an individual who joined the discussion in progress for which proper notification was 
previously given. 
 
Each interception in violation of the Wiretap Act may be prosecuted as a felony, punishable 
by up to five years imprisonment, and/or a $10,000 fine. A person who is the victim of a 
violation of the Wiretap Act has a civil cause of action against the wiretapper for damages, 
attorney’s fees, and litigation costs. 
 
A “body-worn digital recording device” means a device worn on the person of a law 
enforcement officer or correctional officer that is capable of recording video and 
intercepting oral communications. An “electronic control device” means a portable device 
designed as a weapon capable of injuring, immobilizing, or inflicting pain on an individual 
by the discharge of electrical current. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 172/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 748 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; cities of College Park and 
Frostburg; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4