START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 194 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 194 
(Delegate Metzgar, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Incarcerated Individual Apprenticeship Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Incarcerated Individual Apprenticeship Pilot Program in the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) as an independent 
program that is separate from Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE). DPSCS, in 
consultation with the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor), must develop the 
program to provide incarcerated individuals at the Baltimore City Correctional Center the 
opportunity to serve as paid apprentices in an agency or a unit of State or local government 
or with a private entity. The Division of Correction must arrange for the guarding, 
transporting, lodging, feeding, clothing, and medical and other care of an incarcerated 
individual while the incarcerated individual is participating in the program, as specified. A 
person that employs an incarcerated individual under the program must pay at least the 
State minimum wage, as specified. If an incarcerated individual successfully completes the 
program, prior to the individual’s scheduled release, DPSCS or the program must provide 
the incarcerated individual with a certificate demonstrating the incarcerated individual’s 
successful completion of the program. By January 1, 2029, DPSCS must report to the 
General Assembly on the implementation of the program. DPSCS may adopt regulations 
to carry out the bill’s provisions. The bill terminates September 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in State expenditures (multiple fund types) to the 
extent that State agencies choose to employ apprentices in the pilot program. Otherwise, 
DPSCS and MD Labor can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. No effect 
on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in expenditures for local governments that 
choose to employ apprentices in the pilot program. Otherwise, the bill is enabling in nature 
and does not materially affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 194/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  DPSCS must make assignments for program participants to eligible 
employers who are participating in the program.  
 
Current Law:  For an overview of registered apprenticeship programs in the State, see the 
Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
Maryland Correctional Enterprises:  MCE provides work and job training for incarcerated 
individuals in State correctional facilities. MCE produces goods and supplies services at a 
cost that does not exceed the prevailing average market price. These goods and services 
are used by local, State, and federal agencies. These goods are also available for use by 
charitable, civic, educational, fraternal, or religious organizations. 
 
Maryland Wage and Hour Law:  The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State 
complement to the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, which specifies minimum wage and 
overtime requirements for employers and employees in the State. State law specifies that 
an employee must be paid the greater of the federal minimum wage (which is currently 
$7.25 per hour) or $15.00 per hour. However, an employer may pay 85% of the State 
minimum wage rate to employees younger than age 18. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 289 of 2025 and HB 1405 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Maryland Environmental Service; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 194/ Page 3 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a  
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship 
programs. More specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as 
changes to current programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. 
The approval process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program 
in a proposed industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current 
staffing level of the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate 
supervision can be provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations 
of the entity. The Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory 
role for legislation and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
Additionally, Chapter 2 of 2025 (discussed further below) established the Maryland Office 
of Registered Apprenticeship Development (MORAD) within DWDAL’s Maryland 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 194/ Page 4 
Apprenticeship and Training Program (MATP) for the purpose of scaling registered 
apprenticeships across industries and occupations to meet the needs of the State’s economy. 
 
According to MD Labor and as of September 2025, the total number of registered 
apprenticeships in Maryland is over 13,000, with over 1,400 apprentices graduating from 
their programs during 2025. 
 
In addition to registered apprenticeship, MD Labor, in collaboration with the Maryland 
State Department of Education, also operates a parallel youth apprenticeship program 
aimed at connecting students to paid employment and training opportunities called the 
Apprenticeship Maryland Program. As of May 2024, there were 1,045 active youth 
apprenticeships participating in the program. 
 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission 
 
Chapter 168 of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. The purpose of the 
commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill shortages in  
high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways for young 
people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and 
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023, ten times in 2024, and once 
in 2025 and published interim and final reports January 2024 and March 2025, respectively. 
Additionally, the University of Baltimore Schafer Center, as part of its contract to provide 
support staff to the commission, undertook a Survey of Employers and Labor Unions and 
published findings on the prevalence of, barriers to, and benefits of apprenticeships in 
February 2025. 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy (RAISE) Act 
 
Chapter 2, the RAISE Act, operationalized multiple recommendations from the 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission’s interim and final reports. Specifically, Chapter 2 
establishes (1) MORAD within MATP to scale registered apprenticeships across industries 
to meet the needs of the State’s economy; (2) the Registered Apprenticeship Qualified 
Intermediary Program within MATP to increase apprenticeship awareness, connect 
employers and labor organizations with partners, and provide technical assistance to launch 
and expand apprenticeships; (3) the Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 194/ Page 5 
Board to advise MORAD on the strategy to achieve its mission of expanding registered 
apprenticeship opportunities in the State; and (4) the Maryland Pay Per Apprentice 
Program and associated special fund to provide grants to employers and sponsors to 
develop a well-trained, productive workforce that meets the needs of the State’s economy 
and help offset apprenticeship costs. 
 
Recent Reports and Publications 
 
In response to Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024, MD Labor released a report on analyzing the 
apprenticeship mentoring ratio for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the 
State. The report indicates that, for fiscal 2024, there were approximately 694 apprentices 
employed by 119 employers in nontraditional apprenticeships (those outside the traditional 
building trades). 
 
The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) outlined concerns with workforce shortages 
among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation sectors. The 
report directed MD Labor to convene workgroups to study and report on the short-term 
and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. Pursuant to the 2022 JCR, 
MD Labor released reports from a Healthcare Apprenticeship Workgroup, Transportation 
Apprenticeship Workgroup, and Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup. 
 
The 2024 and 2025 JCR directed multiple agencies to collect data relevant to 
apprenticeship in the State in accordance with the interim and final recommendations of 
the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. This included reports from: 
 
 
the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Department of Juvenile Services on 
Public Safety Apprenticeship; 
 
the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission on Apprenticeships in 
Maryland Hospitals; 
 
the Maryland Insurance Administration on Efforts to Support Insurance Industry 
Apprenticeships; 
 
the Maryland Department of Health on a Registered Nurse Degree Apprenticeship 
Program Study; 
 
the Public Service Commission of Maryland on Apprenticeships Within Public 
Service Companies; and 
 
the Maryland Department of Budget and Management on Public Service Registered 
Apprenticeships within State Government. 
 

END OF PAGE 5