START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 103 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 103 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Consumer Contracts - Prohibited Waiver 
 
 
This bill prohibits a consumer contract from waiving, limiting, impairing, or disclaiming 
statutory or punitive damages authorized by federal or State law. The bill prohibits a waiver 
by agreement of its requirements. The bill incorporates these provisions within 
Chapter 194 of 2025, which establishes that a provision in a consumer contract that sets a 
shorter period of time to bring an action under or on the contract than required by State law 
when the contract is issued or delivered is against State policy, illegal, and void. Although 
the bill generally maintains the provisions of Chapter 194, it repeals certain exemptions. 
The bill also contains a severability clause and only applies prospectively. The bill 
takes effect on the later of October 1, 2026, or the taking effect of Chapter 194 
(June 1, 2026), if the effective date of Chapter 194 is amended. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  As noted above, Chapter 194 establishes that a provision 
in a consumer contract that sets a shorter period of time to bring an action under or on the 
contract than required by State law when the contract is issued or delivered is against State 
policy, illegal, and void. However, this provision does not apply to:  (1) any consumer 
contract provided by a business, including an affiliate or subsidiary of the business, that is 
doing business under a license, franchise agreement, certificate, or other authorization 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 103/ Page 2 
issued by a State agency, political subdivision, or public utility commission; (2) a service 
regulated by the Maryland Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications 
Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; or (3) a person or business 
licensed to provide security system services under Title 18 of the Business Occupations 
and Professions Article. The bill repeals these exemptions. 
 
As with Chapter 194, the bill prohibits a court from giving effect to a provision in a 
consumer contract that is illegal. Additionally, the bill specifies that a court must enforce 
the remainder of the consumer contract to the extent practicable.  
 
The bill (and the requirements of Chapter 194) must be construed to apply equally and 
without favorable treatment to a consumer contract with or without an arbitration provision. 
Likewise, the bill and Chapter 194 may not be construed to (1) invalidate an arbitration 
provision that is enforceable under the Federal Arbitration Act or (2) create a right or 
remedy not otherwise provided by federal or State law.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Public Service Commission; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2