START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 168 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 168 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Affordable Housing - Educator 
Workforce Housing and Municipal Corporations 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose and eligible recipients of funding from the Housing 
Innovation Fund, Housing Innovation Pilot Program, and Neighborhood and Community 
Assistance Program, administered by the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD), to support the development of “educator workforce housing”. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHCD can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school boards and municipal corporations are eligible for funding 
assistance from the State to support the development of educator workforce housing. The 
bill otherwise does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Educator workforce housing” means any housing that is rented or sold 
as affordable, low- or moderate-income housing and reserved for teachers or other 
employees of a local school system. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 168/ Page 2 
Providing educator workforce housing is a “school purpose,” so that a local school board 
may not declare any land, school sites, or buildings that it owns as surplus property if they 
can still be used for educator workforce housing. 
 
Changes to Affordable Housing Programs 
 
The bill alters the scope of the Housing Innovation Fund and the Housing Innovation Pilot 
Program, both of which terminate July 1, 2029. 
 
The bill alters the purpose of and potential recipients of funds from the Housing Innovation 
Fund. Specifically, the purpose of the fund is expanded to include providing loans to 
develop educator workforce housing, and the potential recipients are expanded to include 
local boards of education and municipal corporations. Similarly, the bill alters the 
definition of a “housing innovation project” as it relates to the Housing Innovation Fund 
and Pilot Program to include a project to provide educator workforce housing. In addition 
to the current prioritization criteria, DHCD must prioritize funding for a housing innovation 
project if any portion of the units are set aside for educator workforce housing. 
 
The bill alters the purpose of the Housing Innovation Pilot Program to include municipal 
corporations and county boards of education among the entities for which the program 
(1) creates opportunities for increasing housing production and (2) rewards for pursuing 
innovative solutions to the problem of housing scarcity. 
 
Neighborhood and Community Assistance Program 
 
The bill expands the scope of the Neighborhood and Community Assistance program to 
include providing educator workforce housing. DHCD must provide written notice to the 
local school system in which an educator workforce housing project is located.  
 
The bill establishes that, for educator workforce housing projects, approval by a county 
board of education or an authorized designee of a local school system that benefits from a 
project is not required; however, DHCD may not approve a project proposal without 
notifying the county board of education or authorized designee of at least one local school 
system that benefits from the project, as specified. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Live Near Your Work Program 
 
The Community Development Administration (CDA) must administer the Live Near Your 
Work home buyer assistance program that (1) assists home buyers to receive low-interest 
mortgage loans, with down payment and closing cost assistance options, for the purchase 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 168/ Page 3 
of homes near their workplace and (2) coordinate with, and match where appropriate, 
similar programs offered by private employers and county and municipal governments so 
as to maximize the total amount that home buyers can receive under the program. CDA 
must (1) allow home buyers to use the loans for the purchase of newly constructed or 
existing homes and (2) require a home purchased under the program to be occupied by the 
home buyer as a principal residence. In addition, CDA must facilitate the marketing of the 
program with private employers, county and municipal governments, and, where 
appropriate, other units of State government and nonprofit organizations. 
 
Live Near Your Work Program – Community Development Projects 
 
CDA must administer community development projects that (1) are in sustainable 
communities and (2) provide employees with financial assistance in the form of grants to 
buy homes near their workplaces. A community development project administered 
pursuant to these provisions is not subject to specified provisions that require that part of 
the housing be occupied by families of limited income. 
 
Housing Innovation Fund 
 
The Housing Innovation Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by DHCD. The 
purpose of the fund is to provide loans for local housing authorities and county 
governments to develop mixed-income, cross-subsidized housing. The fund consists of 
money appropriated in the State budget to the fund and any other money from any other 
source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only to provide low- or 
no-interest loans to local housing authorities or to county governments partnering with 
housing developers through the Housing Innovation Pilot Program. In addition, the fund 
may be used for projects where a county, in conjunction with a local housing authority or 
a housing developer, acquires existing private sector housing. The fund terminates  
June 30, 2029. 
 
Housing Innovation Pilot Program 
 
“Housing innovation project” means a project to provide mixed-income, cross-subsidized 
housing that meets specified criteria. “Public ownership” means that the housing authority 
of the political subdivision of the State in which the project is located possesses majority 
ownership or control. 
 
The purposes of the Housing Innovation Pilot Program are to create opportunities for the 
State’s housing authorities and county governments to increase the volume of housing 
production and to reward counties pursuing innovative solutions to the problem of housing 
scarcity. The program must be operated with money in the Housing Innovation Fund. A 
project qualifies as a housing innovation project if it provides new housing in which (1) at 
least 20% of the units are set aside for households with a gross annual income of not more 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 168/ Page 4 
than 50% of the area median income for a household of a like size or (2) at least 40% of 
the units are set aside for households with a gross annual income of not more than 60% of 
the area median income for a household of like size. 
 
DHCD must prioritize funding for projects in which (1) the project does not use 
Low‑Income Housing Tax Credit program equity or tax-exempt volume cap; (2) the 
specified affordable set-asides remain restricted at elected levels for at least 99 years; 
(3) the project remains in public ownership; and (4) the project includes a commitment to 
prevailing wage requirements. 
 
DHCD must (1) coordinate with local housing authorities and county governments to 
ensure access to other financial resources, including senior debt products; (2) develop new 
resources in support of statewide housing production; (3) solicit applicants for the program; 
and (4) select three projects to receive assistance from the program each in a different 
jurisdiction. DHCD may select fewer than three projects to fund if there is an insufficient 
number of eligible applicants. 
 
In administering the program, DHCD must take into consideration the need for increased 
development capacity within local housing authorities. DHCD may not condition the award 
of funding from the program on the issuance of bonds by DHCD. The program terminates 
June 30, 2029. 
 
Neighborhood and Community Assistance Program 
 
The purposes of DHCD’s Neighborhood and Community Assistance Program are to 
(1) help nonprofit organizations carry out approved projects in priority funding areas; 
(2) encourage business entities to invest in priority funding areas; and (3) strengthen 
partnerships between public and private entities. 
 
For each fiscal year, a nonprofit organization may submit to DHCD, for approval under the 
program, a proposal for a project to provide services to a priority funding area. The project 
may include community services, redevelopment assistance, job training for low-income 
individuals, education, and crime prevention. The proposal must include specified 
information, including the project to be conducted, the priority funding area that will 
benefit from the project, and the estimated project costs, among other things. A proposal 
must be approved by the local jurisdiction in which the priority funding area is located 
before DHCD may approve it. However, if a local jurisdiction does not respond within 
45 days of receiving notice of the proposal, DHCD may approve the proposal. 
 
In considering a proposal and in determining the maximum amount of contributions 
eligible for tax credits, DHCD must consider relevant factors, including the need for the 
project, the anticipated benefit to the priority funding area, the applicant’s ability to 
successfully complete the project, and the geographic distribution of projects, among other 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 168/ Page 5 
things. DHCD may give preference to a proposal that benefits a sustainable community 
designated by DHCD’s Business Development Program or a neighborhood conservation 
district designated under the program. DHCD may also request data and assistance from 
other units of the State in approving or disapproving a proposal and in determining eligible 
amounts. 
 
An individual or a business entity may claim a nonrefundable tax credit against the income 
tax, insurance premium tax, or public service company franchise tax for a contribution 
worth more than $500 in goods, money, or real property to an approved project under the 
Neighborhood and Community Assistance Program. The tax credit is equal to 50% of the 
amount of approved contributions made during the tax year, up to $250,000. Any excess 
credit, including any amount that would be allowed but for the $250,000 limit, may be 
carried forward for up to five tax years. DHCD administers the tax credit application, 
approval, and certification process. The sum of contributions eligible for the tax credit may 
not exceed $3,500,000 for all approved projects for a fiscal year. 
 
Authority for Local School Boards to Dispose of Surplus Property 
 
With the approval of the State Superintendent or designee, if a local school board finds that 
any land, school site, or building is no longer needed for school purposes, it must inform 
the county commissioners or county council of its determination. The county then has right 
of first refusal to the surplus property for 30 days. If the county finds that the property is 
an integral component of an existing economic development plan, the local school board 
must transfer the property to the county, as specified. If the county has no need for the 
property, the local school board may dispose of the property according to procedures in 
State law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland 
State Department of Education; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City; City of Annapolis; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 168/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 26, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6