START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 195 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 195 
(Delegate Queen) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission - Authority to Conduct Studies 
on the Use of Emerging Technology and the Workgroup on Gambling Prevention 
Technology 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) to 
conduct studies, in collaboration with Bowie State University (BSU), Morgan State 
University (MSU), and the Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling, to 
identify the latest trends and emerging technology to create a safer, more transparent 
gambling environment, including cybersecurity technology, the use of artificial 
intelligence, digital identity verification, and geofencing technology, as specified. 
Additionally, the bill establishes the Workgroup on Gambling Prevention Technology 
within SLGCC. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) can staff the 
workgroup and conduct studies with existing budgeted resources. BSU, MSU, and the 
Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling can likely collaborate and participate 
in the workgroup with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Workgroup on Gambling Prevention Technology must be conducted 
in partnership with BSU, MSU, the Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling, 
and any other foundations or private entities as determined by SLGCC. The workgroup 
must study best practices in using gambling prevention technology to ascertain the extent 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 195/ Page 2 
of problem gambling on college campuses in the State and submit a report on the 
workgroup’s findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
July 1, 2027. 
 
Current Law:  SLGCC must conduct studies of the State lottery and gaming program to:   
 
 
identify any defect in lottery and video lottery facility operations statute or 
regulations of SLGCA that may allow operational or administrative abuses or 
evasions; 
 
guard against the use of those statutes and regulations to conduct organized crime; 
 
ensure that SLGCA’s regulations are proper and related statute and regulations are 
administered to serve their purpose; and 
 
analyze the gaming industry within and outside the State to determine whether 
Maryland’s gaming program is competitive and maximizing revenues for the State. 
 
SLGCC must conduct studies of:   
 
 
the operation and administration of similar laws in other states or countries; 
 
federal laws that may affect the operation of the State lottery or gaming activities; 
 
literature on lotteries and gaming activities, including problem gambling programs; 
and 
 
the reaction of State citizens to existing and potential features of the State lottery 
and gaming program.  
 
SLGCC must submit to the Governor and the General Assembly a monthly report and an 
annual report on State lottery and gaming revenues, total prize disbursements, and other 
expenses for the preceding month and year, respectively. Additionally, SLGCC must 
submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly whenever a matter requires an 
immediate change in a State law to prevent an abuse or evasion or rectify an undesirable 
condition in the operation or administration of the State lottery and gaming program. 
 
SLGCC must regulate sports wagering and the conduct of sports wagering to the same 
extent that SLGCC regulates the operation of video lottery terminals and table games. 
SLGCC must consider the use of technology, remote surveillance, and other similar 
measures to carry out specified sports wagering duties. 
 
Problem Gambling 
 
Video lottery operation licensees must pay an annual fee of $425 per video lottery terminal 
for a Problem Gambling Fund administered by the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH), and SLGCC has established an annual fee of $500 per table game for the Problem 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 195/ Page 3 
Gambling Fund. Additionally, any sports wagering winnings on a sports event not claimed 
within 182 days after the wager is won revert to the Problem Gambling Fund. The Problem 
Gambling Fund is used to fund programs to treat and prevent gambling addiction. After 
satisfying specified requirements, any unspent funds in the Problem Gambling Fund may 
be expended by MDH on drug and other addiction treatment services. 
 
The Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling is a program of the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine and funded by MDH’s Behavioral Health 
Administration through the Problem Gambling Fund. The primary goal of the center is to 
minimize the risks and problems associated with gambling in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3