START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 161 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 161 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax Credit - Retail Service Station Conversions 
 
 
This bill authorizes local governments to grant a property tax credit for certain converted 
retail service stations. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years 
beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent the property tax credit is granted. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit against 
the county or municipal property tax imposed on real property if the use of the real property 
has been converted from a retail service station to another retail use, a residential use, or a 
mixed retail and residential use. “Retail use” does not include use by:  (1) a discount store; 
(2) a self-service storage facility; (3) a licensed cigarette retailer; (4) a licensed other 
tobacco products retailer or tobacconist; (5) an electronic smoking devices retailer or a 
vape shop vendor; or (6) a holder of a Class A retail alcoholic beverages license. “Discount 
store” is a retail store that offers for sale (1) a combination and variety of convenience and 
consumer shopping goods and (2) the majority of the items in the inventory at a price not 
to exceed $5. Local governments may provide for (1) the amount and duration of the 
property tax credit; (2) additional eligibility criteria for the property tax credit; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 161/ Page 2 
(3) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform processing of requests for 
the property tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the property tax 
credit. The tax credit may not be granted for real property unless underground storage tanks 
located on or formerly located on the real property have been permanently closed in 
accordance with regulations of the Department of the Environment. 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that a property tax credit that is authorized be 
granted primarily to defray costs associated with the removal of underground storage tanks 
and the remediation of any contamination associated with underground storage tanks.  
 
Current Law:  Tax credits that may be authorized by local governments, against local 
property taxes only, are specified by law for various types of property. Currently, there are 
73 optional property tax credits authorized by the General Assembly that are made 
available on a statewide basis. These credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the 
Tax – Property Article and are listed in Appendix 1 of the Guide to Local Government 
Taxing Authority. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 to 
the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue decrease depends 
on the number of converted retail service stations, the assessed value of each, local property 
tax rates, and the amount and duration of the property tax credit. The State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation reports that there are approximately 2,300 properties that are 
classified as a retail service station. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in the conversion of retail service 
stations may be meaningfully impacted by the authorization of a property tax credit for 
retail service station conversion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 341 and SB 344 of 2025, HB 12 and SB 67 of 2024, and HB 889 of 
2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 58 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation, Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 161/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3