START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 149 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 149 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Fire Prevention - Assistant Fire Marshals, Residential Rental High-Rise Property 
Fire Safety Equipment, and Fire Alarm System Technicians 
 
 
This bill requires (1) the installation of automatic fire sprinklers, beginning  
October 1, 2026, in each residential high-rise building that is undergoing a substantial 
renovation; (2) the State Fire Prevention Commission (SFPC) to adopt regulations to 
establish a program to license and regulate fire alarm system technicians and fire alarm 
system companies in the State; (3) the State Fire Marshal to approve the appointment of an 
assistant State fire marshal by a county or municipal government or, at the request of a 
local government, designate an individual to serve as an assistant State fire marshal; and 
(4) the Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) to adopt regulations to establish 
requirements and standards for all individuals designated as an Assistant State Fire Marshal 
or a Special Assistant State Fire Marshal. The bill also makes stylistic changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $311,100 in FY 2027; future years 
reflect annualization and the elimination of one-time certification and information 
technology (IT) costs. General fund revenues increase as early as FY 2027 to the extent 
SFPC collects licensing revenue. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$311,100 
$231,400 
$242,400 
$253,500 
$264,500 
Net Effect 
($311,100) 
($231,400) 
($242,400) 
($253,500) 
($264,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase for staff training. Local revenues 
are not affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 149/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Automatic Sprinklers and High-rise Buildings 
 
“High-rise building” means a building where the floor of an occupiable story is greater 
than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department access. “Substantial renovation” 
means permanent alterations that (1) are intended to enhance the value of a building, and 
(2) cost an amount equal to 40% of the value of the building as assessed by the 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation. The bill includes criteria for determining 
whether a renovation is intended to enhance the value of a building. 
 
Beginning October 1, 2026, automatic fire sprinklers must be installed in accordance with 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards in each residential high-rise 
building that is undergoing a substantial renovation. A substantially renovated residential 
rental high-rise building must also have specified fire protections and life safety features. 
 
Licensure of Fire Alarm System Technicians 
 
“Fire alarm system technician” means a person who is engaged in the performance, 
documentation, planning, and coordination of the periodic inspection and testing of 
existing fire alarm systems and their components, not including the commissioning of new 
systems. 
 
SFPC must adopt regulations to (1) define fire alarm system technicians; (2) define fire 
alarm systems in a manner that does not conflict with specified provisions under the 
Business Occupations and Professions Article; (3) designate and identify exemptions to the 
regulations; (4) establish requirements for licensure, involving professional and technical 
standards and requirements for liability insurance; (5) establish a schedule of fees for 
licenses that will recover but not exceed the direct and indirect costs associated with the 
issuance of the licenses; and (6) establish procedures for the State Fire Marshal to deny, 
suspend, or revoke the license of a person who fails to comply with any regulation adopted 
by SFPC. 
 
Minimum Standards for Fire Marshals 
 
Regulations adopted by OSFM establishing requirements for all individuals designated as 
an Assistant State Fire Marshal or a Special Assistant State Fire Marshal must include 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 149/ Page 3 
(1) minimum training, certification, and other standards relating to fire inspection, 
including for fire plan review, fire plan examiners, and fire plan engineering staff; 
(2) acceptable minimum standards for the eligibility of an individual to serve as an 
Assistant State Fire Marshal or a Special Assistant State Fire Marshal; and (3) policies for 
application for, review of, expiration of, renewal of, and probationary status for the 
positions of Assistant State Fire Marshal and Special Assistant State Fire Marshal. 
 
The State Fire Marshal may administer an examination based on NFPA standards as 
relevant for the specified requirements before designating an individual as an 
Assistant State Fire Marshal or a Special Assistant State Fire Marshal. 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Fire Prevention Code 
 
The State Fire Marshal must enforce all laws of the State relating to, among other things, 
the prevention of fire and the installation and maintenance of equipment intended to 
control, detect, or extinguish fire. The State Fire Marshal must also enforce regulations 
adopted by SFPC. SFPC within the Department of State Police (DSP) must adopt 
comprehensive regulations as a State Fire Prevention Code. The commission adopted by 
reference, subject to some exceptions noted in the regulations, the NFPA 1 Fire Code 
(2024 Edition), the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2024 Edition), and some requirements of 
the International Building Code as the State Fire Prevention Code. The State Fire 
Prevention Code has the force and effect of law in the political subdivisions of the State, 
and enforcement is the responsibility of the State Fire Marshal, a legally designated fire 
official of a county or municipality of the State, or other persons legally appointed by the 
State Fire Marshal (as specified under the Public Safety Article). 
 
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2024 Edition) includes provisions requiring the installation 
of automatic sprinkler systems in all existing high-rise apartment buildings by  
January 1, 2033, unless the building meets specified egress requirements. However, the 
State Fire Prevention Code amended these provisions to instead require that all existing 
high-rise apartment buildings have installed automatic sprinkler systems, unless the 
building meets specified egress requirements, within 12 years of the date of the original 
violation notice issued by the fire authority having jurisdiction. 
 
A person may not knowingly violate Title 6 of the Public Safety Article (SFPC and 
State Fire Marshal) or a regulation adopted by SFPC. A person who does so is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 days and/or a fine 
of up to $1,000. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 149/ Page 4 
Melanie Nicholle Diaz Fire Safety Act 
 
Chapter 744 of 2024 established requirements related to the installation of automatic smoke 
detectors, notices regarding the lack of automatic sprinkler systems in residential rental 
high-rise buildings, and emergency escape lighting consistent with NFPA standards. 
Chapter 744 also authorizes local governments to grant a property tax credit for specified 
residential high-rise buildings if the building owner makes fire safety improvements. 
Chapter 744 also established the Workgroup to Develop Fire Safety Best Practices for 
Pre-1974 High-rise Apartment Buildings. The workgroup was required to study, among 
other things, fire safety risks in high-rise apartment buildings that do not have automatic 
sprinkler systems or other fire safety technology. The workgroup submitted its 
interim report on December 23, 2024, and its final report on June 30, 2025.  
 
Local Fire Marshals 
 
A county or municipal corporation may designate a fire marshal or appropriate fire official 
to serve as an assistant State fire marshal to enforce the State fire code in that jurisdiction. 
An assistant State fire marshal may not receive compensation from the State. The State Fire 
Marshal must enforce the State fire code in a county or municipal corporation that has not 
designated an assistant State fire marshal. 
 
Licensure of Fire Sprinkler Contractors 
 
Generally, a person may not provide services as a fire sprinkler contractor in the State 
unless the person is licensed by OSFM. However, specified tests, inspections, and 
installations are permitted without a license. By regulation, all fire sprinkler contractor 
licenses expire two years after the date of issue. The initial application fee is $300, and the 
renewal application fee is $200. 
 
A person may not knowingly violate these provisions. A person who does so is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 days and/or a fine 
of up to $1,000. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $311,064 in fiscal 2027 for 
(1) additional SFPC staff; (2) initial NFPA certification for OSFM employees; and  
(3) one-time IT updates to administer the licensure of fire alarm system technicians. 
General fund revenues increase as early as fiscal 2027 to the extent fire alarm system 
technicians are licensed with SFPC and fees are collected. These effects are discussed in 
more detail below.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 149/ Page 5 
National Fire Protection Association Certification 
 
Although the bill does not require OSFM employees to complete NFPA certification, the 
DSP advises that the standards it is required to adopt by regulation likely will require NFPA 
certification for OSFM staff. There are 71 individuals within OSFM (45 Deputy State Fire 
Marshals, 18 fire safety inspectors, and 8 fire protection engineers) who must therefore 
complete a relevant NFPA certification program to ensure they meet any future standard 
set by OSFM, as required under the bill. The application fee for certification by NFPA is 
$499 and is valid for three years. DSP further advises that it anticipates having the 
National Fire Academy and the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute update their training 
so that future program participants who may later join OSFM will graduate already meeting 
the bill’s minimum training and standards requirements.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $35,429 only in fiscal 2027 for 
OSFM staff to complete NFPA certification.  
 
Licensure of Fire Alarm System Technicians 
 
DSP advises that OSFM currently employs one individual to administer the licensure of 
approximately 400 fire sprinkler contractors and that additional staff are necessary to 
oversee the licensure of fire alarm system technicians; the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs. OSFM must also upgrade its existing licensing system to 
accommodate the addition of fire alarm system technicians. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures increase by $275,635 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the  
bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring  
(1) two administrators to process applications and ensure fees are collected, and  
(2) one manager to provide oversight of the licensure program. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, one-time IT upgrades, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$173,213 
Information Technology Costs 
75,000 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$275,635 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. General fund revenues increase 
to the extent OSFM collects licensure fees as any fees collected by DSP are deposited to 
the general fund; however, as the bill does not specify what the fee must be, a reliable 
estimate is not feasible. Licensing may begin as early as fiscal 2027, but may also be 
delayed until fiscal 2028, allowing for the promulgation of regulations. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 149/ Page 6 
Other Effects 
 
The University System of Maryland advises the University of Maryland, College Park may 
require upgrades to eight of its older university-owned high-rise residential housing 
facilities to install automatic sprinkler systems, with estimated costs of $2.0 million in 
fiscal 2027. DLS partially agrees but notes that the bill’s requirements regarding the 
installation of automatic sprinkler systems only occur if the building undergoes substantial 
renovation, and any associated costs would be covered as a construction expense. 
However, to the extent that the cost of such a project increases to include automatic 
sprinkler systems, less funding is available for other capital projects. 
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill does not 
materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Although under the bill, Assistant State Fire Marshals are approved 
or designated by OSFM, their compensation is covered by the local governments that host 
them. Therefore, local government expenditures increase to the extent they must procure 
additional training and certification for Assistant State Fire Marshals so they comply with 
the minimum standards established by OSFM, as required under the bill. 
 
It is anticipated that local governments can inspect residential high-rise buildings and 
enforce the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill does not 
materially affect local expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that provides services for the installation of 
automatic sprinkler systems may experience additional business as a result of the bill. 
However, any small business that employs fire alarm system technicians must comply with 
the bill’s requirements and is subject to additional oversight by DSP. Additionally, any 
small businesses that own residential high-rise buildings (including condominiums) 
experience additional costs to the extent they must install automatic sprinkler systems in 
affected buildings during the substantial renovation of a building. 
 
Additional Comment:  DLS notes that the bill requires, beginning October 1, 2026, 
automatic fire sprinklers be installed in accordance with NFPA standards in each 
residential high-rise building that is undergoing a substantial renovation. However, that is 
also the effective date of the bill. Therefore, for the purposes of this analysis, it is assumed 
that the bill applies only to residential high-rise buildings that begin substantial renovation 
after the bill’s effective date. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 149/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 513 (Senator Smith) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; City of Salisbury; 
Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of State Police; National Fire Protection 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7