START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 235 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 235 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Housing and Community Development) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Housing and Community Development - Neighborhood Business Development 
Program - Local Approval Requirement 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) repeals the stipulation that the Department of Housing and 
Community Development (DHCD) may not approve an application for financial assistance 
under the Business Development Program unless the political subdivision where the 
proposed project is located approves of the application through specified means and 
(2) repeals a related authorization for DHCD to approve the application if the political 
subdivision does not respond within 45 days after receiving notice from DHCD, as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHCD can handle any administrative changes with existing resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHCD has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with 
this assessment, as discussed below. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 235/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Neighborhood Business Development Program, operating publicly as 
Neighborhood BusinessWorks, provides grants and loans to community-based economic 
development activities in revitalization areas designated by local governments. In food 
deserts or parts of priority funding areas or eligible opportunity zones that serve food 
deserts, the purpose of the program is to help create and retain small businesses and other 
food-related enterprises that provide fresh fruits, vegetables, and other healthy foods to 
residents of the food desert. 
 
A small business, nonprofit organization, or microenterprise in a priority funding area or 
eligible opportunity zone may apply for financial assistance under the program. Financial 
assistance under the program may be provided as (1) a grant; (2) a loan; (3) a reduction in 
the principal obligation of or interest rate on a loan or portion of a loan; (4) a prepayment 
of interest on a subordinate or superior loan or portion of a loan; (5) an assurance;  
(6) a guarantee; (7) any other form of credit enhancement; or (8) a promissory note, as 
specified. 
 
DHCD may not approve an application under the program unless the political subdivision 
where the proposed project is located approves the application by (1) resolution or  
(2) letter, delivered to DHCD by the political subdivision’s authorized designee, expressing 
support for the plan or project. If DHCD does not receive notice of approval or denial of 
an application within 45 days after notice of the proposed project is given, DHCD may 
approve the application. 
 
Background:  DHCD advises the bill is intended to expedite the application process for 
program applicants by removing the required 45-day period for local governments to 
respond before DHCD can approve an application. DHCD advises that it generally does 
not receive a response from local governments when notice is sent regarding program 
applications. Furthermore, DHCD further advises that only one local government has 
responded with a denial in the last 30 years. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHCD advises that removing the required notice of program 
applicants to local jurisdictions and the 45-day period to respond will have a meaningful 
impact on small businesses as small business applicants may receive program funding more 
quickly. DLS disagrees and notes that while applicants may receive funding more quickly, 
most applicants must still be approved by DHCD prior to receiving any program funding. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 235/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 47 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Housing and Community Development) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Kent, Washington, and Worcester counties; City 
of Salisbury; Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 235/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Housing and Community Development - Neighborhood Business 
Development Program - Local Approval Requirement 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 235 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Chuck Cook 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation will benefit small businesses who apply for grants or loans through the 
Neighborhood BusinessWorks by shortening the timeline by as much as 45 days. The 
mission of the program is to provide vital financing to small businesses cannot access 
workable capital through the private market and this legislation will make that mission 
easier to achieve.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4