START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 254 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 254 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Supporting Inclusive Community Adaptation Act 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to facilitate 
community participation in the planning and development of department projects. The bill 
also establishes a grant fund (administered by DNR), and certain other DNR efforts, 
focused on climate change resilience. Finally, the bill makes modifications to provisions 
governing an existing loan fund for shore erosion control projects, including the removal 
of certain funding limitations and the authorization of partial loan forgiveness. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general fund expenditures may increase in 
future years, as discussed below. General fund revenues decrease beginning in FY 2029, 
potentially only minimally, and special fund revenues are affected, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments benefit from the bill, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Community Participation 
 
The bill requires DNR to facilitate community participation in the department’s project 
planning and development (in general, applicable across the department’s activities) and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 254/ Page 2 
authorizes the department to enter into contractual agreements with other State agencies, 
local governments, and nonprofit organizations to promote and enhance community 
participation. A contractual agreement (1) may allow for other State agencies, local 
governments, or nonprofit organizations to provide compensation to individuals for 
community participation in project planning and development and (2) must specify the 
terms of any grant or payment to be received. 
 
Resilience Through Restoration Capital Grant Fund 
 
The bill establishes a Resilience Through Restoration Capital Grant Fund, administered by 
DNR, to provide grant funding to State agencies, local governments, and nonprofit 
organizations for the planning, design, construction, and adaptive management of 
nature-based restoration projects that reduce the State’s climate change vulnerabilities and 
enhance the resilience of the State’s communities and public lands. The fund is focused on 
(1) reducing vulnerability and enhancing resilience with respect to both extreme hazards 
(e.g., storms and more frequent and intense rain events) and chronic hazards (e.g., nuisance 
flooding and sea level rise) and (2) both programmatic and project-level adaptive 
management. 
 
The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (2) money 
from private or public sources, including from federal sources, accepted for the benefit of 
the fund; and (3) interest earnings. The fund may not receive any appropriation from the 
general fund in fiscal 2027. 
 
Climate Change Resilience Efforts for Local Jurisdictions and Department Lands 
 
The bill requires DNR to develop, by October 1, 2027 – and subsequently maintain and 
regularly update – resources for local jurisdictions to use in their climate change resilience 
efforts; specifically, (1) a user-friendly website for local jurisdictions to access the 
department’s climate change-related planning tools and resources; (2) streamlined 
guidance for local jurisdictions’ use of the tools and resources and integration of the tools 
and resources into their planning efforts; and (3) training to assist local jurisdictions in 
incorporating climate adaptation planning into their comprehensive plans and other 
planning documents. 
  
DNR must also identify, evaluate, and prioritize climate vulnerabilities and risks on 
department lands and meet a deadline of doing so for two coastal and two inland 
department properties by December 31, 2035. 
 
Modifications to the Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund 
 
The bill requires interest earnings of the Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund to 
be credited to the fund rather than the general fund and removes existing limits on the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 254/ Page 3 
amount of a shore erosion control project’s construction cost that can be covered by a loan 
from the fund. The bill also authorizes the department to partially forgive a loan from the 
fund in accordance with ecologically based, performance-based, and equity-based criteria. 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
Community Participation 
 
The bill’s community participation provisions apply broadly to the department’s programs; 
however, DNR indicates that the provisions are expected to particularly allow for 
community liaisons to facilitate community input in climate adaptation efforts and  
for those community liaisons to be compensated. The department also points to a 
recommendation – in the 2024 Annual Report of the Maryland Commission on Climate 
Change – that the State seek to increase the level of community-led participatory 
engagement in adaptation and resilience projects. 
 
Resilience Through Restoration Capital Grant Fund 
 
DNR indicates that the bill’s establishment of the Resilience Through Restoration Capital 
Grant Fund in statute is intended to establish in statute an existing initiative – the Resiliency 
through Restoration Initiative – and expand the scope of the program beyond project level 
adaptive management to also include programmatic adaptive management. The existing 
Resiliency through Restoration Initiative supports on-the-ground implementation of 
restoration projects to help protect communities from erosion, flooding, and other climate 
change impacts. 
 
Climate Change Resilience Efforts for Local Jurisdictions and Department Lands 
 
DNR indicates that it regularly develops new tools reflecting the latest climate and 
environmental science, to inform State-level planning. The bill’s provisions focusing on 
increasing climate change resilience of local jurisdictions require the department to make 
those planning tools and resources available to local governments and integrate them into 
streamlined guidance and training to inform local climate adaptation planning. 
 
In addition, DNR indicates that the State would benefit from more examples of how best 
to adapt to climate change. The bill’s requirement that the department identify, evaluate, 
and prioritize climate vulnerabilities and risk on department lands, and do so for two coastal 
and two inland department properties by December 31, 2035, will facilitate such examples. 
 
Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund 
 
Statute requires DNR to administer the Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund to 
provide interest-free loans or grants to persons, municipalities, or counties for design and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 254/ Page 4 
construction of shore erosion control projects. The fund is maintained, financially, by 
(1) repayments of principal on loans from the fund; (2) repayment of specified 
administrative costs; and (3) annual appropriation of funds to restore the fund to a level 
sufficient to carry out an effective shore erosion control loan program during the 
succeeding year. Statute specifies that the repayments are made through a benefit charge 
the State levies on privately owned property benefited by shore erosion control  
projects – levied at a uniform rate over a period not exceeding 25 years. Any investment 
earnings of the fund are credited to the general fund. 
 
A property owner whose project is approved is eligible to receive an interest-free loan 
covering: 
 
 
 
100% of the first $60,000 of the project construction cost; 
 
50% of the next $20,000 of the project construction cost; 
 
25% of the next $20,000 of the project construction cost; and 
 
10% of the part of the construction cost exceeding $100,000. 
 
DNR indicates that this existing loan formula requires a cash contribution from the property 
owner that most cannot afford. The bill eliminates the loan formula and allows the 
department to authorize partial forgiveness of a loan in accordance with ecologically based, 
performance-based, and equity-based criteria (developed by the department). 
 
State Revenues: 
 
Interest Earnings of the Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund 
 
General fund revenues decrease, and special fund revenues (of the Shore Erosion Control 
Construction Loan Fund) increase, beginning in fiscal 2029, due to the bill’s change 
requiring interest earnings of the Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund to be 
credited to the fund and not the general fund. Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the 
Budget Reconciliation Act of 2024) requires, notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
that interest earnings from special funds or accounts (with certain exceptions) accrue to the 
general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. This analysis, therefore, assumes that the bill’s 
change, crediting interest earnings of the Shore Erosion Control Construction Loan Fund 
to the fund rather than the general fund, does not affect the crediting of interest earnings of 
the fund until fiscal 2029. The extent of the corresponding general fund and special fund 
impacts cannot be reliably estimated at this time and may only be minimal. 
 
Loan Forgiveness 
 
Special fund revenues decrease, beginning as early as fiscal 2027, to the extent DNR uses 
the authority in the bill to partially forgive loans made from the fund that are otherwise 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 254/ Page 5 
repaid to the fund in the absence of the bill. The extent of any decrease cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time. 
 
State Expenditures:  PAYGO general fund expenditures may increase in future years to 
support the Resilience Through Restoration Capital Grant Fund, to the extent that the bill 
causes the efforts under the current Resilience through Restoration Initiative to continue 
into the future and/or expand when they would not, otherwise, in the absence of the bill. 
The bill prohibits the fund’s receipt of any appropriation from the general fund in 
fiscal 2027, and DNR indicates that it continues to receive federal funding through the 
Coastal Zone Management Program that can be distributed through the fund. However, it 
appears possible that PAYGO general fund appropriations may be needed in the future to 
supplement, match, or replace federal funding, to sustain the fund. The extent of any future 
general fund appropriations cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
Other provisions of the bill are not expected to materially affect State expenditures:  
 
 
DNR indicates that compensation for community liaisons for department projects, 
under the bill’s community participation provisions, is expected to be relatively 
minimal and allocated from available project funds. 
 
DNR indicates that it can implement the bill’s provisions regarding increasing 
climate change resilience of local jurisdictions, and on department lands, with 
existing resources. Notably, the bill requires the department to identify, evaluate, 
and prioritize climate vulnerabilities and risks on department lands but does not 
require implementation of adaptation measures.  
 
While the bill eliminates the loan formula for the Shore Erosion Control 
Construction Loan Fund, allowing for loans from the fund to cover a greater portion 
of a project’s construction cost, it does not directly affect the overall amount 
appropriated from the fund each fiscal year. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced 
includes an appropriation from the fund of $2.0 million under DNR’s Watershed 
and Climate Services. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments benefit from the bill (1) as eligible recipients of 
funding under the Resilience Through Restoration Capital Grant Fund established in statute 
by the bill; (2) through access to DNR’s climate change-related planning tools and 
resources, and related guidance and training; and (3) through loans under the Shore Erosion 
Control Construction Loan Fund that cover a greater portion of the project construction 
cost (as eligible recipients of the loans). 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 254/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Environmental Service; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Planning; 
University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; cities of Frederick and 
Havre de Grace; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset 
counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 254/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:   Supporting Inclusive Community Adaptation Act 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 254 
 
PREPARED BY: Lydia McPherson | lydia.mcpherson1@maryland.gov 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal is not expected to have a significant impact on small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7