START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 264 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 264 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Information 
Technology) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Maryland Data Privacy and Protection Act of 2026 
 
 
This departmental bill limits the personal information that may be collected, maintained, 
processed, and retained by units of State government and requires certain personal 
information to be deleted or de-identified. Each unit of State government must post a 
privacy notice on its website, as specified, and designate a Privacy Officer. The Department 
of Information Technology (DoIT) is required to establish additional security requirements 
in applicable contracts. The bill also expands the definition of “personal information” as it 
relates to the protection of information by government agencies. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the bill can generally be implemented within the existing resources 
of most State agencies, others may incur additional costs (primarily for staff) to meet the 
bill’s requirements, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  DoIT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 264/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Public Information Act – Personal Records  
 
Specific to the Public Information Act, the bill requires personal information collected by 
units of the State (i.e., State and local government entities) for personal records to be:   
 
 
appropriate and relevant to the legitimate government purpose for which it is 
collected; 
 
limited to the minimum amount of personal information necessary to accomplish 
the legitimate government purpose for which it was collected; 
 
retained for only as long as is reasonably necessary to fulfill the legitimate 
government purpose for which it was collected; and 
 
securely deleted or de-identified when no longer needed to fulfill the legitimate 
government purpose for which it was collected.  
 
Similarly, an official custodian who requests personal information for personal records 
must provide the legitimate government purpose for which the personal information is 
collected.  
 
Each unit of the State must post a privacy notice (in addition to its privacy policies, which 
are required to be posted under current law). The privacy notice and privacy policies must 
be consistent with the guidelines, standards, and policies that the bill requires DoIT to 
adopt. 
 
The bill exempts information contained in application or renewal materials relating to the 
licensing, registration, or certification of an individual for an occupation or profession from 
the requirements noted above.  
 
Compliance with Information Processing and Security Requirements  
 
The bill requires each unit of State government (i.e., State agencies) to designate a  
Privacy Officer to oversee compliance with information processing and security 
requirements required by State law. The Privacy Officer must also coordinate with DoIT 
and the Office of the Attorney General (OAG). Additionally, DoIT must adopt regulations, 
guidance, and model templates to support compliance, including standard Public 
Information Act formats and data protection protocols.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 264/ Page 3 
Procurement Contracts – Basic Security Requirements  
 
The bill expands provisions specifying that DoIT must require basic security requirements 
in a contract; under the bill, it must also require data collection and privacy requirements 
in a contract under which a third-party contractor will (1) have access to and use State 
information technology equipment, systems, or services; (2) collect, store, or process 
personal information as defined in § 10-1301 of the State Government Article (as amended 
by the bill); or (3) connect to State information technology equipment, systems, or services.  
 
The privacy requirements noted above must be consistent with widely recognized privacy 
standards, including specified standards developed by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology. 
 
Protection of Information by Government Agencies  
 
The bill expands the definition of “personal information” within provisions of State law 
governing the protection of information by government entities (which includes State and 
local agencies). Specifically, the bill adds the following data elements that constitute 
“personal information” when combined with an individual’s first name (or first initial) and 
last name, personal mark, or unique biometric or genetic print or image:   
 
 
a username or e-mail address in combination with a password or security question 
and answer that permits access to an individual’s e-mail account; 
 
genetic and health-related data, including mental health, substance use disorder, and 
disability; or 
 
sensitive data, which generally means personal data that reveals certain 
demographic, genetic, biometric, or education information about an individual.  
 
Current Law:   
 
State Chief Privacy Officer and Agency Privacy Officers 
 
Executive Order 01.01.2021.10 was signed in 2021 and established the State Chief Privacy 
Officer (SCPO) in the Office of the Governor to, among other things, provide the Governor 
with advice, recommendations, and consultation about data privacy; supervise and direct 
efforts of State units to protect and secure personally identifiable information (PII), and 
assist State units with various duties related to the collection, processing, sharing, and 
protection of PII.  
 
The Executive Order also requires many, but not all, State agencies to, among other duties, 
employ reasonable security practices and procedures, designate an agency privacy official, 
comply with direction from the SCPO, as specified, adopt a privacy governance and risk 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 264/ Page 4 
management program, and allow an individual to opt out of the State unit’s sharing of 
information if the sharing is not required by law. Agency privacy officers must meet at 
least monthly to provide the SCPO with advice and recommendations about State polices 
needed to protect the privacy of PII. Agencies specified by the Executive Order must,  
by April 1 each year, submit a report to the SCPO that includes:   
 
 
an inventory of all information systems and applications used or maintained by the 
State unit;  
 
a full data inventory of the State unit;  
 
a list of all cloud services used by the State unit; and  
 
a list of all permanent and transient vendor interconnections that are in place.  
 
Data Protection by State Agencies and Local Governments 
 
Generally, a unit of State or local government (except for the Legislative and Judicial 
branches of State government) that collects an individual’s personal information must 
implement and maintain reasonable security procedures and practices appropriate to the 
nature of the information collected and the nature of the unit and its operations. Similarly, 
a unit that uses a nonaffiliated third party as a service provider (and discloses personal 
information about an individual) must require that the third party implement and maintain 
reasonable security procedures and practices.  
 
“Reasonable security procedures and practices” means data security procedures and 
practices developed, in good faith, and set forth in a written information security policy. 
“Personal information” means an individual’s first name or first initial and last name, 
personal mark, or unique biometric or genetic print or image, in combination with one or 
more of the following data elements:   
 
 
a Social Security number;  
 
a driver’s license number, State identification card number, or other individual 
identification number issued by a unit of State government;  
 
a passport number or other identification number issued by the United States 
government;  
 
an individual Taxpayer Identification Number; or  
 
a financial or other account number, credit card number, or credit card number that 
(in combination with a security code, access code, or password) would permit access 
to an individual’s account.  
 
Personal information does not include a voter registration number. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 264/ Page 5 
Department of Information Technology  
 
DoIT and the Secretary of Information Technology are responsible for, among other  
things:  (1) developing, maintaining, revising, and enforcing information technology (IT) 
policies, procedures, and standards; (2) providing technical assistance, advice, and 
recommendations to the Governor and any unit of State government concerning IT matters; 
(3) reviewing agency project plans to make information and services available to the public 
over the Internet; and (4) developing and maintaining a statewide IT Master Plan, as 
specified. “Information technology” means all electronic information processing, including 
maintenance, telecommunications, hardware, software, and associated services. 
 
Public Information Act  
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act establishes that all persons are entitled to have access 
to information about the affairs of government and the official acts of public officials and 
employees. Each governmental unit that maintains public records must identify a 
representative whom a member of the public may contact to request a public record. OAG 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
Background:  DoIT advises that the bill is necessary because the State currently lacks a 
comprehensive and consistent statutory framework governing how State agencies manage 
personal information. The existing patchwork of privacy rules has resulted in inconsistent 
protections for Maryland residents’ sensitive information; unclear vendor obligations; 
overcollection (and over-retention) of personal data; lack of standardized processes for 
individuals to access, correct, or delete their data; and weak transparency and 
accountability for privacy practices across State government. The bill is intended to 
respond to these issues by codifying clear rules for data minimization, retention, deletion, 
vendor accountability, and individual rights. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Department of Budget and Management and DoIT advise that 
the bill can generally be implemented throughout State government with existing resources 
or with minimal additional costs, as many (though not all) of the requirements of the bill 
have already been implemented through Executive Order 01.01.2021.10. 
 
However, some State agencies (e.g., the Comptroller’s Office, the Maryland Department 
of Transportation, and the Department of Disabilities) anticipate that the bill may result in 
an increased workload that cannot be handled by the agency’s existing staff; notably, the 
existing Executive Order does not apply to the Comptroller’s Office. While this analysis 
assumes that the bill can generally be implemented by most State agencies using existing 
budgeted resources (since the bill codifies many elements of the Executive Order), to the 
extent some agencies require additional staff to implement the bill, expenditures increase 
accordingly. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 264/ Page 6 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Office of the Attorney 
General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Higher Education Commission; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Human Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Veterans and Military Families; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
me/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 264/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Data Privacy and Protection Act of 2026 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 264 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Sara Elalamy - DoIT - Legislative Director  
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The bill is not expected to impose additional costs on state agencies or local 
governments. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7