START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 276 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 276 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services 
Systems) 
Health 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Emergency Medical Services Board - Public Access Automated External 
Defibrillator Program - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator (AED) 
Program by (1) clarifying which entities are required to participate in the program; 
(2) exempting a law enforcement agency from obtaining a certificate for an AED deployed 
in a patrol vehicle; (3) codifying the role of an “AED coordinator” and establishing 
specified requirements for the coordinator; (4) establishing certification requirements for 
grocery stores and restaurants under the program; and (5) repealing obsolete provisions 
related to regional councils and regional council AED committees. The bill also makes 
conforming and clarifying changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect local 
governmental finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems 
(MIEMSS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The 
attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 276/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The Maryland Public Access AED Program coordinates an 
effective statewide public access defibrillation program and permits a registered “facility” 
(an agency, an association, a corporation, a firm, a partnership, or any other entity) that 
meets specified requirements to make AEDs available to victims of sudden cardiac arrest. 
Chapter 764 of 2024 expanded the program to include an initiative to co-locate up to 
two doses of naloxone (a medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for the reversal of opioid overdose) with each AED placed in a public building. The 
program is administered by MIEMSS and the emergency medical services (EMS) Board. 
 
Participating Entities 
 
The bill replaces the term “facility” with the term “entity” for the purpose of defining 
program participants. “Entity” means an organization, a business, an association, an 
agency, a corporation, a firm, or a partnership in the State. 
 
Under current law, the program does not apply to a jurisdictional EMS operational 
program, a licensed commercial ambulance service, a health care facility, or a place of 
business for health care practitioners who are licensed as dentists or physicians and 
authorized to use an AED. The bill specifies that a law enforcement agency may not be 
required to obtain a certificate for an AED deployed in a patrol vehicle. 
 
Chapters 304 and 305 of 2023 require each owner and operator of a grocery store or a 
specified restaurant to place an AED in a prominent area and maintain its functionality. A 
grocery store or restaurant that is excluded from the program must still register with 
MIEMSS. The bill specifies that, to qualify for and retain a certificate, each owner and 
operator of a grocery store or restaurant must comply with the applicable requirements of 
the program, including (1) registering the name of the entity with the program and 
(2) maintaining the functionality of each AED and all related equipment and supplies in 
accordance with the standards established by the device manufacturer and FDA. 
 
Chapters 613 and 614 of 2025 require each branch of a county library system or the  
Enoch Pratt Free Library to place an AED in a prominent area and maintain its 
functionality. Each library must comply with the program. These provisions are not altered 
under the bill. 
 
Emergency Medical Services Board 
 
As amended by the bill, the EMS Board may: 
 
 
adopt regulations for the administration of the program; 
 
issue and renew certificates to entities that meet the requirements of the program; 
 
deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the certificate of a registered entity; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 276/ Page 3 
 
approve educational and training programs that (1) are conducted by any private or 
public entity and (2) may include courses from nationally recognized organizations 
such as the American Heart Association, the American Red Cross, and the National 
Safety Council; and 
 
delegate any portion of its authority to MIEMSS. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that educational and training programs approved by the 
EMS Board include training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and automated 
external defibrillation and the ability of the EMS Board to approve the protocol for the use 
of an AED. 
 
Program Requirements 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.06.02.01), to be eligible for registration or 
renewal of a registration, each facility must designate an AED coordinator who must: 
 
 
complete CPR and AED training and subsequent refresher training, in accordance 
with specified requirements; 
 
be responsible for implementing and administering the AED program at the facility; 
and 
 
ensure that monthly safety inspections of all supplemental and AED equipment are 
conducted. 
 
The bill defines “AED coordinator” to mean the individual designated by the registered 
entity to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Maryland Public Access AED 
Program. 
 
Under current law, a facility must ensure that all expected AED operators have completed 
CPR and AED training and subsequent refresher training, as specified. AEDs must be 
placed in locations that are visible and readily accessible to any person willing to operate 
the AED in the event of a suspected cardiac arrest. A facility at which an AED is operated 
must have a telephone or communication service available at all times for the notification 
of a public safety answering point; it must also submit data or other information concerning 
the AED program as requested by MIEMSS. 
 
The bill clarifies that to qualify and retain a certificate, an entity must: 
 
 
have a written plan for the use of an AED that includes a requirement that the entity 
notify the EMS system through 9-1-1 as soon as possible on the use of an AED; 
 
have established AED maintenance, placement, operation, and reporting procedures 
as required by the EMS board; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 276/ Page 4 
 
require the AED coordinator to maintain the functionality of each AED and all 
related equipment and supplies in accordance with specified standards; 
 
require the AED coordinator to promote awareness of the location and operation of 
the AED among potential or foreseeable AED operators in case of emergency; and 
 
if the entity is a public building, meet any requirements relating to the co-location 
of naloxone with each AED maintained by the entity. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that each individual who is expected to operate an AED 
has successfully completed an educational training course and refresher training as required 
by the EMS Board. Instead, the bill requires an entity, other than a grocery store or 
restaurant, to ensure that the AED coordinator has successfully completed an educational 
training course and any refresher training course required by the EMS board. 
 
Regional Council 
 
Under current law, “regional administrator” means the individual employed by MIEMSS 
as a regional administrator in each EMS region. “Regional council” means an EMS 
advisory board as created regulations. “Regional council AED committee” means a 
committee appointed by the regional council consisting of the regional medical director, 
regional administrator, and three or more individuals with knowledge or and expertise in 
AEDs. The bill repeals these obsolete terms as they relate to the program. 
 
The bill also repeals the requirement for a registered facility to report the use of an AED to 
MIEMSS for review by the regional council AED committee. Instead, a registered entity 
must report the use of an AED to MIEMSS using the form provided by MIEMSS. 
 
Civil Immunity 
 
Under current law, in addition to any other immunities available under statutory or 
common law, a registered facility is not civilly liable for any act or omission in the 
provision of automated external defibrillation if the registered facility has satisfied the 
requirements for making automated external defibrillation available and possesses a valid 
certificate at the time of the act or omission. The bill removes civil immunity as it relates 
to a member of the regional council AED committee. 
 
Background:  MIEMSS advises that the bill revises and streamlines statutory provisions 
relating to the Maryland Public Access AED Program. The bill is intended to make the 
program’s requirements easier to understand for participating entities and remove obsolete 
provisions. MIEMSS further advises that the bill makes no substantive changes to program 
requirements. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 276/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 24 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services Systems) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of Health; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 276/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Emergency Medical Services Board - Public Access 
Automated External Defibrillator Program – Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 276 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Christian J. Miele, Esq., Director of Governmental Affairs 
 
 
 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems 
(MIEMSS) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There will be no economic impact on Maryland small businesses as this program is 
voluntary for those entities who are not mandated to have an AED on premises. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6