START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 255 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 255 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee, et 
al.) (By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Pamela J. Kelly Tree-Mendous Maryland Program - 
Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the stated purpose of the Pamela J. Kelly Tree-Mendous 
Maryland Program – which, under current law, is focused on planting native trees and 
shrubs – to also focus on community participation and on stewardship/maintenance 
(in addition to planting) of native trees and shrubs. The program’s altered purpose is 
promoting community participation in tree planting and stewardship and the planting and 
maintaining of native trees and shrubs through community forestry activities on public 
lands, community open spaces, school grounds, and rights‑of‑way. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill only alters the purposes for which existing donated/granted funds 
may be used. The expanded scope of the program under the bill may affect the timing of 
deployment of existing funds, but does not otherwise directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 255/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 129 of 2012 established the Pamela J. Kelly Tree-Mendous 
Maryland Program in statute for the purpose of planting native trees and shrubs on public 
lands, community open spaces, school grounds, and rights-of-way. The program is 
administered by DNR and funded by donations and grants received by the department. The 
department is authorized to seek, accept, and expend donations and grants for the 
implementation and administration of the program. 
 
Background:  DNR indicates that the bill improves the department’s ability to deploy 
program funds, enabling the Maryland Forest Service to address forest management needs 
beyond planting and deliver a range of resources in support of statewide forest 
conservation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 164 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 18, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 255/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Natural Resources - Pamela J. Kelly Tree-Mendous Maryland Program 
- Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 255 
 
PREPARED BY: Lydia McPherson | lydia.mcpherson1@maryland.gov 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal is not expected to have a significant impact on small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3