START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 281 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 281 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Child Care Providers - Criminal Background Investigations 
 
 
This emergency departmental bill generally alters statutory provisions related to criminal 
background investigations for specified individuals who care for, supervise, or otherwise 
have specified access to children, including provisions that govern the process for the 
dissemination of criminal history records checks (CHRC). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the bill’s changes are intended to ensure that State law conforms 
to federal requirements and that designated entities may continue to secure national CHRC 
as required, general fund expenditures are assumed to increase by at least $900,000 in 
FY 2027 and by potentially significantly amounts annually thereafter for affected agencies 
to conform to the bill’s requirements. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential local government expenditures to the extent the bill increases 
workloads related to the processing of CHRIs. No material impact on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment, 
as discussed below. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 281/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In general, the bill alters numerous provisions under Part V of Title 5, 
Subtitle 5 of the Family Law Article that govern when certain individuals who care for, 
supervise, or otherwise have access to children are required (or authorized) to secure a 
CHRC. While several alterations represent only stylistic or technical changes, the bill 
notably:   
 
 
specifies that in accordance with provisions within the Criminal Procedure Article, 
the Central Repository must forward an employee’s, employer’s, individual’s, or 
volunteer’s State criminal history record information (CHRI) to the employee, 
employer, individual, or volunteer and the national CHRI to the authorized agencies 
required to license, register, approve, or certify the facility that is required to have 
employees and employers obtain a CHRI (instead of, as under current law, 
forwarding the CHRI to the employee, employer, individual, or volunteer and the 
authorized agencies required to license, register, approve, or certify the facility); 
 
specifies that an adult or an individual who is not a relative and who agrees to 
provide care as a result of a sudden unavailability of a child’s primary caretaker, as 
specified, must obtain a CHRC; and 
 
alters the definition of “emergency out-of-home placement” to mean an 
out‑of‑home placement in which a local department places a child in the home of 
an individual for whom a facility is required to apply for a CHRC as a result of a 
sudden unavailability of the child’s primary caretaker. 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Criminal Justice Information System - Central 
Repository (CJIS-CR) is established by the Criminal Procedure Article, §§ 10-213 et seq., 
within DPSCS to collect, manage, and disseminate Maryland CHRI for criminal justice 
and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. For national CHRCs, 
CJIS-CR collects the fee and submits the requests for national CHRI to the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) electronically. 
 
In general, employees and employers who work in specified facilities and who care for or 
supervise children (or have access to children who are cared for or supervised in the 
facility) are required to apply for a national and State CHRC at any designated law 
enforcement office in the State or other location approved by DPSCS. Among the facilities 
requiring CHRCs are child care centers, family child care homes, schools, foster care 
homes, and recreation centers that primarily serve minors. Contractors or subcontractors 
must also require employees that will have direct, unsupervised, and uncontrolled access 
to children in one of the specified facilities to obtain a CHRC. Employers and local 
departments of social services may require volunteers at the facility to obtain a CHRC. 
Statutory provisions also authorize a local department of social services, if a child is placed 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 281/ Page 3 
in an emergency out‐of‐home placement, to request that a designated State or local law 
enforcement agency in the State perform a federal name-based check on specified 
individuals, such as adults residing in the home. Within 15 calendar days after the local 
department receives the results of the name‐based check, the local department must submit 
a complete set of fingerprints on the individual to DPSCS. Within 15 calendar days after 
the name‐based check, DPSCS must perform a CHRC. A child must be removed 
immediately from an emergency out‐of‐home placement if any individual required to 
submit to a name‐based check refuses to submit the follow-up fingerprints. 
 
DPSCS advises that, in 2025, the FBI updated its compliance language for the 
dissemination of national background checks. The bill’s changes are intended to bring the 
State into compliance with federal law and are necessary to ensure Maryland agencies 
continue to receive national background checks on employees working with children. 
According to DPSCS, if these changes are not made, the FBI will deny Maryland access to 
National Background Checks for individuals who have unsupervised and controlled access 
to children. Currently, the FBI has granted the State a temporary grace period which allows 
the State to continue receiving national background checks under existing statutes. 
However, this grace period ends on December 31, 2026. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland State Department of Education 
 
The bill limits access to national CHRI results to authorized agencies required to license, 
register, approve, or certify specified facilities including nonpublic schools. As a result, 
MSDE assumes that the department will be the only authorized recipient of the national 
CHRI completed for all new employees for nonpublic schools in Maryland, and therefore 
required to review the results for all nonpublic employees prior to the date of employment. 
Although a reliable estimate of the number of new employees requiring national CHRIs 
annually is not available, for context, MSDE estimates there are approximately 
23,000 nonpublic school employees in the State. According to MSDE, in order for it to 
receive CHRI results, process the review, and document any due process proceedings 
associated with rejecting the employment of an applicant, a new database is needed at an 
estimated cost of $900,000. In addition, to facilitate the review of each record and provide 
timely information to nonpublic schools, additional staff are needed. Specifically, MSDE 
assumes the need for six new positions, at an estimated cost of approximately $630,000 on 
an annual basis.  
 
MSDE further advises that it is unclear whether the bill also requires the department to 
provide assistance with national CHRI for local school system employees or any other 
education related employers in the State. To the extent that MSDE must assist with CHRIs 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 281/ Page 4 
for such employees, the need for additional staff and general fund expenditures increases, 
likely significantly. 
 
However, in the absence of clarity regarding the bill’s overall effect on the dissemination 
of national CHRIs through MSDE, DLS advises that a reliable estimate regarding the need 
for additional staff is not feasible and has therefore not been specifically accounted for in 
this analysis. 
 
Department of Human Services  
 
Under the bill, DHS must require a CHRC for an adult or an individual who is not a relative 
and who agrees to provide care as a result of a sudden unavailability of the child’s primary 
caretaker, as specified. DHS advises that, in 2025, 2,886 safety plans were implemented; 
however, the department is unable to determine the number of placements that involved a 
substitute caregiver who was not a relative or family member. In addition, CJIS-CR is 
authorized by law to collect a fee for providing CHRC for purposes other than criminal 
justice and DHS usually covers the cost of CHRCs for individuals serving as emergency 
placements under a safety plan. Further, in instances where non-relatives are unable to 
obtain a CHRC, children may be placed in foster care, with an associated impact on 
expenditures. For illustrative purposes only, and assuming a foster care rate of 
$65.75 per day, if 200 children are placed in foster care for three nights as a result of an 
individual’s inability to serve as a temporary caregiver, general fund expenditures increase 
by $39,450. 
 
Small Business Effect:  As noted above, the bill is intended to conform statutory language 
regarding CHRCs to federal requirements; otherwise, according to DPSCS, specified 
entities will no longer have the ability to continue to secure required national background 
checks. Accordingly, DLS advises that the bill has a meaningful impact on small businesses 
(particularly child care providers) that are required to have background checks performed 
on certain individuals within their facilities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, and 
Howard counties; Maryland Municipal League; Town of La Plata; Maryland State 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 281/ Page 5 
Department of Education; Department of Human Services; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 281/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Family Law - Child Care Providers - Criminal Background 
Investigations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB281 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jason Davidson, Director, Government and Legislative Affairs 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 6