START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 250 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 250 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Environment) and Delegate 
Odom 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Appropriation or Use of Water and Dam Safety - Enforcement 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to 
impose an administrative penalty for a violation of provisions of the Environment Article 
relating to the appropriation or use of waters, reservoirs, and dams. The bill also  
(1) expands MDE’s authorization to use orders for violations related to waterway 
construction and dam safety; (2) standardizes related administrative notice and hearing 
procedures; and (3) requires MDE to take certain steps before taking any action to recover 
a civil or administrative penalty under new and existing penalty provisions relating to the 
appropriation or use of waters, reservoirs, and dams. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues likely increase by at least $50,000 in FY 2027 due to 
the bill’s penalty provisions. The bill is assumed to effectuate contingent language in the 
FY 2027 budget as introduced; as a result, in FY 2027, special fund expenditures increase 
by $250,000, and general fund expenditures decrease correspondingly. Future years reflect 
ongoing but indeterminate effects. Other State agencies are not materially affected, as 
discussed below. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$50,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
($250,000) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Expenditure 
$250,000 
-  
-  
-  
-  
Net Effect 
$50,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures are not materially affected, assuming local governments 
comply with the affected provisions, as discussed below. Local revenues are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 250/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) generally 
concurs with this assessment, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, a person who violates any provision of 
Title 5, Subtitle 5 (Appropriation or Use of Waters, Reservoirs, and Dams) or any rule, 
regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under the subtitle is liable for a civil penalty 
of up to $10,000 per violation. Each day is a separate violation. MDE is also authorized to 
seek injunctive relief. Additionally, a person who violates any provision of Title 5, 
Subtitle 5 or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or permit 
adopted or issued under the subtitle is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to fines, 
imprisonment, and enjoinment, as specified under § 9-343 of the Environment Article.  
 
In addition to any other remedies available and after an opportunity for a hearing (which 
may be waived), the bill authorizes MDE to impose an administrative penalty for any 
violation of Subtitle 5 or any regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under the 
subtitle. Specifically, MDE may impose an administrative penalty of up to $5,000 for each 
violation (not exceeding $100,000 total), which must be assessed with consideration given 
to specified factors. Each day is a separate violation. The bill establishes provisions 
regarding the collection of such an administrative penalty, and procedures that must be 
taken if a person fails to pay the penalty. 
 
Before taking any civil or administrative action to recover a penalty under these provisions, 
the bill requires MDE to (1) provide the alleged violator with written notice of the proposed 
penalty and an opportunity for an informal meeting concerning a settlement; (2) use 
discretion to determine whether a formal enforcement action is appropriate; and (3) if 
applicable, review any good faith application from the person, or an authorized 
representative of the person, for a loan from the Private Dam Repair Fund.  
 
The bill also makes clarifying and conforming changes to provisions governing the 
Maryland Clean Water Fund to specify that any administrative or civil penalties collected 
under Subtitle 5 (other than penalties and fines that must be paid into the Private Repair 
Dam Fund) must be paid into the Maryland Clean Water Fund. 
 
Under current law, MDE is authorized (after or concurrently with the service of a complaint 
under Subtitle 5) to issue an order and send a notice requiring a person to take corrective 
action and appear and engage in a hearing regarding a complaint under the subtitle relating 
to water appropriation and use. MDE must give notice and hold any hearing related to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 250/ Page 3 
such orders in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act. The bill repeals the 
specification that MDE is authorized to take these actions regarding a complaint relating 
to water appropriation and use and instead authorizes MDE to take these actions after or 
concurrently with the service of a complaint under all of Subtitle 5. These changes allow 
MDE to issue orders for complaints related to waterway construction and dam safety and 
standardize the notice and hearing processes for complaints under Subtitle 5.  
 
The bill’s provisions are severable. 
 
Background:  MDE notes that under current law, the department does not have sufficient 
resources to effectively enforce violations of water appropriation or use permits and 
waterway and floodplain construction laws; as a result, historically, it has only pursued 
egregious violations. According to MDE, in general, bringing administrative enforcement 
actions is less resource-intensive than pursuing civil actions and criminal cases. 
Administrative enforcement actions are also typically concluded more quickly and give 
MDE more flexibility to negotiate final outcomes. As a result, the bill’s changes are 
intended to enable MDE to bring more enforcement actions, which MDE anticipates will 
improve compliance with affected statutory and regulatory provisions.  
 
MDE notes that in the last three years, there were 186 sites identified as noncompliant with 
waterway and floodplain construction laws and that an estimated 40 of those sites would 
have warranted administrative penalties under the bill. MDE also estimates that one-third 
of its current water appropriation and use permittees are in violation of applicable laws.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  
 
Maryland Department of the Environment  
 
Special Fund Revenues from Additional Penalties Collected:  Based on information 
provided by MDE, which is based on violation data over the past three years, special fund 
revenues (for the Maryland Clean Water Fund and the Private Dam Repair Fund), increase 
by at least $50,000 in fiscal 2027. Based on the persistent backlog of violations that have 
not been pursued, MDE anticipates that special fund revenues continue to increase in the 
out years even as some violators presumably come into compliance with affected statutory 
provisions.  
 
DLS does not have sufficient data to independently verify MDE’s violation data or its 
penalty revenue estimate, but concurs that based on the information provided, MDE is 
likely to collect at least $50,000 in special fund revenues in fiscal 2027, and that  
special fund revenues continue to increase in the out years by an indeterminate amount. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 250/ Page 4 
Use of Additional Penalty Revenue and Related Budgetary Impacts:  The fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced includes a $250,000 reduction in MDE’s general fund appropriation 
and a corresponding $250,000 special fund appropriation contingent on the enactment of 
legislation that expands MDE’s civil and administrative penalty authority. Assuming this 
bill effectuates those contingencies, special fund expenditures for MDE increase by 
$250,000 in fiscal 2027, and general fund expenditures decrease correspondingly. In future 
years, it is assumed that MDE continues to collect additional penalties due to the bill’s 
changes and that the additional special funds continue to be used in lieu of general funds. 
Any such impact in the out years has not been quantified. 
 
DLS advises that it is likely that MDE does not have sufficient special fund revenues or 
fund balance in fiscal 2027 to fully cover the contingent special fund appropriation 
included in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced. Thus, a general fund deficiency 
appropriation may be needed in fiscal 2027 to cover at least a portion of those costs; any 
such effect has not been accounted for in this analysis.  
 
Other State Agencies and Local Governments as Regulated Entities  
 
This fiscal and policy note generally assumes that State agencies and local governments 
that are regulated under the affected provisions strive for compliance; to the extent State 
and local agencies comply with the affected provisions, the bill does not materially affect 
their expenditures. However, to the extent any State agencies or local governments violate 
the affected provisions, they may be subject to additional penalties under the bill.  
 
MDE notes that water appropriation and use permit violations account for the largest 
volume of violations (approximately 2,000), and that many of these permit holders are 
municipal water systems and local governments. However, MDE also advises that it is 
committed to consulting with local governments before assessing penalties.  
 
The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of the 
Office of Administrative Hearings or the Judiciary. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DLS concurs with MDE’s assessment that small businesses are 
not affected if they comply with the affected statutory and regulatory provisions. To that 
end, this fiscal and policy note generally assumes that small businesses regulated under the 
affected provisions strive for compliance. However, to the extent that any small businesses 
violate the affected provisions, they may be subject to additional penalties under the bill.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 250/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 108 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Environment) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 19, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 250/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Environment – Appropriation or Use of Water Dam Safety - 
Enforcement 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 250 
PREPARED BY: 
Less Knapp, Assistant Director of the Water and Science 
Administration 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Small businesses will not be impacted by this new law if they abide by the current laws 
and regulations for water use and wetlands. When issuing penalties, MDE takes the size 
of a business into consideration to ensure a fair and equitable settlement. 
 

END OF PAGE 6