START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 253 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 253 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Heavy Weight Port Corridor Permits - Regulations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters requirements related to the issuance of heavy weight port 
corridor permits. The bill removes a requirement that the Secretary of Transportation 
designate State and county highways used by permitted vehicles as being part of a “heavy 
weight port corridor.” The bill also requires the Secretary of Transportation to establish 
regulations specifying destinations to which vehicles may travel from the Seagirt Marine 
Terminal under a permit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 254 and 255 of 2019 authorized MDOT to 
establish a permit program that allows an overweight vehicle carrying international freight, 
as specified, to travel on roads designated as being part of a heavy weight port corridor. 
Under current law, the Secretary of Transportation, by regulation, may determine that a 
vehicle (or combination of vehicles) transporting manifested international freight as the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 253/ Page 2 
only load in a sealed, seagoing container on a semitrailer is transporting an indivisible load, 
on the condition that the vehicle (or combination of vehicles) is issued a heavy weight port 
corridor permit and: 
 
 
is carrying at most 100,000 pounds gross maximum vehicle weight; 
 
has the minimum number of axles required by the permit; 
 
does not exceed the maximum axle weight (or axle spacing requirements), as 
established by regulation or specified in the permit; 
 
is traveling only during the hours as established by regulation or specified on the 
permit; 
 
adheres to a unique maximum speed limit specified on the permit; and 
 
is traveling only on State or county highways that are (1) on the specific route 
established by regulation and specified on the permit between the Seagirt Marine 
Terminal and a destination authorized by the Secretary of Transportation, with no 
deviation from the specific route and (2) specifically designated by the Secretary of 
Transportation as being part of a “heavy weight port corridor.” The bill removes 
the reference to designated heavy weight port corridors. 
 
Under current law, the Secretary of Transportation must adopt regulations for the issuance 
of heavy weight port corridor permits. These regulations (1) may set permit fees and 
(2) must establish axle and gross weight requirements, routes, and other necessary criteria. 
The bill does not alter these provisions. However, the bill further requires the Secretary of 
Transportation to adopt regulations establishing the authorized destinations to which a 
vehicle or combination of vehicles may travel from the Seagirt Marine Terminal under a 
permit. 
 
Background:  The heavy weight port corridor permit program was established in 2019 to 
facilitate the movement of overweight international freight on designated State and county 
highways. According to MDOT, vehicles issued these permits deliver goods between the 
Port of Baltimore, Tradepoint Atlantic, and designated U.S. Customs facilities. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDOT advises that the bill streamlines the process for heavy weight 
port corridor permits, can be implemented with existing budgeted resources, and does not 
affect permit fee revenues. According to MDOT, the current requirement that heavy weight 
port corridor permit travel routes be established by regulation creates administrative delays 
when routes need to be modified due to road closures, highway repair projects, and related 
events. 
 
However, DLS advises that the language of the bill does not eliminate the requirement that 
permit routes be established in regulations. Thus, while MDOT can implement the bill with 
existing resources, the bill, as written, does not allow for the intended efficiencies. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 253/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 149 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 253/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Vehicle Laws - Heavy Weight Port Corridor Permits - Regulations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 253 
 
PREPARED BY: 
 
 
Duane Pearce, Chief 
State Highway Administration 
 
Motor Carrier Division, Office of Traffic and Safety 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The bill will have a minimal but positive impact on small business. Small business motor 
carriers conducting dedicated drayage operations based at the Port of Baltimore will not 
encounter delays due to unanticipated permit route restrictions for cargo destined for 
Tradepoint Atlantic. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4