START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 200 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 200 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Sale of Residential Real Property - Required Flood Risk Disclosure 
 
 
This bill requires, subject to specified exceptions and beginning July 1, 2027, a seller of 
real property to provide specified flood-risk information to a purchaser before the parties 
enter into a contract. This requirement only applies to residential real property improved 
by four or fewer single-family units. By June 1, 2027, the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) must develop and publish a real property flood risk disclosure 
statement form for use in connection with the bill’s requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can handle the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) elevation 
certificate” means the certificate issued by FEMA that certifies official elevation and 
building data for a property located within a special flood hazard area in order to inform 
flood insurance premiums.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 200/ Page 2 
MDE must develop, publish, and maintain a real property flood risk disclosure statement 
form that, at minimum, includes the following information: 
 
 
whether the property is located wholly or partially within a special or moderate-risk 
flood hazard area (as defined in the bill);  
 
whether the seller has knowledge of any past occurrence where an owner received 
specified federal disaster assistance; 
 
whether the property is subject to federal requirements for the owner to maintain 
flood insurance;  
 
whether the vendor currently has flood insurance and the availability of a FEMA 
elevation certificate;  
 
whether the vendor has knowledge of any claims filed for flood damage, including 
with the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
 
whether the vendor has knowledge of any flood damage, water seepage, or pooled 
water resulting from natural events such as heavy rainfall, coastal storm surges, tidal 
inundation, or river overflows. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, prior to entering into a contract of sale, a seller of real property 
must provide a completed flood risk disclosure form to the purchaser. The seller must also 
provide (if available) a copy of the FEMA elevation certificate. However, these notice 
requirements do not apply to:  
 
 
the initial sale of a single-family residence that (1) has never been occupied or 
(2) had a certificate of occupancy issued within one year before the date on which 
the vendor and purchaser entered into a contract of sale;  
 
a transfer of property that is exempt from the transfer tax under § 13-207 of the  
Tax – Property Article, except (1) a land installment contract of sale or (2) an option 
to purchase real property;  
 
a sale by a lender, or an affiliate of a lender, that acquired the real property by 
foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure; 
 
a sheriff’s sale, tax sale, or sale by foreclosure, partition, or court-appointed trustee; 
 
a transfer by a fiduciary in the course of administering a decedent’s estate, 
guardianship, conservatorship, or trust;  
 
a transfer of a single-family residential real property that the buyer will convert to a 
use other than residential ; and  
 
a sale of unimproved real property. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 200/ Page 3 
Current Law:  
 
Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976  
 
Pursuant to the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976, MDE is responsible for various 
initiatives designed to address flood hazards, including (1) assisting in the development of 
guidance to minimize the impacts of flooding; (2) providing State guidelines and technical 
assistance to local governments to manage flood areas; and (3) administering the 
Comprehensive Flood Management Grant Program. For the purposes of State law 
regarding flood control and watershed management, “subdivision” is defined as any 
county, including Baltimore City, and any incorporated municipality that has the authority 
to adopt and enforce land use and control measures for the areas within its jurisdiction.  
 
MDE and subdivisions must coordinate flood management activities with all related 
programs, including the National Flood Insurance Program, the Sediment Control 
Program, and the State water pollution control and abatement programs. 
 
Real Property Contact Disclosures – Requirements  
 
Statutory provisions set forth numerous requirements regarding statements, disclosures, 
and notices in contracts for the sale of property, including provisions relating to:  
 
 
notice of estimated deferred water and sewer charges; 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a “critical area” of the 
Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays; 
 
notice of specified development impact fees; 
 
notice of protection by the Real Estate Guaranty Fund; 
 
notices related to deposits, specified contractual provisions, and warranties; and 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a zone of dewatering influence.  
 
Many requirements regarding such statements, disclosures, and notices vary depending on 
the type of property at issue and/or the jurisdiction where the property is located. Generally, 
unless otherwise specifically provided, a contract of sale is not rendered invalid by the 
omission of any statement, disclosure, or notice.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 200/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 17, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4