START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 210 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 210 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Out-of-State Drivers - Automated Enforcement (Out-of-State 
Driver Accountability Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each county and municipal automated traffic enforcement program to 
submit a quarterly report to the Vision Zero coordinator with specified information 
regarding out-of-state automated enforcement citations.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Any potential administrative costs for local governments are assumed to be 
minimal. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to county and municipal automated traffic enforcement 
programs that implement: 
 
 
traffic control signal monitoring systems; 
 
automated railroad grade crossing enforcement systems; 
 
school bus monitoring cameras; 
 
stop sign monitoring systems;  
 
speed monitoring systems; 
 
work zone speed control systems; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 210/ Page 2 
 
bus lane monitoring systems; 
 
noise abatement monitoring systems; 
 
vehicle height monitoring systems; or  
 
any other county or municipal automated traffic enforcement system authorized 
under State law. 
 
Each county and municipal automated traffic enforcement program must submit a quarterly 
report to the coordinator stating, for each citation issued during the applicable quarter to a 
motor vehicle registered in another state, (1) the registration plate number and state of 
registration; (2) whether the citation has been paid; and (3) whether the citation is past due. 
Each quarterly report must:   
 
 
include the information described above for the previous quarter; 
 
update the information provided in the previous quarterly reports to reflect citations 
that have been subsequently paid and are no longer considered past due; and 
 
provide a cumulative summary of (1) citations issued under the program to motor 
vehicles registered in another state; (2) the number of citations that have been paid; 
and (3) the number of citations that are past due. 
 
The Vision Zero coordinator must collaborate with county and municipal automated traffic 
enforcement programs to implement the bill. 
 
Current Law:  State law currently authorizes the use of various automated enforcement 
systems, including traffic control signal monitoring systems, automated railroad grade 
crossing enforcement systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring systems, 
stop sign monitoring systems, bus lane monitoring systems, noise abatement monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 
The State’s traffic safety program was renamed Vision Zero by Chapter 377 of 2019 and 
is currently referred to as Zero Deaths Maryland. The purpose of Vision Zero is to develop 
strategies to make roadways safer for drivers and passengers of motor vehicles, bicyclists, 
and pedestrians. The goal of Vision Zero is to have zero vehicle-related deaths or serious 
injuries on roadways by 2030. The Maryland Department of Transportation must designate 
a coordinator to oversee the implementation of Vision Zero throughout the State. In 
implementing Vision Zero, the coordinator must, among other duties, collaborate with 
other State agencies and local authorities, including local transportation agencies, law 
enforcement agencies, educational institutions, and fire and rescue services. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 210/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 915 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of State 
Police; Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Howard, Montgomery, and  
Prince George’s counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3