START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 293 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 293 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Longitudenal Data System 
Center) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center - External Data Sharing With 
Third-Party Data Centers for Multistate Reporting - Authorization 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Governing Board of the Maryland Longitudinal Data 
System (MLDS) Center to allow the MLDS Center to provide individual-level student and 
workforce data to one third-party data center at a time only to enable multistate research 
and reporting on student outcomes. Before authorizing a transfer of data, the board must 
ensure the third‑party data center handles data in accordance with specified standards. 
Before providing data to a third-party data center, MLDS Center must enter into a written 
data sharing agreement that complies with the bill’s security and privacy requirements, and 
the Governing Board must affirmatively approve the sharing of data elements that 
constitute each set, the sharing of each data set, and each proposed research or reporting 
project that seeks to use Maryland data. The bill also repeals language authorizing the board 
to allow MLDS Center to send student information to the U.S. Census Bureau. Lastly, 
MLDS Center must submit ongoing reports to specified standing committees of the 
General Assembly relating to the written data sharing agreements. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent the board approves data sharing agreements under the bill, 
MLDS Center and the board can implement such agreements and complete the required 
reports with existing resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  MLDS Center has determined that this bill has minimal or no 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with 
this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 293/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, third-party data center means a secure computational 
research platform managed by a person other than a State agency that allows states to 
securely share data for purposes of data matching and multistate reporting. Data sharing 
agreements with third-party data centers are subject to governing board approval and 
annual review to ensure continued compliance. A third-party data center must:   
 
 
have data handling and security standards that are at least as rigorous as those 
employed by MLDS Center; 
 
be a FedRAMP-authorized and -certified platform (the Federal Risk and 
Authorization Management Program, managed by the U.S. General Services 
Administration); 
 
use personally identifiable information only to the extent that is necessary for 
matching student data and workforce data with data from other states; 
 
employ certain privacy-enhancing techniques; 
 
use only de-identified data for analytic purposes; 
 
release only aggregate data reports and other output; and  
 
not report data in any form that may be used to identify individuals as specified.  
 
Within 30 days of entering into a written data sharing agreement, MLDS Center must report 
to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and the House Ways 
and Means Committee with information on the name of the third-party data center, a 
summary of the data to be shared, and the purposes of and value to the State for entering 
into the data sharing agreements. Within one year of the initial report, and each year 
thereafter until the data sharing agreement is no longer in effect, MLDS Center must also 
report to those same standing committees with information on the status of the data sharing 
agreement, how the data is being used to further the purposes and stated value of the data 
sharing agreement, and any violations of the data sharing agreement, including steps taken 
to remedy the violations.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 190 of 2010 established MLDS to contain individual-level student 
data and workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce. The purpose 
of the data system is to facilitate and enable the exchange of student and workforce data 
among agencies and institutions within the State as well as generate timely and accurate 
information about student achievement that can be used to improve the State’s education 
system and guide decision makers at all levels. The MLDS Center may only use 
de‑identified data in the analysis, research, and reporting conducted by the center. The 
center may only use aggregate data in the release of data in reports and in response to data 
requests. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 293/ Page 3 
Student data collected by MLDS includes State and national assessments; course taking 
and completion; grade point average; remediation; retention; degree, diploma, or credential 
attainment; enrollment; demographic data; juvenile delinquency records; elementary and 
secondary school disciplinary records; child welfare data; license, industry certificate, or 
vocational certificate; personally identifiable information; and student disability data by 
specific disability category. Medical and health records are specifically excluded from the 
types of data that MLDS may collect. Workforce data includes employment, wage 
information, and related personally identifiable information, as specified.  
 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
 
At the federal level, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) of 1974 
governs the privacy of student data. FERPA generally prohibits the disclosure by schools 
that receive federal education funding of personally identifiable information from a 
student’s education record unless the educational institution has obtained signed and dated 
written consent from a parent or eligible student or one of FERPA’s exceptions applies. 
An education record includes a range of information about a student. FERPA permits the 
use of de-identified data and limits the disclosure of personally identifiable information to 
authorized purposes. 
 
Background:  MLDS Center advises that the center and its counterparts in 
Washington D.C. and Virginia have already applied for and been awarded a grant from the 
Coleridge Initiative’s Democratizing our Data Grant Challenge to establish a multistate 
data sharing partnership. The Coleridge Initiative is a nonprofit organization working with 
governments to ensure that data is more effectively used for public decision-making by 
providing (1) a platform to securely link confidential data within and across states and 
agencies and (2) data literacy training to agency staff. The initiative’s data platform, the 
Administrative Data Research Facility, is a secure, FedRAMP-authorized, cloud-based 
environment that enables government agencies to link their longitudinal data with other 
states and agencies. 
 
FedRAMP is managed by the U.S. General Services Administration and provides a 
standardized approach to security assessment, authorization, and continuous monitoring 
for cloud products and services. MLDS Center advises that the FedRAMP designation 
requires annual audits and reviews and reflects a level of security that is equivalent to 
federal agencies. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MLDS Center advises that providing data to a third-party data center 
in accordance with the bill affects operations at the center. However, MLDS Center also 
advises that, given the administrative work already completed associated with applying for 
participation in the Coleridge Initiative’s Democratizing our Data Grant Challenge 
(described above), the center can manage any additional operational from sharing data in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 293/ Page 4 
accordance with that agreement using existing resources. To the extent the board approves 
additional sharing with additional third-party data centers in the future, MLDS Center may 
experience additional operational impacts to prepare and share data as necessary. However, 
this analysis assumes that the board will approve future data sharing agreements in 
accordance with existing administrative capacity in MLDS Center such that existing 
resources remain sufficient. 
 
Additional Comments:  To participate in the Post-Secondary Employment Outcomes 
(PSEO) project, a college or university must provide student transcript level data to the 
U.S. Census Bureau. Chapters 63 and 64 of 2024 authorize the governing board of the 
MLDS Center to send student information to the U.S. Census Bureau. Since the passage of 
Chapters 63 and 64, MLDS Center advises that the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission has taken the lead on the Post-Secondary Employment Outcomes Explorer 
project in Maryland. Therefore, the center no longer requires approval to share data with 
the U.S. Census Bureau as was authorized by Chapters 63 and 64. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 56 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2026 
 
caw/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 293/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center - External Data Sharing With 
Third-Party Data Centers for Multistate Reporting – Authorization 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 293 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Ross Goldstein, Executive Director, MLDS Center 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
_____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill allows the Maryland Longitudinal Data System (MLDS) Center Governing Board to 
authorize the MLDS Center to share student and workforce data with a third party data center for 
the purpose of enabling multistate report projects. If the legislation is approved, the MLDS 
Center has already secured a grant to facilitate the work necessary for multistate data sharing and 
reporting.  Accordingly, there will be no economic impact to the state or on small businesses.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5