START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 247 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 247 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Critical Area Commission) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection Program - 
Variances - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters certain standards and requirements for variances from land 
use requirements under the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection 
Program.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to affect State finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.     
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, when a variance is requested for a new accessory structure 
or use, there is a rebuttable presumption that an existing accessory structure or use on the 
parcel or lot demonstrates reasonable and significant use. 
 
A local jurisdiction may not accept an application for a variance to (1) authorize a use that 
is not allowed by the critical area land classification of the lot or parcel; (2) adjust the 
amount or type of mitigation required by critical area regulations or a local critical area 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 247/ Page 2 
program; or (3) provide relief that could be obtained through an available administrative 
process that is approved as part of a local jurisdiction’s critical area program. 
The bill establishes additional conditions for granting a variance to a local jurisdiction’s 
critical area program, by establishing that a variance may not be granted unless (1) the 
applicant demonstrates a substantial need for the variance that is not based on convenience, 
personal preference, or financial advantage and (2) the applicant demonstrates that the 
development cannot be located outside a habitat protection area.   
 
The bill also clarifies an existing condition for granting a variance – the condition that 
without the variance, the applicant would be deprived of a use of land or a structure 
permitted to others in accordance with the provisions of the critical area program. The bill 
clarifies the condition by establishing that an applicant may make a comparison only to 
other properties or structures that (1) are located in the Critical Area; (2) were developed 
after the adoption of the local jurisdiction’s critical area program; (3) were conforming and 
legally authorized at the time of development; (4) are similarly situated; and (5) if located 
in a modified buffer area, were developed in accordance with requirements for modified 
buffer areas under the local jurisdiction’s critical area program.  
 
A local board of appeals must (1) hear on the record an appeal of an administrative officer’s 
decision on a critical area variance application and (2) grant deference to the administrative 
officer’s findings of fact. 
 
Current Law:  A local critical area program must contain provisions for granting a 
variance to the local jurisdiction’s critical area program, in accordance with specified 
Critical Area Commission regulations, including certain variance standards (see 
COMAR 27.01.12.04).  
 
Statute establishes that a variance to a local jurisdiction’s critical area program may not be 
granted unless:   
 
 
due to special features of a site, or special conditions or circumstances peculiar to 
the applicant’s land or structure, a literal enforcement of the program would result 
in unwarranted hardship to the applicant;  
 
the local jurisdiction finds that the applicant has satisfied each one of the variance 
provisions; and  
 
without the variance, the applicant would be deprived of a use of land or a structure 
permitted to others in accordance with the critical area program. 
 
“Unwarranted hardship” means that, without a variance, an applicant would be denied 
reasonable and significant use of the entire parcel or lot for which the variance is requested. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 247/ Page 3 
In considering an application for a variance, a local jurisdiction must presume that the 
specific development activity in the Critical Area that is subject to the application and for 
which a variance is required does not conform with the general purpose and intent of the 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection Program, regulations 
adopted under it, and the requirements of the local jurisdiction’s program. A local 
jurisdiction must take into consideration whether the variance request is based on 
conditions or circumstances that are the result of actions by the applicant. 
 
Background:   
 
Changes Made by the Bill 
 
The Critical Area Commission indicates that bill primarily (1) allows for minor variance 
requests to be managed through a simplified, ministerial administrative process (through 
the bill’s provision referencing relief being obtained through an available administrative 
process); (2) adds language to variance standards that reflects recent case law; (3) clarifies 
that a variance cannot provide relief from certain critical area program requirements; and 
(4) establishes that appeals of variance decisions made by an administrative hearing officer 
or other official that hears and decides a variance case are heard based on the record of the 
administrative hearing officer’s or official’s decision, and not heard de novo (anew). 
 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection Program 
 
Chapter 794 of 1984 established the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Protection Program 
(now the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection Program) to 
minimize damage to water quality and wildlife habitat by fostering more sensitive 
development activity along the shoreline areas of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. 
The goals of the program now are applicable to both the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic 
Coastal Bays (after enactment of Chapter 433 of 2002) and include (1) protection of water 
quality; (2) conservation of habitat; (3) accommodation of future growth and development 
without adverse environmental impacts; (4) improvement of climate resiliency; and 
(5) equitable distribution of the burdens and benefits of development, mitigation, 
restoration, conservation, and climate change adaptation within the Critical Area. 
 
Chapter 794 identified the Critical Area as all land within 1,000 feet of the mean high water 
line of tidal waters or the landward edge of tidal wetlands and all waters of and lands under 
the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries to the head of tide. In 2002, the Critical Area was 
expanded to include the State’s coastal bays, and, in 2024, the program was modified to 
incorporate climate resilience, environmental justice, and equity measures. The 
1984 legislation also created the Critical Area Commission within DNR, which oversees 
the development and implementation of local land use programs dealing with the Critical 
Area. Each local jurisdiction is charged with the primary responsibility for development 
and implementation of its own local program; that local authority, however, is subject to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 247/ Page 4 
commission review and approval and must be consistent with the commission’s 
regulations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; cities of Annapolis and 
Salisbury; Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Cecil, Charles, Dorchester, 
Harford, Kent, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Worcester counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 247/ Page 5 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection 
Program - Variances - Alterations 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 247 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Nick Kelly, Executive Director, Critical Area Commission for the 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays  
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There will be minimal economic impacts on small businesses. The bill is meant to 
simplify the variance process and provide clarifications to the statute. This legislation 
may result in small businesses having shorter waiting periods to receive variances and 
permits.  
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5