START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 306 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 306 
(Delegates Qi and Hill) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Manufacturers and Dealers - Prices Listed on Dealer Websites 
(Jack Fitzgerald Price Transparency Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch from taking an adverse 
action against a dealer for disclosing on the dealer’s website that the advertised price of a 
vehicle is the manufacturer’s minimum allowable advertised price and that the dealer may 
offer a lower price for the vehicle. This does not apply to situations in which a dealer 
violates existing prohibitions related to deceptive advertising practices, advertising a 
vehicle without the intent to sell the vehicle as advertised, or a State or local law intended 
to protect the public. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A motor vehicle manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch must be 
licensed by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) in order to, among other things, 
transfer new vehicles and conduct business in new vehicles in Maryland. Likewise, a 
person may not conduct the business of a dealer unless licensed by MVA. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 306/ Page 2 
Coercion of Vehicle Dealers 
 
In general, a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch (whether directly or through an 
agent, employee, affiliate, or representative) may not coerce any dealer to make any 
agreement with the manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch (or their agent, employee, 
affiliate, or representative). “Coerce” means to compel (or attempt to compel) by threat of 
harm, breach of contract, or other adverse action or consequences (including the loss of 
any incentive or other benefit made available to other dealers of the same line make in the 
State). “Coerce” also includes to act in a manner that violates the general requirement that 
a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch (whether directly or through an agent, 
employee, or representative) act in good faith. However, “coerce” does not encompass 
arguing, urging, recommending, or persuading. 
 
Equal Offering of Incentives to Dealers of Same Line Make 
 
Any consumer rebates, dealer incentives, price or interest rate reductions, or finance terms 
that a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch offers or advertises, or allows its dealer 
to offer or advertise, must be offered to all dealers of the same line make. Any 
manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch that denies these benefits to a dealer on the 
basis that the dealer failed to comply with performance standards has the burden of proving 
that the performance standards comply with State law. 
 
Unless a dealer violates a State or local law intended to protect the public, a manufacturer, 
distributor, or factory branch may not (1) require a dealer to alter or replace an existing 
dealership facility or (2) deny (or threaten to deny) any benefit generally available to all 
dealers for a dealer’s failure to alter or replace an existing dealership facility. 
 
Prohibited Advertising Practices 
 
A dealer (or an agent or employee of a dealer) may not (1) use any advertisement that is in 
any way false, deceptive, or misleading or (2) advertise or offer by any means to the public 
any vehicle without intent to sell it as advertised or offered. A person convicted of violating 
these requirements is subject to imprisonment for up to two months and/or a fine of up to 
$500. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 834 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 297 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 306/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3