START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 340 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 340 
(Delegate Mireku-North, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact 
 
 
This bill enters Maryland into the School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact. The 
bill details the conditions for entry into the compact, compact governance under the School 
Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact Commission, compact financing, information 
exchange in the compact, and dispute resolution processes, among other provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE general fund expenditures increase by $30,000 in FY 2027 for 
one‑time enhancements to the State licensure system and by an additional $7,000 in 
FY 2027 and annually thereafter to pay a fee to participate in the compact. Otherwise, 
MSDE can likely accommodate participation in the compact with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. Potential minimal increase in MSDE fee revenue to the 
extent license fees are levied on compact licenses. 
  
Local Effect:  No direct effect on local finances; however, the bill may facilitate the 
recruitment of school psychologists from other states to fill school psychologist vacancies. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Purpose of the Compact 
 
The purpose of the compact is to facilitate the practice of school psychology in educational 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 340/ Page 2 
or school settings and, in doing so, improve the availability of school psychological 
services to the public. The compact aims to establish a pathway for school psychologists 
to obtain equivalent licenses to provide school psychological services in any member state. 
In this way, the compact enables member states to ensure that safe and effective school 
psychological services are available and delivered by appropriately qualified professionals 
in their educational settings. 
 
State Participation in the Compact 
 
To be eligible to join the compact and maintain eligibility as a member state, a state must; 
 
 
enact a compact statute that is not materially different from the model compact; 
 
participate in the sharing of information with other member states as reasonably 
necessary to accomplish the objectives of the compact; 
 
identify and maintain with the commission a list of equivalent licenses available to 
licensees who hold a home state license under this compact; 
 
have a mechanism in place for receiving and investigating complaints about 
licensees; 
 
notify the commission, in compliance with the compact and commission rules, of 
any adverse action taken against a licensee or of the availability of investigative 
information related to a licensee or applicant for licensure; 
 
require that applicants for a home state license have taken and passed a qualifying 
national exam, completed a minimum of 1,200 hours of supervised internship (at 
least 600 of which must have been completed in a school prior to licensure) and 
graduated from a qualifying school psychologist education program; and 
 
comply with compact terms and commission rules. 
 
Each member state must grant an equivalent license or renewal to practice school 
psychology upon application by a licensee who satisfies the applicable criteria. Member 
states may set and collect a fee for granting an equivalent license. 
 
School Psychologist Participation in the Compact 
 
The bill establishes conditions under which a licensee may obtain and maintain an 
equivalent license from a remote state (a member state other than the home state where a 
licensee holds a license). Among other requirements, a licensee must hold and maintain an 
active license in a home state; satisfy applicable state-specific requirements; complete any 
administrative or application requirements established by the commission and pay any 
associated fees; and complete any requirements for renewal in the home state. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 340/ Page 3 
Individuals seeking compact licensure or license renewal must undergo a criminal 
background check. 
 
The bill also establishes additional rules for active military members or their spouses 
regarding determining home state status. 
 
Discipline and Adverse Actions 
 
The bill sets out processes for disciplining licensees and imposing adverse actions. Nothing 
in the compact must be deemed or construed to limit the authority of a member state to 
investigate or impose disciplinary measures on licensees according to its state practice 
laws. Member states are authorized to receive, and must provide, investigative files and 
information regarding discipline. Member states must also protect and maintain the 
confidentiality and security of investigative information and clearly communicate the 
intention and purpose of any disclosure. 
 
School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact Commission 
 
The compact is governed by the School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact 
Commission, a joint government agency composed of all member states. The bill outlines 
requirements regarding commission structure, membership, powers, voting, financing, and 
meetings. Each member state is limited to one commissioner, selected by that state’s 
licensing authority. The commission must fund its establishment, organization, and 
ongoing activities. The commission is authorized to collect annual assessments from 
member states and impose fees on licensees practicing in member states to cover expenses. 
 
Among other powers, the commission may; 
 
 
establish and amend rules and bylaws; 
 
establish procedures related to licensure; 
 
maintain financial records; 
 
take actions relating to the finances of the commission; 
 
provide and receive information from law enforcement agencies; 
 
determine compliance with model compact language; 
 
initiate and conclude legal proceedings; and 
 
perform other functions necessary to achieve the compact’s purposes. 
 
The bill establishes an executive committee with the power to act on behalf of the 
commission with certain specified powers, duties, and responsibilities. The commission 
must create an annual report for member states. Meetings of the commission must generally 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 340/ Page 4 
be open to the public except in specified circumstances. The commission must keep 
minutes that fully and clearly describe all matters discussed in a meeting. 
 
Facilitating Information Exchange 
 
The commission must provide for facilitating the exchange of information to administer 
and implement the compact. A member state must agree to provide identifying information, 
licensure data, adverse actions against a licensee, nonconfidential information related to 
alternative program participation, any denial of application, investigative information, and 
other information that may facilitate the administration of the compact. However, nothing 
in the compact must be deemed or construed to alter, limit, or inhibit a member state’s 
authority to control and maintain ownership of its licensee information. 
 
Rulemaking, Oversight, Dispute Resolution, and Enforcement 
 
The commission must promulgate reasonable rules to achieve the compact’s intent and 
purpose. If the commission exceeds its rulemaking authority, such actions are invalid and 
have no legal force in member states. The bill sets out processes for rejecting rules by a 
majority of member states, promulgating new rules, and handling emergency rulemaking. 
The executive and judicial branches of each state must enforce the compact and take 
necessary actions to implement it. The bill specifies oversight procedures and provisions 
for legal proceedings involving the compact. 
 
The bill also establishes procedures for determining when a member state is in default of 
its obligations. If a state’s membership is terminated, it must immediately notify all 
licensees within the state. The terminated state must continue to recognize all licenses 
granted under the compact for at least six months after notice of termination. 
 
Upon request, the commission must attempt to resolve disputes between member states and 
between member and nonmember states. The commission must establish rules for 
mediation and binding dispute resolution. Additionally, the commission may initiate legal 
action against member states to enforce compliance, and member states may similarly take 
legal action against the commission. However, no person other than a member state may 
enforce the compact against the commission. 
 
Effective Date, Withdrawal, and Amendment 
 
The compact takes effect upon enactment in the seventh member state. If a state is later 
found to be in default, or withdraws, the compact and commission remain in effect even if 
the number of member states falls below seven. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 340/ Page 5 
A state may withdraw by enacting a statute repealing the compact, but withdrawal does not 
take effect until 180 days after enactment. The bill establishes other requirements relating 
to withdrawal from the compact, including that withdrawal does not absolve the state’s 
licensing authority from complying with investigative and adverse action reporting 
requirements before the withdrawal becomes effective.  
 
Construction and Severability 
 
The compact and the commission’s rulemaking authority must be liberally construed to 
effectuate the purposes of the compact. The provisions of the compact must be severable. 
 
Consistent Effect and Conflict with Other State Laws 
 
Nothing in the compact may prevent or inhibit the enforcement of any other law of a 
member state that is not inconsistent with the compact. Any laws, statutes, regulations, or 
other legal requirements in a member state in conflict with the compact are superseded to 
the extent of the conflict. All permissible agreements between the commission and the 
member states are binding in accordance with their terms. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 13A.12.04.09), “school 
psychologist” means an individual who is licensed to provide psychological services to 
children in a public or State-approved nonpublic school setting. The school psychologist 
supervises interns and psychometrists (individuals who work directly under the 
professional supervision of a school psychologist and assist in administering psychological 
tests and other related psychometric tasks). 
 
To qualify for MSDE licensure as a school psychologist, an applicant must meet one of 
four sets of requirements:   
 
 
hold a master’s or higher degree in school psychology from a State-approved 
program and have qualifying scores on the State-approved test for school 
psychologists; 
 
hold a master’s or higher degree; complete a State-approved program in school 
psychology, culminating in at least a 1,200-hour internship in school psychology; 
and have qualifying scores on the State-approved test for school psychologists;  
 
hold a valid Nationally Certified School Psychologist certificate issued by the 
National School Psychology Certification Board; or 
 
hold a master’s or higher degree from an institution of higher education and hold a 
valid professional certificate in school psychology from another state (with 
appropriate verification of at least 27 months of satisfactory performance as a school 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 340/ Page 6 
psychologist during the past seven years on the same basis for which application is 
being made for a comparable Maryland certificate). 
 
Each school system must provide school psychological services. The School Psychology 
Program is a comprehensive continuum of services and activities based on psychological 
principles; the continuum of services and activities includes, but is not limited to, 
consultations, psychological counseling, psychological assessments, professional 
development, and program development. The goal of the program is to prevent or 
remediate educational, emotional, or behavioral problems by identifying, analyzing, and 
reporting psychoeducational needs through consultation, observation, or psychological and 
educational assessment. According to MSDE, comprehensive school psychological 
services are undertaken in concert with the activities of teachers, administrators, school 
counselors, and other school staff. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Programming Costs 
 
MSDE advises that there are one‑time programming costs of approximately $30,000 in 
fiscal 2027 only to enhance the Maryland educator licensure system to allow for 
applications from compact members. 
 
License Fees 
 
MSDE fee revenues increase to the extent additional individuals apply for compact 
licensure or renewal. The exact amount of such increase depends on the number of 
additional licensees who apply for compact licensure, which is unknown at this time. 
Furthermore, while the compact allows MSDE to set and collect fees for granting 
equivalent licenses to out-of-state school psychologists, § 6-704 of the Education Article 
limits the fee that the Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board may set for the 
issuance of a license at $10. Therefore, MSDE would not be able to establish a higher fee 
for these licenses. 
 
As the commission may impose fees on member States for compact participation, MSDE 
expenditures likewise increase by an estimated $7,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027 
to pay this fee. 
 
Criminal History Records Checks 
 
Individuals seeking compact licensure or license renewal must undergo a criminal 
background check. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) charges a fee of $12.00 for 
a national check. The Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository (CJIS-CR) 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 340/ Page 7 
in the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services collects the fee from the 
applicant and reimburses the FBI. CJIS-CR submits requests for national criminal records 
to the FBI electronically. Each individual who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a criminal history 
records check (CHRC) is required to pay $50.00 for a State and national CHRC, including 
a $20.00 fingerprinting fee, a $12.00 FBI fee, and an $18.00 fee to CJIS-CR. To the extent 
the bill’s requirement for a criminal background check result in additional individuals 
obtaining a State and national CHRC, CJJS‑CR revenues increase from fees. Fees collected 
from applicants are anticipated to offset any cost to complete the CHRC. 
 
Maryland State Department of Education 
 
MSDE advises that one education program specialist is required to administer the compact, 
including acting as the commissioner for the State, implementing rules developed by the 
commission, complying with information sharing processes, investigating complaints 
about licenses, collecting fees, and generally enforcing the compact. However, the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that such administrative and oversight 
responsibilities are likely not meaningfully different to those MSDE already performs to 
oversee in-State licensing of school psychologists. Therefore, DLS advises that MSDE can 
likely accommodate entry into the compact with existing resources. 
 
To the extent compact entry necessitates the revision of regulations, MSDE can likely 
accomplish such updates with existing resources. MSDE further notes that licensure does 
not require a background check, rather employers must conduct background checks at the 
time of hire. 
 
Under the bill, the compact must come into effect once the compact statute is enacted in 
the seventh member state. According to the compact’s website and as of February 2026, 
seven states (Alabama, Colorado, Delaware, Georgia, Kansas, Nebraska, and 
West Virginia) have enacted the model legislation required to join the compact, allowing 
the compact to begin its operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 959 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 238 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore City Public 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 340/ Page 8 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8