START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 328 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 328 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Bicounty Commissions - Public Ethics - Financial Disclosure Statements  
PG/MC 105-26 
 
 
This bill requires an applicant for appointment as a bicounty commissioner (commissioner) 
in Prince George’s County to submit a paper copy of their financial disclosure statement 
to the Prince George’s County Office of Ethics and Accountability. Further, the bill 
requires the chief administrative officer of Prince George’s County to submit each financial 
disclosure statement of a commissioner or applicant to the Prince George’s County Office 
of Ethics and Accountability, which must retain the statements for the commissioner’s 
entire term of office or return the original statement and all copies to any applicant who is 
not appointed. On notification by the Prince George’s County Office of Ethics and 
Accountability that an applicant was not appointed, the State Ethics Commission (SEC) 
must promptly delete the financial disclosure statement electronically filed by the 
applicant. Finally, the Prince George’s County Office of Ethics and Accountability must 
require that any person examining or copying a financial disclosure statement record their 
name, home address, and the name of the individual whose statement was examined or 
copied. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill applies only to bicounty commissions. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 328/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Commissioner” means a commissioner of a bicounty commission. 
 
Each commissioner and applicant must (1) electronically file a financial disclosure 
statement with SEC, as specified, and (2) submit a paper copy of the electronically filed 
statement to the chief administrative officer of the county from which the commissioner is 
appointed, as specified. The chief administrative officer of a county must then transmit 
each statement received from a commissioner or applicant to the executive director of the 
appropriate bicounty commission. 
 
Retention of a Financial Disclosure Statement 
 
The executive director of the appropriate bicounty commission and chief administrative 
officer of each county must (1) retain a financial disclosure statement of a commissioner 
for the commissioner’s entire term of office and (2) within 15 days of an appointment 
becoming final, return all copies of the financial disclosure statement to an applicant who 
is not appointed. 
 
The chief administrative officer of each county involved must notify SEC if an applicant 
is not appointed, and upon notification, SEC must promptly delete the statement 
electronically filed by the applicant. 
 
Public Inspection of a Financial Disclosure Statement 
 
SEC, the executive director of each bicounty commission, and the chief administrative 
officer of each county:  (1) must maintain the financial disclosure statements of 
commissioners and applicants; (2) must make those statements available to the public for 
examination and copying during normal office hours; and (3) may charge a reasonable fee 
and adopt reasonable administrative procedures for the examination and copying of a 
statement. 
 
Prince George’s County Office of Ethics and Accountability 
 
The Prince George’s County Office of Ethics and Accountability is responsible for 
increasing accountability and oversight by identifying fraud, abuse, and illegal acts. It 
supports the Board of Ethics of Prince George’s County in exercising its authorities granted 
to it under the Prince George’s County Code of Ethics to promote the public’s trust of 
county government and ensure the impartiality of employees and county elected officials 
in the execution of their duties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 328/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
State 
Ethics 
Commission; 
Montgomery 
and  
Prince George’s counties; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3