START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 382 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 382 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Commercial Law - Broadband Access - Low-Income Consumer Programs 
(Maryland Broadband Opportunity and Fairness Act) 
 
 
This bill requires, by December 1, 2026, each broadband provider serving 10,000 or more 
customers to establish a low-income consumer program. The bill establishes eligibility 
criteria, program requirements, minimum broadband Internet speeds, and filing 
requirements. Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under 
the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions. The bill also expands the duties of the Office of Statewide Broadband 
(OSB) within the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
account for the bill's requirements.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division) and 
DHCD can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. The bill’s imposition of 
existing penalty provisions does not have a material impact on State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 382/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Broadband service” means a mass-market retail service that provides the capability to 
transmit data to and receive data from all or substantially all Internet endpoints, including 
any capabilities that are incidental to and enable the operation of communications services 
provided by specified telecommunications services. “Broadband service” does not include 
dial-up service. 
 
A “low-income consumer” means an individual whose household or at least one member 
of the household qualifies for benefits or tax credits under specified federal or State  
anti-poverty programs. 
 
Low-cost Broadband Service Option – Requirement 
 
A low-income consumer program must offer at least one low-cost broadband service option 
to eligible low-income consumers including (1) a minimum broadband speed that meets 
specified requirements; (2) at least 1.2 terabytes of data storage; and (3) a latency that is 
sufficiently low to allow reasonably foreseeable, real-time, interactive applications. 
Network outages of broadband services offered may not exceed, on average, 48 hours 
within any year. OSB may modify the download and upload speeds for areas of the State 
in which such speeds are not reasonably practicable.  
 
If a provider can no longer provide a low-cost broadband service option to a customer, the 
provider must sell the network capacity at a reasonable, wholesale rate on a 
nondiscriminatory basis to other providers.  
 
Authorized Program Price Increases 
 
A provider may, once every three years, increase the price of broadband service under the 
provider’s program by the lesser of the most recent change in the Consumer Price Index 
for all urban consumers, or not more than 2% per year. A provider must provide  
at least 30 days’ notice of a price increase to consumers enrolled in the provider’s program 
and OSB before increasing the price. 
 
Enrollment in a Program 
 
A provider may not require enrollment in an automatic payment plan as a criterion for 
eligibility in a program. A provider must allow customers enrolled in the provider’s 
program to purchase stand-alone broadband service or a broadband service bundled with 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 382/ Page 3 
cable television or phone service. Any contract or agreement for broadband service offered 
as part of a program must include the same terms and conditions, other than price and 
broadband speeds, as regularly priced plans for similar services offered by the provider.  
 
Promotions and Advertisement 
 
A provider must make available to the public in a prominent manner on its website 
anywhere that a list of available plans is posted the availability of broadband service for 
low-income consumers and enrollment procedures. A provider must make all 
commercially reasonable efforts to promote and advertise the availability of broadband 
service for low-income consumers and enrollment procedures on the provider’s website 
and in any written or commercial promotional or advertising materials. Any promotion or 
advertising must include the prominent display of the provider’s program.  
 
Fiber-optic Requirements 
 
For any program that provides a low-cost broadband service to a customer that involves 
laying fiber-optic cables or conduit underground or along a roadway, the provider must 
include interspersed conduit access points at regular and short intervals.  
 
Exemption from Low-income Consumer Program 
 
OSB may exempt a provider from the bill’s requirements if the provider provides 
broadband service to fewer than 20,000 households, and OSB determines that compliance 
would result in an unreasonable or unsustainable financial impact on the provider.  
 
Filing Requirements 
 
By November 15, 2027, and annually thereafter, a provider in the State must file with OSB 
a compliance report including (1) the availability of a low-income consumer program;  
(2) the number of consumers enrolled in the program; (3) the procedures used to verify the 
eligibility of customers applying for the program; (4) the advertising and marketing efforts 
undertaken to advertise and promote the availability of the program, including samples of 
advertising and marketing materials; (5) all broadband service plans offered by the 
provider, including pricing and broadband speeds; and (6) any other information OSB 
considers necessary or appropriate.  
 
Office of Statewide Broadband Duties 
 
By December 1, 2029, and annually thereafter, OSB must determine whether the minimum 
broadband download and upload speeds and data storage requirements should be increased 
to (1) the Federal Communication Commission’s benchmark for high-speed fixed 
broadband download and upload speeds or (2) commonly available mobile broadband 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 382/ Page 4 
download and upload speeds, and data storage limits in the State. OSB must also  
(1) evaluate the eligibility requirements for a low-income consumer, and (2) include in its 
annual report any recommendations for changes to the eligibility requirements.  
 
Broadband Affordability Advisory Board 
 
The purpose of the Broadband Affordability Advisory Board is to establish a definition for 
a low-cost broadband service option as required under federal law. The board must submit 
the definition of low-cost broadband service option to OSB for submittal to the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) for approval. The definition 
of low-cost broadband service option must meet all requirements established under the bill, 
meet any requirements set by federal law, and meet any requirements set by NTIA.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Office of Statewide Broadband 
 
Chapter 74 of 2021 established OSB within DHCD as the successor to the Office of Rural 
Broadband and charged OSB with expanded responsibilities relating to planning, data 
collection, outreach, and intergovernmental coordination. Notably, the Act required OSB 
to prepare a statewide plan ensuring universal, affordable, reliable broadband Internet 
connectivity exceeding specified federal standards by December 31, 2026. OSB must 
annually report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the progress of the State’s 
efforts to develop and implement the statewide plan, among other things. 
 
Chapter 74 also established (1) the Digital Inclusion Fund, to provide a competitive  
grant program to support capacity building for local governments and nonprofit 
organizations seeking to further access to high-speed Internet and implement programs to 
expand digital literacy and (2) the Digital Connectivity Fund, to assist in the establishment 
and expansion of affordable broadband communication services in disconnected areas and 
communities in the State. In addition, the Act transferred the existing Rural Broadband 
Assistance Fund from the Department of Commerce to OSB. The purpose of the Rural 
Broadband Assistance Fund is to assist in the establishment of broadband communication 
services in rural and underserved areas of the State. 
 
Federal Broadband, Equity, Access, and Deployment Program 
 
The federal Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 includes more than  
$60 billion in funding nationally for broadband programs. The largest program is the 
Broadband Equity, Access, and Deployment (BEAD) Program, which provides  
$42.5 billion nationally for grants to states, allocated by a formula based on the proportion 
of unserved locations in each state as well as unserved locations in high-cost areas. In  
June 2023, the National Telecommunications and Information Administration announced 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 382/ Page 5 
that Maryland’s BEAD allocation will total $267.7 million in addition to $5.0 million that 
DHCD already received as a planning grant. More information can be found on the  
DHCD website.  
 
Consumer Protection 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates 
MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each 
repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any 
person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last  
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 571 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5