START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 321 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 321 
(Delegate Lehman) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - Synthetic Turf Industry and Disposal Study - Deadline Extension 
 
   
This bill extends the deadline, from July 1, 2026, to January 15, 2027, by which the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) must submit a specified report relating 
to synthetic turf to specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Extending the deadline for MDE to submit the required report does not 
materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 567 of 2024 required MDE, in consultation with the Synthetic 
Turf Council and other specified stakeholders, including local governments, county school 
systems, and higher education facilities, to conduct a study on synthetic turf, existing 
synthetic turf fields in the State, and the synthetic turf industry in the State. MDE must 
submit a report of its findings to specified committees of the General Assembly by  
July 1, 2026.  
 
The report must include (1) industry information and background; (2) methodologies used 
for data collection, including public hearings and other public outreach; (3) current industry 
practices and guidelines relating to the sale, maintenance, reuse, and disposal of synthetic 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 321/ Page 2 
turf; (4) current industry disposal methods of synthetic turf, including known disposal 
locations; (5) proper and improper disposal methods of synthetic turf; (6) current recycling 
rates and methods of synthetic turf and future recycling proposals; (7) factors influencing 
disposal and recycling; (8) case studies and examples; and (9) proposals for improving 
recycling rates and waste management.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Somerset 
counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; Baltimore City Community 
College; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County 
Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
me/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2