START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 339 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 339 
(Delegates Simmons and Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Board of License Commissioners - Chief Inspector - 
Compensation 
 
 
This bill modifies the pay schedule of the full-time chief inspector employed by the 
Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners from non-represented pay 
schedule NR-05 to non-represented pay schedule NR-15 in the general county classified 
salary schedule. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Anne Arundel County finances 
or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 668 of 2021 required the Anne Arundel County Board  
of License Commissioners to replace its part-time chief inspector position with a  
full-time chief inspector position with a salary in non-represented pay schedule NR-05 in 
the general county classified salary schedule. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to Anne Arundel County’s fiscal 2026 
non-represented pay schedule, an NR-05 salary is between $36,378 and $67,252. An 
NR-15 salary is between $59,612 and $110,209. Generally, the board is responsible for 
funding its own operations, including salaries of inspectors, using revenue from license 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 339/ Page 2 
fees. While the bill modifies the pay schedule for the full-time chief inspector, it does not 
directly require the board to increase or decrease the chief inspector’s salary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 570 and HB 410 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 396 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2