START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 373 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 373 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Health 
Finance 
 
State Board of Dental Examiners - Disciplinary Action and Unannounced 
Inspections 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) to conduct an unannounced 
inspection to determine compliance with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC) guidelines on standard (rather than universal) precautions and Guidelines for 
Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings under specified circumstances. The bill 
updates and alters grounds for disciplinary action by BDE and authorizes the board to take 
disciplinary action against or relating to an expanded function dental assistant (EFDA). 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not likely affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Disciplinary Grounds – Dentists 
 
The grounds for disciplinary action against an applicant for a dental license or a licensed 
dentist are updated and altered to include:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 373/ Page 2 
 
except in an emergency, life-threatening situation where it is not feasible or 
practicable, failure to comply with CDC guidelines on standard precautions or 
CDC’s Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings; or 
 
employing, supervising, or using the services of an individual as an EFDA who is 
not certified by BDE. 
 
Disciplinary Grounds – Dental Hygienists 
 
The grounds for disciplinary action against an applicant for a dental hygiene license or a 
licensed dental hygienist are updated to include if the applicant or licensee, except in an 
emergency, life-threatening situation where it is not feasible or practicable, fails to comply 
with CDC guidelines on standard precautions or CDC’s Guidelines for Infection Control 
in Dental Health-Care Settings. 
 
Disciplinary Grounds – Expanded Function Dental Assistants 
 
The bill establishes disciplinary grounds under which BDE may deny a certificate to 
practice expanded function dental assisting to any applicant, reprimand any certified 
EFDA, place any certified EFDA on probation, or suspend or revoke the certificate of any 
certified EFDA, if the applicant or certificate holder:   
 
 
practices expanded function dental assisting in an incompetent manner; 
 
fails to conform to generally accepted standards in the practice of expanded function 
dental assisting; 
 
performs intraoral functions not authorized by statute or the rules and regulations of 
the board; 
 
fraudulently or deceptively obtains or attempts to obtain a certificate for the 
applicant or for another; 
 
fraudulently or deceptively uses a certificate; 
 
is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any other state or country 
or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by any 
branch of the uniformed services or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs for an 
act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the board’s disciplinary 
statutes; 
 
violates any rule or regulation adopted by the board; 
 
is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving 
moral turpitude, whether or not any appeal or other proceeding is pending to have 
the conviction or plea set aside; 
 
provides professional services while under the influence of alcohol or any controlled 
dangerous substance or drug in excess of therapeutic amounts; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 373/ Page 3 
 
willfully makes or files a false report or record or fails to file a report or record in 
the practice of expanded function dental assisting or willfully induces another to file 
a false report; 
 
refuses, withholds from, denies, or discriminates against an individual with regard 
to the provision of professional services that the certified individual is qualified to 
render because the individual is HIV positive; 
 
except in an emergency, life-threatening situation where it is not feasible or 
practicable, fails to comply with CDC guidelines on standard precautions or 
Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings;  
 
fails to comply with a board order; 
 
is mentally or physically incompetent to practice expanded function dental assisting; 
 
willfully and without legal justification fails to cooperate with a lawful investigation 
conducted by the board; 
 
engages in sexual misconduct; or 
 
behaves dishonorably or unprofessionally.  
 
Current Law:  An individual must be licensed to practice dentistry or dental hygiene or 
certified to practice expanded function dental assisting. BDE issues licenses and 
certificates, adopts standards of practice, investigates complaints based on alleged 
violations of regulations and statutes, and disciplines licensees. 
 
Unannounced Inspections and Universal Precautions 
 
On receipt of a written and signed complaint, including a referral from the Commissioner 
of Labor and Industry, BDE may conduct an unannounced inspection of the office of a 
dentist, other than an office in a hospital, related institution, freestanding medical facility, 
or a freestanding birthing center, to determine compliance with CDC guidelines on 
universal precautions. Failure to comply with universal precautions, except in a 
life-threatening situation where it is not feasible or practicable, is grounds for disciplinary 
action by BDE. 
 
Disciplinary Grounds 
 
A dental or dental hygiene applicant or licensee is subject to license denial, as well as 
reprimand, probation, suspension, and revocation on various disciplinary grounds. Before 
BDE takes any disciplinary action, the individual has the opportunity for a hearing before 
BDE. BDE must give the individual notice and hold the hearing in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedures Act. An individual aggrieved by a final decision of BDE in a 
contested case may petition for judicial review. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 373/ Page 4 
Expanded Function Dental Assisting 
 
In general, dental assistants are not required to be licensed or certified by BDE. However, 
dental assistants may be registered as qualified in general duties or qualified in 
orthodontics, and/or certified as a dental radiation technologist or an EFDA. An EFDA is 
certified by BDE to perform specific intraoral procedures. An EFDA may perform a 
procedure if a licensed dentist (1) gives specific instructions to perform the procedure and 
(2) directly supervises the procedure. 
 
Additional Comments:  Universal precautions are guidelines that protect health care 
workers from exposure to potentially infectious materials, while standard precautions are 
a more comprehensive set of safety protocols used to protect health care workers and 
patients from infection. Last updated in April 2024, CDC issues standard precautions for 
all patient care based on a risk assessment and makes use of common sense practices and 
personal protective equipment use that protect health care providers from infection and 
prevent the spread of infection from patient to patient. In 2003, CDC published the 
Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4