START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 333 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 333 
(Delegates Palakovich Carr and Griffith) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
General Assembly Vacancy - Political Party Central Committee - Procedures 
 
 
This bill establishes requirements for the filling of a vacancy for the office of senator or 
delegate in the General Assembly by central committees of political parties in the State 
under Article III, § 13 of the Maryland Constitution. The bill’s provisions explicitly 
override the constitution and bylaws of any political party. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The application period to apply to a central committee to fill a vacancy 
must be open for at least seven days and advertised in a conspicuous manner by the central 
committee filling the vacancy by a public notice that includes (1) the central committee’s 
intent to meet to fill the vacancy; (2) the time and place of any meetings to be held to 
discuss or vote on the filling of the vacancy; (3) the process for filling the vacancy; and 
(4) the manner in which individuals may apply to fill the vacancy. 
 
The specified notice must be translated into a language other than English if the local 
Board of Elections for the county in which the central committee is located is required to 
translate election materials into that language as required under § 203 of the federal Voting 
Rights Act. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 333/ Page 2 
All applications submitted to a central committee to fill a vacancy must (1) be posted online 
promptly after the application deadline by the county central committee or the State central 
committee of the political party and (2) remain posted online until at least 30 days after the 
central committee votes on an individual to fill the vacancy. The central committee may 
redact personal information from the applications posted online. 
 
The central committee must hold a public meeting to interview the individuals who applied 
to fill the vacancy. A meeting held by a central committee to discuss or vote on filling a 
vacancy must be (1) open to the public and (2) announced at least three days before the 
meeting. 
 
The vote by a central committee to choose an individual to fill a vacancy must be by roll 
call vote or by signed ballots, in addition to being in a meeting open to the public. A 
member of the central committee who has applied to fill the vacancy must recuse 
themselves from (1) administering the process of filling the vacancy, including advertising 
the vacancy, reviewing applications, and interviewing candidates and (2) voting on the 
individual to fill the vacancy. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Political Parties and Central Committees 
 
Except as to a matter of compelling State interest, if any provision of Title 4 of the Election 
Law Article (political parties) relating to party governance conflicts with the constitution 
and bylaws of a political party, the constitution and bylaws must apply. 
 
Each political party must have a State central committee that (1) is the governing body of 
the political party and (2) may be comprised of the members of the central committees of 
the counties during their terms in office. A principal political party must elect the members 
of the county central committee at a primary election. A party’s State central committee 
must determine its own rules and procedure, not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Election Law Article. 
 
Generally, each political party must adopt and be governed by a constitution and all bylaws 
and rules adopted in accordance with the constitution. In accordance with the constitution 
and bylaws of a principal political party, the central committee of that party for each county 
must adopt a constitution, bylaws, and rules. 
 
State Constitutional Process for Filling General Assembly Vacancies 
 
In the case of death, disqualification, resignation, refusal to act, or expulsion of a State 
senator or delegate, or in the case of a senator’s or delegate’s removal from the city or 
county from which he or she was elected, the Governor must, in accordance with specified 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 333/ Page 3 
procedures, appoint a person affiliated with the same political party to serve the remainder 
of the vacating senator’s or delegate’s unexpired term. 
 
The Governor appoints a person named by the specified central committee of the political 
party, if any, with which the vacating senator or delegate was affiliated only if that central 
committee submits, in writing, the name of a qualified person no more than 30 days after 
the vacancy occurs. In the event of a vacancy in a district that includes all or a portion of 
two or more counties, the affected central committees follow specified procedures for 
selecting and submitting a name or list of names to the Governor. 
 
Upon receipt of a submission from the affected central committee, as specified, the 
Governor must, within 15 days, appoint the central committee’s selection to fill the 
vacancy. If the central committee does not submit a name to the Governor within the 
30-day period, as specified, the Governor must, within 15 days of the expiration of the 
30-day period, select and appoint a person to fill the vacancy. The appointee must be 
(1) affiliated with the same political party, if any, as the vacating senator or delegate and 
(2) otherwise properly qualified to hold the office of senator or delegate in the affected 
district or county. Similarly, if no central committee exists in the affected county or district, 
the Governor must, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, appoint a person who is 
(1) affiliated with the same political party, if any, as the vacating senator or delegate and 
(2) otherwise properly qualified to hold the office. 
 
A gubernatorial appointee to fill a vacancy in the office of State senator or delegate serves 
the remainder of the vacating senator’s or delegate’s unexpired term. Elections for State 
and county offices, with the exception of special elections to fill vacancies in specified 
county offices, may be held only every four years, as specified. 
 
Language Accessibility – Federal Voting Rights Act 
 
In accordance with § 203 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, States and political 
subdivisions that have over a certain amount of limited-English proficient citizens  
in a single language minority group (defined as persons who are American Indian, 
Asian American, Alaska Native, or of Spanish heritage) may not provide voting materials 
only in the English language. Generally, the provisions are triggered if more than 10,000 in 
a political subdivision, or more than 5% of the citizens of voting age in the jurisdiction, are 
members of a single-language minority group and do not speak or understand English 
adequately enough to participate in the electoral process. Separate criteria apply if a 
political subdivision contains all or any part of an Indian reservation. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 333/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 171 and HB 237 of 2025, SB 140 and HB 347 of 2024 and SB 366 and 
HB 563 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4