START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 325 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 325 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board - Composition 
 
 
This bill alters the composition of the Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board 
(PSTEB) by adding an additional member of the Maryland Association of Nonpublic 
Special Education Facilities (MANSEF), as chosen by the Governor from a list of 
nominees provided by MANSEF. The bill also removes the requirement that  
one Board member be a certified nonpublic school classroom teacher, as chosen by the 
Governor from a list of nominees provided by the Association of Independent Schools. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s changes do not have an operational or fiscal impact on the 
State. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PSTEB consists of 25 regular members appointed by the Governor with 
the advice and consent of the Senate. In making appointments to PSTEB, the Governor 
must ensure the Board is representative of the various geographic regions of the State and 
of minority populations of the State. 
 
Each regular member serves for a staggered three-year term and until a successor is 
appointed. A member who is appointed after a term has begun may only serve for the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 325/ Page 2 
remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. The Board must 
annually elect a chairman from among its members, and a majority of the Board then 
serving on the Board is a quorum. The Governor may remove a member from the Board 
for incompetence or misconduct, and the staff for the Board must be provided by the  
State Board of Education. 
 
Among the regular members, the Governor must appoint one certified nonpublic school 
classroom teacher, chosen from a list of nominees provided by the Association of 
Independent Schools. The Governor also must appoint one member of MANSEF, chosen 
from a list of nominees provided by MANSEF. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2