START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 336 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 336 
(Delegate Addison, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - District Court - Issuance of Summonses and Arrest 
Warrants 
 
 
This bill prohibits a District Court commissioner from issuing an arrest warrant based on 
an application for a statement of charges filed by an individual who is not a police officer 
or a State’s Attorney and establishes a new procedure for the issuance of a criminal 
summons or arrest warrant by the District Court under these circumstances. The bill also 
requires the Maryland Judiciary to report specified data to the General Assembly on an 
annual basis beginning March 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $276,000 in fiscal 2027 only for 
one‑time computer programming. The bill also has an operational effect on the courts. 
Revenues are not affected.   
 
Local Effect:  As discussed below, the bill has an operational effect on State’s Attorneys’ 
offices and local law enforcement. This estimate presumes that any such effect does not 
materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Issuance of Criminal Summonses and Arrest Warrants 
 
On review of an application for a statement of charges submitted by an individual who is 
not a police officer or a State’s Attorney, a District Court commissioner (1) may issue a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 336/ Page 2 
summons, if the commissioner determines that there is probable cause that the defendant 
committed the offense or offenses charged in the charging document; (2) may not issue an 
arrest warrant; and (3) must refer an application for a statement of charges for which a 
summons was issued to the State’s Attorney’s office for review and a prompt determination 
of whether a request for an arrest warrant must be made, if the commissioner finds that 
there is probable cause to believe that the defendant poses a danger to another person or to 
the community. 
 
On receipt of an application for a statement of charges, the State’s Attorney must review 
the case as soon as practicable but no later than within 72 hours to determine whether to 
request that a District Court or circuit court judge issue an arrest warrant. On a finding of 
good cause, a judge may convert a summons to an arrest warrant. The District Court must 
inform a victim of crime whether charges have been issued in response to an application 
for a statement of charges filed by the victim. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
Beginning in 2027, by March 1 of each year, the Maryland Judiciary must report to the 
General Assembly the following data for the preceding calendar year, disaggregated by 
county, and by the race, sex, and age of defendants: 
 
 
the number of applications for a statement of charges filed, including information 
on the individual who filed the application and the outcome of the application, as 
specified;   
 
for each summons and arrest warrant issued, whether the arrest warrant was issued 
by a judge or a commissioner and whether there was a request to recall the summons 
or arrest warrant (and the result of each recall request); and  
 
the final disposition of the case. 
 
Current Law:  The issuance of a charging document, regardless of whether an individual 
is arrested, formally initiates the criminal process. The charging document is a written 
accusation alleging that the defendant has committed a crime. A charging document may 
be in the form of a citation, a statement of charges, an information, or an indictment. 
 
A judicial officer may file a statement of charges with the District Court based on an 
application by a law enforcement officer or any other individual. The application contains 
an affidavit required to demonstrate probable cause that the defendant committed the crime 
charged. Although the judicial officer may be a judge, it is more likely that the officer is a 
District Court commissioner. District Court commissioners are available 24 hours per day 
for judicial duties. The judicial officer has the authority to determine whether the 
application establishes probable cause, and, on such a finding, issues a summons or an 
arrest warrant. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 336/ Page 3 
However, a District Court commissioner may issue an arrest warrant only if the 
commissioner finds that there is probable cause to believe that the defendant committed 
the offense charged in the charging document and (1) the defendant previously failed to 
respond to a summons that has been personally served or a citation; (2) the defendant’s 
whereabouts are unknown and the issuance of a warrant is necessary to subject the 
defendant to the court’s jurisdiction; (3) the defendant is in custody for another offense; or 
(4) there is probable cause to believe that the defendant poses a danger to another person 
or to the community. On a finding of good cause, a District Court or circuit court judge 
may recall an arrest warrant issued by a District Court commissioner and issue a summons 
in its place. 
 
A summons notifies the defendant of the time and place to appear in court for a preliminary 
hearing. It may be served on the defendant by mail or in person. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $276,010 in fiscal 2027 only 
for one‐time computer programming for the Judiciary to implement the bill’s data reporting 
requirement ($69,266) and the multi‐agency process for summonses and arrest warrants 
based on civilian applications for statements of charges ($206,744). With this 
programming, District Court commissioners can coordinate and track requests with State’s 
Attorney’s offices in 24 jurisdictions, and the District Court can notify filers of any change 
from a summons to a warrant after the completion of the 72‐hour review period by State’s 
Attorneys. 
 
Exhibit 1 contains statistics on the number of applications for statement of charges and 
arrest warrants issued by District Court commissioners in fiscal 2024 and 2025. As noted 
below, in fiscal 2025, District Court commissioners received 18,394 nonpolice applications 
for statements of charges. Under the bill, commissioners would not be able to issue 
warrants for any of those applications. Instead, a commissioner may issue a criminal 
summons upon a finding of probable cause, and the summons must be reviewed by the 
appropriate State’s Attorney for possible issuance of an arrest warrant.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 336/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
District Court Commissioners 
Applications for Statements of Charges and Arrest Warrants 
Fiscal 2024 and 2025 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
Total Number of Applications for 
Statement of Charges Received 
by District Court Commissioners 
54,864 
53,300 
Nonpolice Applications for 
Statement of Charges Received by 
District Court Commissioners 
19,853 
18,394 
Total Number of Arrest Warrants 
Issued by District Court 
Commissioners (to everyone) 
25,752 
25,473 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
According to the Judiciary, law enforcement or other organizations often refer individuals 
to District Court commissioners to file an application for charges when an officer has not 
witnessed an alleged event. Individuals are also often referred to commissioners to obtain 
peace or protective orders (when the courts are closed) with very little involvement by law 
enforcement, if any. Commissioners sometimes issue warrants if they identify applicable 
charges through an application for a peace or protective order. 
 
The bill prohibits a commissioner from issuing an arrest warrant if an ordinary citizen files 
an application for a statement of charges, instead authorizing only the issuance of a 
summons, which is then reviewed by a State’s Attorney for a possible arrest warrant to be 
issued by a judge. The Judiciary advises that if a summons is issued, it may or may not be 
served expeditiously, does not ensure presentment of the defendant to the court, and 
provides no protections for victims/complainants. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The procedures established under the bill have an operational effect 
on State’s Attorneys’ offices due to (1) the required review of criminal summonses issued 
by District Court commissioners based on civilian applications for a statement of charges 
and (2) the alteration of filing practices for local law enforcement and State’s Attorneys’ 
offices. As noted above, these entities often refer individuals to a commissioner to file an 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 336/ Page 5 
application for a statement of charges on their own. Under the bill, these entities may need 
to file these applications in certain cases. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5