START OF PAGE 1
HB0363/673027/1

BY: Ways and Means Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 363
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 2, strike “Income Tax – Local” and substitute “Local
Government – Grant for Recipients of State”; in line 3, strike “credit against the
county” and substitute “grant to recipients of the State”; in lines 4 and 5, in each
instance, after “tax” insert “credit”; in line 4, after “children” insert “, subject to certain
limitations”; in lines 4 and 5, strike “a credit against the county” and substitute “county
grants to recipients of the State”; after line 5, insert:

“BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 12–906
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)”;

in line 8, strike “10–706, 10–751, and 10–809” and substitute “10–706 and 10–809”; and
after line 10, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 10–751
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, after line 12, insert:

“Article – Local Government

12–906.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0363/673027/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 363
Page 2 of 4

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
MEANINGS INDICATED.

(2) “FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME”, “FIDUCIARY”,
“RESIDENT”, AND “TAXABLE YEAR” HAVE THE MEANINGS STATED IN § 10–101 OF
THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(3) “QUALIFIED CHILD” AND “TAXPAYER” HAVE THE MEANINGS
STATED IN § 10–751 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(B) A COUNTY MAY PROVIDE, BY LAW, FOR A GRANT FOR EACH
QUALIFIED CHILD OF A TAXPAYER IF:

(1) THE TAXPAYER HAS FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME
LOWER THAN THE THRESHOLD AMOUNT OF $15,000; AND

(2) THE TAXPAYER AND EACH QUALIFIED CHILD ARE RESIDENTS,
OTHER THAN FIDUCIARIES, WHO ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE YEAR ARE:

(I) DOMICILED IN THAT COUNTY; OR

(II) MAINTAIN A PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE OR PLACE OF ABODE
IN THAT COUNTY.

(C) THE AMOUNT OF A GRANT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE
REDUCED BY 10% FOR EACH $1,000, OR FRACTION THEREOF, BY WHICH THE
TAXPAYER’S FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME EXCEEDS THE THRESHOLD
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0363/673027/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 363
Page 3 of 4

AMOUNT, EXCEPT THAT THE REDUCTION CANNOT REDUCE THE GRANT BELOW
ZERO.

(D) A COUNTY MAY PROVIDE, BY LAW, FOR:

(1) THE AMOUNT OF THE GRANT UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION; AND

(2) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE GRANT
UNDER THIS SECTION.

(E) A COUNTY THAT PROVIDES A GRANT UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL
REIMBURSE THE COMPTROLLER FOR REASONABLE EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE
COMPTROLLER TO PROVIDE THE COUNTY INFORMATION NECESSARY TO
IMPLEMENT THE GRANT.”;

and strike in their entirety lines 19 through 22, inclusive, and substitute:

“(c) (1) A credit allowed under [§ 10–704(a)(1)] § 10–704(B)(1) or § 10–
709(b)(1) of this subtitle is allowed against the State income tax only.

(2) A credit allowed under [§ 10–704(a)(2)] § 10–704(B)(2) or § 10–
709(b)(2) of this subtitle is allowed against the county income tax only.”.

On page 2, in lines 13, 16, and 20, strike “(1)”, “(2)”, and “(3)”, respectively; in
lines 16 and 20, in each instance, strike the bracket; in line 16, strike “ALLOWED
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION”; and in line 20, strike “SUBSECTION”.

On pages 2 and 3, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 23 on page
2 through line 19 on page 3, inclusive.

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB0363/673027/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 363
Page 4 of 4

On page 3, in line 26, strike “§ 10–751(C)” and substitute “§ 10–751”; and in line
28, strike “, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31,
2026”.
END OF PAGE 4