START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 395 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 395 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Water Pollution Control - Discharge Permits - Concentrated Animal Feeding 
Operations 
 
 
This emergency bill repeals (1) a requirement that a person hold a concentrated animal 
feeding operation (CAFO) discharge permit issued by the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) before beginning construction on any part of a new CAFO and (2) a 
prohibition against MDE issuing a CAFO discharge permit to a person who violates that 
requirement. The bill authorizes MDE – if the general discharge permit for CAFOs is 
administratively extended by MDE – to authorize a person to begin construction on any 
part of a new animal feeding operation (AFO) under an approval process established by 
MDE that requires the person to demonstrate compliance with specified standards.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.   
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact on some AFOs 
to the extent that construction is able to begin on a new AFO concurrent with the 
development of an updated AFO general discharge permit by MDE, as discussed below.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The approval process established by MDE under the bill must require a 
person to demonstrate compliance with (1) the requirements for coverage under the 
administratively extended AFO general discharge permit and (2) all other applicable laws 
and regulations and required construction permits.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 395/ Page 2 
Current Law:     
 
Federal Clean Water Act  
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency delegates authority 
to issue NPDES permits to MDE. 
 
State Permitting for Wastewater Discharges  
 
In General:  MDE issues discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by 
controlling industrial and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are 
regulated through combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater 
discharges are regulated through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
“Discharge permit” is defined in statute as a permit issued by MDE for the discharge of 
any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the waters of the State. MDE issues both 
individual discharge permits and general discharge permits. An individual permit is 
designed for the specific needs of an individual facility, while a general permit is a generic 
document appropriate for a specific type of activity that has similar environmental impacts. 
 
Applicability:  A person must generally hold an MDE discharge permit before constructing, 
installing, modifying, extending, altering, or operating a system, facility, outlet, or 
establishment if its operation could cause or increase the discharge of pollutants into the 
waters of the State. This permitting requirement applies to (1) an industrial, commercial, 
or recreation facility or disposal system; (2) a State-owned treatment facility; or (3) any 
other outlet or establishment. Further, a person must hold a CAFO discharge permit before 
beginning construction on any part of a new CAFO, and MDE is prohibited from issuing a 
CAFO discharge permit to a person who violates this requirement. 
 
Animal Feeding Operations 
 
An “animal feeding operation” is defined as a feedlot or facility where (1) nonaquatic 
animals are confined, fed, and maintained for at least 45 days in any 12-month period and 
(2) crops, vegetation, forage growth, or postharvest residues are not sustained in the normal 
growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.  
 
AFOs are categorized as small, medium, or large based on the number of animals housed 
or the total housing capacity; a CAFO is an AFO that has certain characteristics (i.e., has a 
certain number of animals and meets other specified criteria). In general, a CAFO is a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 395/ Page 3 
medium or large AFO that discharges or proposes to discharge pollutants into surface 
waters of the State. MDE may designate a small AFO as a CAFO after a site inspection if 
(1) animal waste comes into contact with surface water or (2) animals come into contact 
with surface water and the AFO is not using best management practices designed and 
approved by the soil conservation district to limit animal access to surface water.  
 
MDE regulations generally require a CAFO to obtain permit coverage under a general 
discharge permit issued by the department unless the department notifies the discharger 
that a separate discharge permit is required. The AFO general discharge permit is designed 
to control nutrients from Maryland’s largest agricultural animal operations and serves as 
both a State and federal permit. The terms “CAFO general discharge permit” and “AFO 
general discharge permit” refer to the same permit; MDE only issues one general discharge 
permit for such facilities.  
 
The most recent AFO general discharge permit expired on July 7, 2025, and MDE is in the 
process of establishing a new general discharge permit. MDE anticipates that the new 
general discharge permit will be finalized by August 2026. CAFOs that were previously 
covered under the expired AFO general discharge permit are operating under an 
administrative continuance.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Although overall, the bill is anticipated to have minimal impact 
on AFOs in the State, the bill may offer an opportunity for a new AFO to begin construction 
concurrent with the development of an updated AFO general discharge permit by MDE. 
This might enable a new AFO to be operation-ready sooner than under current law. MDE 
notes, however, that a discharge permit for construction may be needed, and that the 
addition of animals would likely need to wait until the AFO general discharge permit is 
finalized.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 371 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 395/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 13, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4