START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 326 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 326 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Maryland Center for School Safety - Anonymous Reporting System 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) to develop and administer 
an anonymous reporting system that (1) coordinates the receipt of information relating to 
a school or student safety concern in a manner that maintains confidentiality and  
(2) provides a mechanism for any reported information to be forwarded to school or other 
appropriate officials. A custodian of public records under the Maryland Public Information 
Act (PIA) must deny inspection of any information or materials related to the anonymous 
reporting system. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Local school systems already comply with the bill’s requirements. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MCSS must develop operational guidelines and procedures for the 
anonymous reporting system and provide training sessions for school personnel on 
navigating the system. In general, each local school system must participate in the system 
by July 1, 2027; however, a local school system may opt out only if it operates and makes 
available to the public a substantially similar system. A local school system that opts out 
of the system must provide written notice to MCSS by December 1, 2026. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 326/ Page 2 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Center for School Safety 
 
Chapter 372 of 2013 established MCSS as an independent unit within State government 
under the direction of a governing board chaired by the State Superintendent of Schools. 
Five years later, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act made MCSS an independent unit within 
the Maryland State Department of Education and increased the mandated appropriation for 
MCSS’s operations from $500,000 to $2.0 million annually. MCSS’s duties include:   
 
 
assisting local school systems to identify resources and implement training for 
students and parents about relationship violence, identifying the signs of unhealthy 
relationships, and preventing relationship violence; 
 
analyzing data on School Resource Officers (SROs) and developing guidelines for 
local school systems regarding the assignment and training of SROs; 
 
certifying school safety coordinators; 
 
consulting with local school systems on safety evaluations; 
 
reviewing and commenting on school emergency plans; and 
 
reporting on life-threatening incidents that occur on public school grounds. 
 
MCSS operates Safe Schools Maryland, an anonymous and free reporting system available 
to students, teachers, school staff members, parents, and the general public to report any 
school or student safety concerns, including mental health concerns. 
 
Maryland Public Information Act  
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 326/ Page 3 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified.  
 
 
Required Denials 
 
A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a public record if  
(1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law, or (2) the inspection would be 
contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the Maryland Rules, or an order 
of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for specified personal and 
confidential records and information, including, for example, personnel and student 
records, hospital records, specified medical and financial information, and shielded 
criminal and police records. Chapter 62 of 2021 specifies that a record relating to an 
administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police officer is not a protected 
personnel record under PIA and requires a custodian to allow access to such records by 
federal and State prosecutors. Chapters 548 and 549 of 2024 further specify that a record 
of positive community feedback that was not solicited by the police officer who is the 
subject of the feedback is not a protected personnel record under PIA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Center for 
School Safety; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3