START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 342 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 342 
(Delegate Behler) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Forestry Licenses - Applicant Qualifications - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the educational qualifications for an applicant for a forestry license from the 
State Board of Foresters. Under the bill, the applicant must have graduated (on completion 
of a four-year curriculum in forestry) from a college or university that is (1) approved by 
the board and (2) accredited by the Society of American Foresters or an equivalent 
accrediting entity. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Forestry can implement the bill’s licensing qualification 
changes with existing resources. No material effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Foresters licenses and regulates foresters to ensure the 
appropriate use of natural and timber resources, watershed protection, and the preservation 
of ecological systems and wildlife habitats. It has the authority to investigate complaints 
against licensed foresters and deny, suspend, or revoke a license and reprimand a licensee 
for specified offenses. Instead of or in addition to suspending or revoking a license, the 
board may impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for each violation. 
 
Among other requirements, to qualify for a license, an applicant must have graduated on 
completion of a four-year curriculum in forestry from a college or university that is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 342/ Page 2 
approved by the board or accredited by the Society of American Foresters. The applicant 
must also have at least two years of experience in forestry that indicates to the board that 
the applicant is competent to practice forestry. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2