START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 343 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 343 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Economic Matters 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Housing Development Projects - Housing Counseling Services 
 
 
This bill requires a recipient of funding from the Department of Housing and Community 
Development’s (DHCD) Strategic Demolition Fund or the Baltimore Vacants 
Reinvestment Initiative (BVRI) for any project to construct, acquire, or rehabilitate 
residential property for single-family homeownership, to provide information about 
“housing counseling” services to prospective residents before the execution of a contract 
to purchase the property. Such services must be provided by housing counselors certified 
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and employed by an 
“approved housing counseling agency,” as defined. Beginning fiscal 2028 and annually 
thereafter, the Governor must appropriate $90,000 to be used by community development 
organizations to partner with approved housing counseling agencies providing housing 
counseling services under the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $90,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2028 due to the mandated appropriation. DHCD can administer the funding to 
community development organizations with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
90,000 
90,000 
90,000 
90,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($90,000) 
($90,000) 
($90,000) 
($90,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 343/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Housing counseling” means counselor-to-client assistance that addresses 
unique financial circumstances or housing issues and focuses on ways of overcoming 
specific obstacles to achieving a housing goal. 
 
Current Law:  A “community development organization” is a corporation, foundation, or 
other legal entity with the purpose of improving the physical, economic, or social 
environment of the area where it operates and for which no part of its net earnings inures 
to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual holding an interest in that entity. 
 
Baltimore Vacants Reinvestments Initiative  
 
On 
January 
5, 
2016, 
then-Governor 
Hogan 
and 
then-Baltimore 
City  
Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake announced Project CORE (Creating Opportunities for 
Renewal and Enterprise) as a multi-year State-city partnership to demolish thousands of 
vacant buildings in Baltimore City and replace them with green space and economic 
development 
projects. 
DHCD, 
the 
Maryland 
Stadium 
Authority, 
and  
Baltimore City entered into a memorandum of understanding on February 10, 2016. On  
October 1, 2024, Governor Wes Moore, by executive order, redesignated Project CORE as 
BVRI to eliminate blight, revitalize neighborhoods, and maximize the economic potential 
and quality of life for residents in Baltimore City. BRVI is not authorized in statute and 
additional information regarding BVRI can be found on its website.  
 
Strategic Demolition Fund and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
 
Chapter 30 of 2016 established the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
within DHCD. The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund to provide grants and loans to assist 
in predevelopment activities, including interior and exterior demolition, land assembly, 
architecture and engineering, and site development for revitalization projects in designated 
areas of the State. The fund may only be used to provide grants and loans for such activities 
to government agencies and community development organizations in an area designated 
as a sustainable community or a qualified opportunity zone. Historically, the fund supports 
Project CORE, and the fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes $60.0 million in 
general obligation bonds for the fund, of which $50.0 million is designated for BVRI.   
 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development – Housing Counseling 
 
HUD sponsors housing counseling agencies throughout the country to assist individuals 
with, among other things, advice on buying a home. HUD housing counselors must be 
certified by HUD and prove competence in the following six areas:  financial management; 
housing affordability; fair housing; homeownership; avoiding foreclosure; and tenancy 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 343/ Page 3 
issues. Generally, HUD housing counselors charge fees to clients for their services 
(e.g., prospective tenants and homeowners); however, HUD guidelines require  
that any fee be waived if the client cannot afford to pay the fee. HUD also maintains  
a list of department-approved counseling agencies. As of March 2026, there were  
10 HUD-approved housing counseling agencies in the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  No effect in fiscal 2027. General fund expenditures increase by 
$90,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2028 due to the bill’s mandated appropriation. 
Although the bill does not specify to which agency or program the mandated appropriation 
is made, the bill is drafted to the Housing and Community Development Article. Therefore, 
this analysis assumes that DHCD receives the appropriation and must disburse it. DHCD 
can disburse the funding to community development organizations with existing resources. 
 
Additional Comment:  The Department of Legislative Services notes that the bill 
identifies the “Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund” as the “Strategic 
Demolition Fund”  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1302 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Wicomico Counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Budget and Management; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3