START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 381 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 381 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
State Highway Administration - Urban Core and Urban Center Traffic Control 
Devices - No Turn on Red 
 
   
This bill requires the State Highway Administration (SHA), by July 1, 2029, to install a 
traffic control device prohibiting a vehicle from making a right turn while facing a steady 
red signal at each intersection on a State highway in an urban core or urban center, as 
described in the Context Driven guide, at which a traffic control signal is in use. However, 
SHA may choose not to install a traffic control device at a specific intersection if it 
determines that the installation would significantly impair public safety.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by at least $532,600 
in FY 2027 and by $1.2 million in both FY 2028 and 2029 (totaling $2.9 million from 
FY 2027 through 2029) to install the required traffic control devices, as discussed below. 
Future years reflect termination of a contractual employee after FY 2029 and potential 
ongoing maintenance costs. Revenues are not affected.     
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
532,600 
1,204,200 
1,207,700 
‐ 
‐ 
Net Effect 
($532,600) 
($1,204,200) 
($1,207,700) 
(‐) 
(‐)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances, although 
implementation likely necessitates significant coordination with local authorities.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 381/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Highway Administration 
 
SHA is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately 16,800 lane miles of road, 
2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and 80 miles of sound/noise barriers 
in the State. It also has responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, and maintaining 
these roads and bridges to safety and performance standards while considering 
sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. SHA must construct, reconstruct, and 
repair State highways as necessary and maintain them in good condition.  
 
As part of its duties and responsibilities to manage the State’s highways, SHA publishes 
the Context Driven guide for free on its website. The guide includes information on 
common transportation issues, establishes goals for improving those issues, and provides 
detailed information on different road design elements and alternatives that can be used to 
meet those goals. For example, the guide advises that, in urban core areas, having raised 
crosswalks can reduce pedestrian crashes by 46% and restricting vehicles from turning 
right-on-red can reduce injury crashes by 38%.  
 
Right Turns on Red  
 
The driver of any vehicle must obey the instruction of any traffic control device applicable 
to the vehicle and placed in accordance with the Maryland Vehicle Law. When a vehicle 
faces a steady circular red signal from a traffic control signal, the vehicle must stop at the 
near side of the intersection, as specified. However, after making the required stop (and 
unless a sign prohibiting a turn is in place), the vehicle may cautiously enter the intersection 
to make a right turn or a left turn from a one‑way street onto a one‑way street. Nevertheless, 
such a vehicle must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or bicycle lawfully within an 
adjacent crosswalk and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another 
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.  
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase by at least $532,602 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026, effective date, and by $1.2 million in both 
fiscal 2028 and 2029 to install traffic control devices at 133 intersections throughout the 
State. This estimate also reflects the cost of hiring one temporary full-time technician to 
oversee the installation process from fiscal 2027 through 2029; it includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The information and 
assumptions used in calculating the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
SHA incurs $87,500 in fiscal 2027 only to conduct traffic engineering studies at all 
133 intersections to determine the impact of the new traffic control devices on traffic 
in the area and the best location for each device; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 381/ Page 3 
 
the average cost for each installation is $19,729, which includes material and labor; 
and 
 
19 installations take place in fiscal 2027 and 57 installations take place in both 
fiscal 2028 and 2029.  
 
 
FY 27 
FY 28 
FY 29 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
 
 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$61,110 
$76,890 
$80,273 
Traffic Engineering Studies 
87,500 
0 
0 
Installation Costs 
374,851 
1,124,553 
1,124,553 
Other operating Expenses 
     9,141 
      2,805 
      2,832 
Total State Expenditures 
532,602 
1,204,248 
1,207,658 
 
The estimate does not specifically account for any costs SHA may incur beginning in 
fiscal 2030, once all 133 installations have been completed, to maintain and/or repair the 
new traffic control devices. Additionally, costs for installation could be higher to the extent 
additional roadway modifications are necessary in particular locations (e.g., adding new 
crosswalks, widening roadways to accommodate a changing traffic flow, right‐of‐way 
acquisition, etc.).  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Anne Arundel, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3