START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 315 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 315 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Human Relations - Discrimination in Housing - Income-Based Housing Subsidies 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits, except as authorized under federal law, a landlord or 
residential rental property that uses financial information (including credit history) as part 
of a prospective tenant’s rental application from refusing to rent to a prospective tenant 
who pays rent with the assistance of an income-based housing subsidy on the basis of the 
prospective tenant’s income, credit score, lack of credit score, or adverse credit history, as 
specified. The bill establishes such an action as a discriminatory housing practice, subject 
to enforcement by the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR). A landlord that 
receives funding from a governmental entity, a quasi-governmental entity, or a nonprofit 
organization that requires income qualification for tenants in income-restricted rental units 
may collect financial information from a prospective tenant if the collection of such 
information is a condition of the funding. The bill also includes provisions regarding 
(1) authorized verification of sufficient income to pay the portion of rent not covered by an 
income‐based housing subsidy and (2) circumstances under which a refusal to rent to a 
prospective tenant who pays rent with the assistance of such a subsidy is permissible.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MCCR can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. The bill 
does not otherwise materially affect State operations or finances, as it is assumed that the 
bill does not significantly impact the workloads of the Judiciary and the Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH). 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 315/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Income‐based housing subsidy” means recurring monetary assistance to 
a landlord from a governmental entity or nonprofit organization that is intended to defray, 
in whole or in part, a tenant’s rent obligation. This includes low‐income housing assistance 
certificates and vouchers issued under the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
 
The bill’s prohibition regarding the use of adverse credit history is applicable to any such 
history that arose during a period when the prospective tenant did not have an 
income‑based housing subsidy, if the period during which the tenant did not have the 
subsidy is confirmed by (1) the applicant; (2) voucher paperwork; (3) documents provided 
by a public housing authority; or (4) a public housing authority in response to a request by 
the landlord. A landlord may not, however, require that a public housing authority verify 
applicable dates for the subsidy for purposes of assessing the tenant’s credit history.  
 
A landlord or residential rental property may require verification that a tenant has sufficient 
income to pay the portion of rent not covered by the income‑based housing subsidy using 
an income to tenant’s portion of rent ratio that is substantially equivalent to the ratio used 
by the landlord for nonsubsidized tenants. In addition, a landlord or residential rental 
property may refuse to rent to a prospective tenant who pays rent with the assistance of an 
income‑based housing subsidy on the basis of any commercially reasonable and 
nondiscriminatory use of a reference from a previous or current landlord of the tenant or 
the tenant’s history of violating a lease, creating a nuisance, or damaging property. 
 
Current Law:  In general, State law prohibits housing discrimination because of race, sex, 
color, religion, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, source of income, disability, or military status. Discriminatory housing practices 
include (1) the refusal to rent, sell, or otherwise make available a dwelling; 
(2) discrimination with regard to terms or conditions of sale or rentals of dwellings; and 
(3) discrimination with regard to the making or purchasing of loans or providing other 
financial assistance. Prohibited practices also include retaliation, coercion, intimidation, or 
threats because a person exercises the rights and protections granted by State law to prevent 
discrimination. 
 
Chapters 116 and 117 of 2020 established the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of 
a person’s source of income. “Source of income” is any lawful source of money paid 
directly or indirectly to or on behalf of a renter or buyer of housing, including income from 
(1) any lawful profession, occupation, or job; (2) any government or private assistance, 
grant, loan, or rental assistance program, including low-income housing assistance 
certificates and vouchers; (3) any gift, inheritance, pension, annuity, alimony, child 
support, or other consideration or benefit; and (4) any sale or pledge of property or an 
interest in property. Prohibitions against discrimination based on source of income do not:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 315/ Page 3 
 
prohibit a person from determining the ability of a potential buyer or renter to pay a 
purchase price or pay rent by verifying in a commercially reasonable and 
nondiscriminatory manner the source and amount of income or creditworthiness of 
the potential buyer or renter; 
 
prevent a person from refusing to consider income derived from criminal activity; 
or 
 
prohibit a person from determining, in accordance with applicable federal and State 
laws, the ability of a potential buyer to repay a mortgage loan. 
 
A person claiming to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice may file a 
complaint with MCCR. Statutory provisions specify the process and requirements for 
complaints of housing discrimination, including the responsibilities of MCCR in 
investigating a claim and attempting conciliation and the circumstances under which a 
complainant, respondent, or aggrieved person must have an opportunity for an 
administrative hearing conducted by OAH or may elect to file a civil action in circuit court. 
If an administrative law judge (ALJ) finds that the respondent has engaged in a 
discriminatory housing practice, the ALJ may order appropriate relief, including actual 
damages and injunctive or other relief, and may assess a civil penalty against the 
respondent. A court may award actual or punitive damages, grant injunctive relief, and 
allow reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 896 and SB 677 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 335 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3