START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 311 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 311 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools - Individuals With Disabilities - Accessibility and Emergency 
Planning 
 
 
This bill requires each local school system to, as a component of required regular safety 
evaluations of each public school, identify and, if necessary, develop solutions for issues 
of accessibility for individuals with disabilities. Each local school system must, as a 
component of required annual reports to the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS), 
include instances in which a public school facility became inaccessible for a student with 
a disability in a manner that could impede evacuation or an emergency response. An annual 
report to MCSS may be disclosed to a member of the General Assembly upon request, but 
otherwise (1) must be confidential; (2) may not be disclosed; and (3) is not considered a 
public record and must be exempt from inspection under the Maryland Public Information 
Act (PIA). The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MCSS can carry out the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes to safety evaluation and reporting requirements are not 
expected to materially affect local school system finances, as discussed below. No effect 
on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 311/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 30 of 2018, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act, required each local 
school system, by June 15, 2019, and regularly thereafter, to conduct a safety evaluation of 
each public school under its jurisdiction. The evaluations must (1) identify and, if 
necessary, develop solutions for physical safety concerns, including issues with building 
security and (2) identify and evaluate any patterns of safety concerns on school property or 
at school-sponsored events. 
 
In December 2019, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), in consultation 
with disability advocacy groups, updated the Emergency Planning Guidelines for Local 
School Systems and Schools to accommodate, safeguard, and evacuate students, staff, and 
visitors with disabilities on public school grounds in accordance with the federal 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Each local school system must update its 
emergency plan to comply with the update of MSDE’s guidelines and regulations. If a 
student with an individualized education program (IEP) requires specific accommodations 
for evacuation in an emergency, the student’s IEP must include accommodations  
for the student during an emergency. If a student with a 504 plan requires specific 
accommodations for evacuation in an emergency, the student’s 504 team must discuss and 
address the student’s needs, as necessary. 
 
Each local superintendent of schools and the head of the SEED School must annually 
certify to the State Superintendent that required emergency plans are being implemented 
and send a copy of the local school system’s central administration emergency plan to the 
State Superintendent of Schools, if updated from the previous year. 
 
Each local school system must annually submit a report to MCSS that includes, for the 
immediately preceding school year (1) aggregate data about threats made against any 
school or school system facility; (2) information about any school lockdowns, evacuations, 
or other emergency responses that occurred; (3) incidents in which a public school’s 
emergency plan failed in part or in whole to function as anticipated in an emergency or an 
emergency drill; and (4) school hours spent in an emergency or an emergency drill. Each 
local school system must also, in consultation with the center, update each emergency plan 
to correct identified weaknesses. 
 
Building Accessibility Requirements 
 
Public schools in Maryland must meet the ADA Standards for Accessible Design, much of 
which is covered in Chapter Four of the Guide to the ADA Accessibility Standards, as well 
as State regulations to the extent they are more stringent than ADA requirements. 
ADA standards cover, among other things, accessible routes to doors, placement of entry 
controls, door height and width, and door hardware. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 311/ Page 3 
Maryland’s Public Information Act, Generally 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not alter federal or State law regarding accessibility of 
school buildings. Therefore, even though the expanded evaluation and reporting 
requirements under the bill may reveal the extent of any accessibility issues, including 
noncompliance with ADA or State law, this analysis assumes that the bill itself does not 
increase costs related to compliance with current law regarding accessibility of school 
buildings. Local school systems can include the required information in annual reports to 
MCSS with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 694 and SB 851 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 507 (Senator Zucker) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Interagency 
Commission on School Construction; Maryland Center for School Safety; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3