START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 355 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 355 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - Sexual Abuse and Assault Awareness and Prevention Program - 
Human and Sex Trafficking 
 
 
This bill requires that the age-appropriate education program on the awareness and 
prevention of sexual abuse and assault developed and implemented by the State Board of 
Education (SBE) and each nonpublic school include, for students in grades 6 through 8, 
material promoting the awareness and prevention of human and sex trafficking. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can develop 
the required program using existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems can provide instruction on the awareness and 
prevention of human and sex trafficking grades 6 through 8 using existing resources; 
however, resources may be diverted from existing health curriculum requirements. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Health Education Standards 
 
With the assistance of the local health department (LHD), each local board of education 
must provide adequate school health services, instruction in health education, and a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 355/ Page 2 
healthful school environment. MSDE and the Maryland Department of Health must jointly 
develop public standards and guidelines for school health programs and offer assistance to 
the local boards of education and LHDs in their implementation. Each local school system 
must designate a school health services program coordinator, but it may authorize the LHD 
to designate a coordinator. 
 
Each local school system must (1) provide in public schools a comprehensive health 
education program with sufficient frequency and duration to meet the requirements of the 
State curriculum for all students in prekindergarten through grade 8 and (2) offer in public 
schools a comprehensive health education program in grades 9 through 12 that enables 
students to meet graduation requirements and to select health education electives. Access 
to the curriculum must be provided for nondiploma-bound students. 
 
In order to graduate from public high school in Maryland, students must complete a credit 
of health. 
 
State law requires local school systems to teach a number of specified health topics 
including drug addiction and prevention education; awareness and prevention of 
sexual abuse and assault; and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) that includes 
hands-only CPR and the use of an automated external defibrillator. 
 
State regulations require health instruction in the following topics:  mental and emotional 
health; substance abuse prevention; family life and human sexuality; safety and violence 
prevention; healthy eating; and disease prevention and control. 
 
Awareness and Prevention of Sexual Abuse 
 
SBE and each nonpublic school must develop and implement a program of age-appropriate 
education on the awareness and prevention of sexual abuse and assault. The program must 
be taught by a teacher who is trained to provide the instruction on the awareness and 
prevention of sexual assault and incorporated into the health curriculum of each local board 
of education and each nonpublic school. 
 
“Nonpublic school” is specified to mean a noncollegiate educational institution that holds 
a certificate of approval from SBE and participates in the State’s Nonpublic Schools 
Textbook and Technology Grants program. 
 
New Health Education Standards 
 
New health education standards were adopted by SBE in December 2019; the 
Maryland State Framework for Comprehensive Health Education was revised based on 
those standards. The grade 7 standards require students to analyze laws, policies, and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 355/ Page 3 
consequences related to sexual mistreatment, grooming, harassment, abuse, assault, 
exploitation, and human trafficking that are designed to protect young people. The 
indicators for grades 6 and 8 do not explicitly include the words “human and  
sex trafficking”; however, the words sexual mistreatment, grooming, harassment, abuse, 
assault, exploitation, and boundary violations were selected by the committee to represent 
age-appropriate instruction on abuse, assault, and exploitation for those grades. 
 
Additional Comments:  Specified nonpublic school expenditures increase minimally to 
develop and implement a program of age-appropriate education that includes for students 
in grades 6 through 8 materials promoting the awareness and prevention of 
human sex trafficking and to train teachers to deliver the program. A cost estimate cannot 
be reliably determined; however, it is assumed that the costs to develop and implement a 
program that meets the requirements of the bill are minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 763 of 2025 and HB 620 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 254 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3