START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 358 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 358 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Elementary or Secondary School Book Fairs - Exemption 
 
 
This bill extends an exemption from the State sales and use tax to sales made at an  
in-person elementary or secondary school book fair conducted in partnership with a  
third-party vendor. To be eligible for the exemption, the net proceeds must be used for the 
educational benefit of the school or its students. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2027. 
Based on one set of assumptions, State revenues could decrease by approximately 
$150,000 annually. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill exempts, from the State sales and use tax, sales made by an 
elementary or secondary school, nonprofit parent-teacher organization, or other nonprofit 
organization within an elementary or secondary school if the sale is made at a book fair 
held in-person on the premises of the school and the net proceeds are used solely for the 
educational benefit of the school or its students. The tax exemption also includes a sale 
resulting from an agreement or a contract with an organization to participate in a book fair 
for a percentage of the gross receipts under which students, teachers, school staff, or 
members of the parent-teacher organization or other nonprofit organization within an 
elementary or secondary school act as agents or salespersons for the third-party vendor by 
managing the book fair. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 358/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Elementary or secondary schools and nonprofit parent-teacher 
organizations already receive an exemption from the State sales tax in certain 
circumstances as shown in the following table. This exemption includes the sale of 
magazine subscriptions through third party vendors for fundraising purposes at the school. 
 
 
Tax Exempt Status for Certain School Related Sales 
 
 
Magazine Subscriptions 
 
Books 
Purchase by PTA 
Exempt 
TG 11-204(a)(6) 
 
Exempt 
TG 11-204(a)(6) 
Sale Directly by PTA 
Exempt 
TG 11-204(b)(6) 
 
Exempt 
TG 11-204 (b)(6) 
Sale Through Vendor1 
Exempt 
TG 11-204 (b)(5) 
 
Not Exempt 
 
Note:  1For purpose of PTA/School Fundraising; PTA = parent teacher association; TG = Tax-General 
Article 
 
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
According to the December 2025 revenue forecast, the sales and use tax is the State’s 
second largest source of general fund revenue, accounting for approximately $6.1 billion 
in fiscal 2026 and $6.2 billion in fiscal 2027. The current tax rate is 6.0%. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
fiscal 2027. The total revenue decrease depends on the number of school book fairs that 
take place each year and the amount of sales at these events. Information is not currently 
available on the total magnitude of school book fairs in Maryland, since the lead third-party 
vendor for such events (Scholastic Corporation) does not report the breakdown of sales at 
the state level. However, information is available from recent book fairs at two elementary 
schools in Montgomery County. Recent book fairs held at Rachel Carson Elementary 
School in Gaithersburg have averaged $22,400 in sales over the past four events, while 
Bethesda Elementary School had sales totaling approximately $20,000 at one event  
last year. Based on the current 6.0% State sales tax rate, the proposed tax exemption would 
have resulted in a $1,344 revenue loss at the book fair at Rachel Carson Elementary School 
and a $1,200 revenue loss at Bethesda Elementary School. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 358/ Page 3 
Based on one set of assumptions, the potential revenue loss from the proposed sales tax 
exemption could total approximately $150,000 annually statewide. This estimate is based 
on 500 school book fairs taking place each year with average sales of $5,000 at each school. 
 
According to the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), there are 
approximately 1,400 elementary and secondary schools in the State, of which around 1,000 
are elementary and middle schools. This estimate assumes that 50% of public elementary 
and middle schools will conduct a book fair each year. 
 
MSDE also reports that approximately 51.0% of public school students are approved for 
free and reduced-price meals (FRPM) which is one approach to measure the family income 
levels of public school students and their ability to purchase items at a school sponsored 
book fair. The FRPM count as a percent of student enrollment ranges from 27.8% in 
Calvert County to 86.8% in Baltimore City. Three local school systems (Baltimore City, 
Caroline County, and Somerset County) have over 70% of their students approved for 
FRPM. Due to the variations in the family incomes across Maryland, potential book sales 
may be significantly lower in certain public schools. Due to this reason, this estimate 
assumes that the average sales from school book fairs will be lower than the current 
experience in Montgomery County. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 403 (Senator McCray, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3