START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 331 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 331 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund and Litter Reduction Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Fund and Litter 
Reduction Program within the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), 
administered by the Office of Recycling. In general, the purpose of the program is to 
increase the reuse and recycling of, and reduce litter from, beverage containers in the State. 
The bill establishes a framework for a “beverage container stewardship organization” – 
representing “producers” – to develop and implement a beverage container stewardship 
plan. Producers must be registered annually with MDE beginning March 1, 2028. A plan 
must be submitted to MDE for review and approval by March 1, 2028, and must be 
implemented within six months of plan approval. By January 1, 2029, a producer must be 
part of a beverage container stewardship program that has a plan approved by MDE, as 
specified. The bill also establishes a related grant program, provisions for redemption 
facilities and retailers, an advisory council, and enforcement provisions. MDE must adopt 
implementing regulations. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $360,800 in 
FY 2027; general fund revenues increase correspondingly in FY 2028. Special fund 
expenditures increase by $518,600 in FY 2028, $566,300 in FY 2029, $551,200 in  
FY 2030, and $575,200 in FY 2031; special fund revenues increase correspondingly 
beginning in FY 2028. Other effects are described below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0 
$360,800 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$518,600 
$566,300 
$551,200 
$575,200 
GF Expenditure 
$360,800 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$518,600 
$566,300 
$551,200 
$575,200 
Net Effect 
($360,800) 
$360,800 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 331/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government finances may be affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Intent and Performance Targets:  The bill establishes the General Assembly’s intent to 
achieve several specified goals, including reducing the volume of litter and plastic pollution 
from beverage containers in the State by achieving a redemption rate of at least 90% for 
the approximately 5.5 billion single-use beverage containers sold annually in the State. 
Performance targets for the program are as follows:  (1) by December 31, 2028, attainment 
of all convenience standards identified by the department under the bill (described below); 
(2) by December 31, 2030, a 70% redemption rate; (3) by December 31, 2033, a 
90% redemption rate; and (4) by December 31, 2038, at least 10% of all beverage 
containers sold in the State are returned and refilled. 
 
“Beverage container” means a bottle, can, or other container that (1) has been sealed by a 
manufacturer; (2) is made of glass, metal, or plastic; and (3) at the time of sale, contains 
three liters or less of a beverage. “Beverage container” does not include (1) a carton; 
(2) a pouch; or (3) aseptic packaging. 
 
“Beverage container stewardship organization” means a § 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization 
(1) created by producers to implement a beverage container stewardship plan and 
(2) approved by MDE. 
 
Funding:  Funding for the Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Fund and Litter 
Reduction Program includes:   
 
 
fees collected by the beverage container stewardship organization from producers 
(discussed below; retained by the beverage container stewardship organization to 
finance the program); 
 
revenues from the sale of raw materials (retained by the beverage container 
stewardship organization and used to finance the program); 
 
unclaimed deposits, 10% of which are transferred to the Chesapeake Bay Trust 
(CBT) (used to administer and finance the Beverage Container Recycling Refund 
Grant Program), and the remainder of which are used by the beverage container 
stewardship organization to implement the bill; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 331/ Page 3 
 
registration fees paid by producers to MDE, which are deposited in the State 
Recycling Trust Fund and used to fund MDE’s administration of the program; and 
 
penalties collected under the program, which are deposited in the State Recycling 
Trust Fund and used to fund MDE’s administration of the program. 
 
New Labeling Standards, Refund Amount, and Incorporating the Refund Amount into Sales 
Prices:  Beginning January 1, 2029, but not before, each redeemable beverage container 
sold in the State must include a depiction of the following information:  (1) the word 
“Maryland” or the letters “MD”; and (2) a refund value of 10 cents (for redeemable 
beverage containers with a volume of 24 fluid ounces (fl. oz.) or less) or a refund value of 
15 cents (for redeemable beverage containers with a volume of more than 24 fl. oz.). 
 
Beginning January 1, 2034, MDE must increase the refund values by 5 cents if MDE 
determines that the redemption rate was less than 90% of the total number of beverage 
containers sold in the State for two consecutive calendar years. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2029, the wholesale and retail prices of a full redeemable beverage 
container must include the refund value, and a retailer must include the refund value of a 
redeemable beverage container sold by the retailer on the customer’s sales receipt. 
However, the retail price of a full redeemable beverage container sold by an on-premises 
seller may not include the refund value. “On-premises seller” means a person that sells 
filled and unopened redeemable beverage containers for on-premises consumption, 
including bars, hotels, restaurants, sporting venues, entertainment venues, and gaming 
venues. 
 
Redemption Facilities and Retailers:  The program must provide a range of options for 
customers to conveniently redeem empty redeemable beverage containers for the  
full refund value. This range of options includes (1) at a retailer’s place of business through 
direct take-back by the retailer, reverse vending machines, a bag drop program, or other 
redemption methods; (2) dedicated and conveniently located redemption facilities operated 
by retailers, public entities, or the beverage container stewardship organization; and 
(3) placing redeemable beverage container redemption and processing methods, such as 
reverse vending machines, bag drop programs, and account-based bulk processing 
programs, in specified areas. The program must also provide a range of options for  
on-premises sellers to conveniently redeem empty redeemable beverage containers for the 
full-refund value, including (1) an account-based refund issued by the beverage container 
stewardship organization or its agents or (2) an account-based refund issued by the operator 
of a bag drop program. 
 
A person must apply for a license from MDE to operate a redemption facility in the State. 
MDE must develop standards and a licensing process for the establishment and operation 
of redemption facilities. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 331/ Page 4 
A redemption facility must accept all types of empty redeemable beverage containers for 
redemption; however, a retailer or redemption facility may refuse to accept an empty 
redeemable beverage container under certain conditions. 
 
Retailers with at least 3,000 square feet of sales floor space and at least 150 square feet of 
shelf space dedicated to the display of redeemable beverage containers must establish and 
maintain a dedicated area at their place of business to accept any empty redeemable 
beverage containers returned for redemption during business hours. The retailer must pay 
the redeemer the refund value for each empty redeemable beverage container redeemed. 
Retailers may meet these requirements through various specified methods. A retailer within 
an area that meets convenience standards established by MDE may be exempt from the 
requirements under certain conditions. The department is authorized to (1) set standards 
for the number of reverse vending machines required for retailers in underserved 
communities and (2) establish a cap for the number of empty redeemable beverage 
containers that may be redeemed per visit at small retailers. 
 
Retailers with less than 3,000 square feet of sales floor space or less than 150 square feet 
of shelf space dedicated to the display of redeemable beverage containers must (1) provide 
on-site cash refunds for the redemption of empty redeemable beverage containers, of the 
same material and size sold by the retailer, that are not accepted by a reverse vending 
machine and (2) post at the retailer’s entrance the address of the nearest reverse vending 
machine or other redemption method that provides an immediate cash refund. 
 
If a person provides a reverse vending machine for the redemption of empty redeemable 
beverage containers, the person must provide an alternative option for redemption when 
the reverse vending machine is full, broken, or under repair and for the redemption of any 
empty redeemable beverage containers not accepted by the machine. 
 
MDE must establish a process for submitting, reviewing, approving, and monitoring an 
account-based bulk processing program that (1) ensures the program accurately refunds 
deposits and maintains and reports data from each transaction and (2) identifies the 
information that must be submitted to MDE for program approval. 
 
Refunds must be provided (1) in cash; (2) in the form of a receipt from a reverse vending 
machine or account-based redemption system if the receipt can be exchanged for cash, as 
specified, and there is no requirement that other goods be purchased to receive the cash 
refund; or (3) by credit to an account allowing the consumer to receive the refund or a 
refund receipt within a specified number of days. The beverage container stewardship 
organization must reimburse a retailer for the value of valid receipts redeemed by 
consumers. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 331/ Page 5 
MDE must establish a process for a county or municipality to create a redemption facility; 
however, a county or municipality may not be required to host, operate, or provide land, 
facilities, or any other resources for the establishment or operation of any redemption 
facility. Empty redeemable beverage containers redeemed at a local facility must be 
credited toward meeting required recycling rates under the Maryland Recycling Act 
(MRA). 
 
Reimbursements and Handling Fees:  The beverage container stewardship organization or 
its agent must reimburse a redemption facility, retailer, or any other person that accepts 
redeemable beverage containers for redemption for the handling of each container 
redeemed. MDE must set the handling fee, which must be set at an amount that covers the 
costs to collect, sort, process, and transport empty redeemable beverage containers for 
recycling, reuse, or refilling. MDE may increase the handling fee to encourage the 
establishment of more redemption facilities. An on-premises seller that provides empty 
redeemable beverage containers for redemption must also be reimbursed by the beverage 
container stewardship organization or its agent for refunds paid by the on-premises seller 
and handling of each container redeemed. MDE must set a material handling fee, which 
must be set at an amount that covers the costs of temporary storage, preliminary sorting, 
and preparing each redeemable beverage container for collection. The beverage container 
stewardship organization or its agent must provide to an on-premises seller any required 
receptacles or bags or necessary labels. 
 
Redeemed empty redeemable beverage containers must be collected for return to the 
beverage container stewardship organization for sale as scrap material to finance the 
program. 
 
Deposit Initiators and Unclaimed Deposits:  A “deposit initiator” is the first distributor to 
collect a deposit on a beverage container sold in the State. A deposit initiator must deposit 
any deposits collected into a deposit collection account that is maintained separately from 
all other revenues. The funds in the account may only be used to pay the refund value of a 
redeemable beverage container being redeemed. A deposit initiator must report specified 
related information to the beverage container stewardship organization at a frequency 
determined by MDE. 
 
MDE must determine the point at which a deposit becomes an unclaimed deposit, and 
unclaimed deposits are calculated as specified. A deposit initiator must transfer all 
unclaimed deposits to the beverage container stewardship organization at a frequency 
determined by MDE. The beverage container stewardship organization must establish a 
reserve account to manage all unclaimed deposits and, beginning January 1, 2030,  
transfer 10% of all unclaimed deposits to CBT with a frequency determined by MDE. The 
beverage container stewardship organization must use the funds in the reserve account to 
(1) achieve the intent of the General Assembly as stated in the bill and (2) meet or exceed 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 331/ Page 6 
the performance targets established in the bill. The unclaimed deposits transferred to CBT 
may be used only to administer and finance the Beverage Container Recycling Refund 
Grant Program, discussed in further detail below. 
 
Producers, Beverage Container Stewardship Organization, Plan, and Registration:  A 
“producer” is a person responsible for complying with the bill’s requirements and includes 
a franchisor of a franchise located in the State. A producer does not include (1) the State or 
a local government, as specified; (2) a tax-exempt charitable or social welfare organization; 
(3) a franchisee that operates a franchise in the State; (4) a person that annually sells, offers 
for sale, or distributes in the State fewer than 1,000 redeemable beverage containers; or 
(5) a person that annually sells, offers for sale, or distributes in the State redeemable 
beverage containers that, in aggregate, generate less than $5.0 million each year in global 
revenue. The bill establishes specific requirements for a producer that sells, offers for sale, 
or distributes redeemable beverage containers in the State. The bill establishes who is 
responsible under various scenarios depending on who manufactures or distributes the 
redeemable beverage container or has contractually accepted responsibility as the producer. 
 
By March 1 each year, beginning in 2028, the beverage container stewardship organization 
must provide to MDE (1) a list of each producer participating in the beverage container 
stewardship organization and (2) for each producer, a registration form. MDE must create 
a registration form that requires each producer participating in the beverage container 
stewardship organization to provide specified information. A producer must submit a 
completed registration form to the beverage container stewardship organization that 
represents the producer. 
 
On a schedule determined by MDE, each producer must pay a registration fee established 
by the department for producers that sell redeemable beverage containers in the State. The 
fee must be set to an amount that (1) when combined with anticipated penalty revenue, will 
produce funds sufficient to cover MDE’s estimated costs of planning, implementing, 
administering, monitoring, enforcing, and evaluating the program for the upcoming year; 
(2) for the first year of the program during which fees are collected, must cover the  
start-up costs of the program that were incurred by the department and financed from the 
general fund; and (3) is proportional to a producer’s share of the total number of 
redeemable beverage containers sold in the State for the immediately preceding calendar 
year. If fee revenues exceed costs in a given year, MDE must carry the excess revenues 
forward to reduce fees for the following year. If fee revenues do not cover costs in a given 
year, MDE must adjust registration fees for the following year in order to cover MDE’s 
actual costs from the immediately preceding year. 
 
The portion of the registration fees that covers the start-up costs of the program that were 
financed from the general fund during the first year of the program must be deposited into 
the general fund. Otherwise, registration fee revenue collected by MDE must be transferred 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 331/ Page 7 
to the State Recycling Trust Fund and used only to cover MDE’s costs of planning, 
implementing, administering, monitoring, enforcing, and evaluating the program. 
 
By October 1, 2027, MDE must approve, for a period not to exceed 10 years, a  
single beverage container stewardship organization to represent all producers in fulfilling 
the requirements of the program if the beverage container stewardship organization 
demonstrates that it meets specified requirements. If no application to operate a beverage 
container stewardship organization is submitted by producers to MDE by October 1, 2027, 
the department must (1) establish or designate a beverage container stewardship 
organization to implement the program and (2) require all producers, as a condition of 
selling or distributing beverages in the State, to join and fund the designated organization. 
 
MDE may renew the approval of the beverage container stewardship organization if it 
continues to meet the requirements and any other requirement set by MDE. MDE must 
revoke the approval, for failure to meet applicable requirements or failure to implement 
and administer an approved beverage container stewardship plan. In that circumstance, 
specified procedures are followed, and MDE may approve one or more additional beverage 
container stewardship organizations to carry out the responsibility of the revoked beverage 
container stewardship organization. 
 
By March 1, 2028, the beverage container stewardship organization must submit a 
beverage container stewardship plan to MDE. The bill establishes provisions regarding the 
content of such a plan. Among other things, the plan must include specified financing 
information. Among other requirements, the financing information must establish a fee 
structure for producers participating in the beverage container stewardship organization. 
The fee structure, among other things, must be set in a manner that covers the costs of 
administering the beverage container stewardship organization and implementing the 
beverage container stewardship plan. A participating producer must pay the fee established 
under the plan to the beverage container stewardship organization, and the beverage 
container stewardship organization must use the fees for implementing the plan. 
 
MDE must approve, approve with conditions, or deny a beverage container stewardship 
plan that is submitted to MDE for approval within 120 days of receipt. MDE must consider 
specified factors when making a determination regarding a plan and must consult with the 
Redeemable Beverage Container Recycling Refund Advisory Council (discussed below). 
MDE must also submit a plan to an independent financial auditor to ensure that the 
proposed financing in the plan will cover implementation costs. MDE is authorized to 
rescind approval of a plan for good cause or require amendment of an approved plan under 
specified circumstances. The bill allows for plan amendments and resubmission for 
approval under specified conditions. Plan approval expires after five years. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 331/ Page 8 
The beverage container stewardship organization must implement an approved plan within 
six months of receiving plan approval and must meet detailed guidelines and requirements 
when implementing and administering a plan. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2029, a producer may not sell, offer for sale, or distribute in or import 
into the State a redeemable beverage container unless the producer (1) is registered with 
MDE; (2) has paid the registration fee; and (3) is part of the beverage container stewardship 
organization that has been approved by MDE and has a beverage container stewardship 
plan approved by MDE. 
 
The beverage container stewardship organization must submit a copy of its financial 
records to MDE for a financial audit upon request. 
 
Beverage Container Stewardship Organization Annual Reports:  By April 1 each year, 
beginning in 2030, the beverage container stewardship organization that has an approved 
beverage container stewardship plan must submit a report to MDE on the progress made 
in the preceding calendar year toward meeting the performance targets and the goals of the 
program and the beverage container stewardship organization’s beverage container 
stewardship plan. The report must include specified information for the preceding 
calendar year. MDE must provide the advisory council with a copy of each annual report. 
MDE and the advisory council must keep all financial, production, and sales data of 
individual producers confidential, and MDE must post the annual report on its website in 
a manner that protects data confidentiality. 
 
Compensation for Local Governments:  Through December 31, 2031, a portion of revenues 
collected under the Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund and Litter Reduction 
Program must be used to compensate a county or municipality for any net loss of revenue 
to the local government’s waste management system that can be documented and attributed 
to the program. Certain factors must be considered when a county or municipality is 
determining a net loss of revenue: 
 
 
the loss of revenue from the sale of scrap materials; 
 
financial savings from a reduction in (1) glass bottles in the recycling stream; 
(2) transportation costs associated with curbside collection of trash and recycling; 
(3) processing costs associated with recycling beverage containers; (4) the costs of 
landfilling and incinerating beverage containers that are not recycled; and (5) the 
costs of litter collection; and 
 
for a county or municipality that has a total maximum daily load (TMDL) for trash 
in a waterway under its jurisdiction, the reduced costs and increased benefits of 
complying with the TMDL due to a reduction in beverage container litter. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 331/ Page 9 
Material Recovery Facility Payments:  Beginning January 1, 2029, and continuing until 
reimbursement payments under the producer responsibility (for packaging and paper 
products) law – established under Chapter 431 of 2025 (see Current Law) – begin, the 
beverage container stewardship organization must provide payments to a material recovery 
facility to cover the costs of collecting, sorting, processing, and transporting empty 
unredeemed redeemable beverage containers for recycling, reuse, or refilling, provided 
specified standards and reporting requirements are met. MDE establishes the payment 
amount and may adjust it to account for changes in the costs of collecting, sorting, 
processing, and transporting empty unredeemed redeemable beverage containers. 
 
“Material recovery facility” means a facility located in the State that collects, compacts, 
repackages, sorts, or processes source-separated materials for transportation and recycling. 
 
Beverage Container Recycling Refund Grant Program:  The bill establishes the Beverage 
Container Recycling Refund Grant Program, administered by CBT, to provide funding for: 
 
 
an assessment of the investments and policies necessary to ensure that, by  
December 31, 2038, at least 10% of all beverage containers sold in the State are 
returned and refilled; and 
 
projects that (1) increase the reuse and recycling of beverage containers in the State; 
(2) increase the availability of public water fountains and refill stations in the State; 
and (3) reduce the volume of litter from beverage containers in the State. 
 
MDE must adopt implementing regulations in consultation with the advisory council; the 
regulations must establish an application process, criteria for evaluating and awarding 
grants, reporting and evaluation requirements, and any other requirements MDE deems 
necessary. The grant program is funded from a portion of the unclaimed deposits 
transferred to CBT (10% of all unclaimed deposits is transferred to CBT, beginning 
January 1, 2030). Eligible entities include (1) a school or institution of higher education; 
(2) a nonprofit organization; (3) a county or municipality; (4) a for-profit organization; and 
(5) a public-private partnership (P3). CBT must begin awarding grants on January 1, 2030. 
 
Redeemable Beverage Container Recycling Refund Advisory Council:  The bill establishes 
the Redeemable Beverage Container Recycling Refund Advisory Council to (1) advise 
MDE on determining whether to approve a beverage container stewardship plan; (2) make 
recommendations to MDE on the implementation of approved beverage container 
stewardship plans; (3) review and advise MDE on the annual reports; and (4) advise MDE 
on the implementation, administration, and performance of the program. Advisory council 
members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
MDE must provide staff for the advisory council. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 331/ Page 10 
In consultation with the advisory council, MDE must establish convenience standards for 
the coverage and availability of redemption options across the State and ensure the 
standards provide accessibility for differently abled people and people who live in rural 
areas or low-income communities of color. 
 
Miscellaneous Requirements for the Maryland Department of the Environment:  MDE 
must adopt implementing regulations by June 1, 2027. MDE must also establish a system 
for large on-premises sellers to verify the source of the high volumes of redeemable 
beverage containers redeemed by the on-premises seller. 
 
MDE must periodically review available beverage container redemption and processing 
methods to determine whether the types of beverage containers covered under the program 
should be expanded. The department may expand the types of beverage containers covered 
under the program by regulation if, based on its review, it determines there are convenient 
redemption options for those beverage containers. 
 
MDE must also (1) consult with counties and municipalities to assess the impacts of the 
program on local beverage container litter and recycling operations and county  
and municipal budgets and (2) by June 1, 2027, report to the General Assembly its 
recommendations on ways to offset adverse impacts and enhance positive impacts of the 
program on beverage container litter, recycling rates, and county and municipal budgets. 
 
Enforcement Provisions:  Except as specified, current law provisions under 
§§ 9-334 through 9-344 of the Environment Article apply to enforce violations of the bill. 
Under §§ 9-334 through 9-344 of the Environment Article, in addition to being subject to 
an injunctive action, a violator is subject to a maximum penalty of $10,000 to be collected 
in a civil action brought by MDE. Each day a violation occurs is a separate violation. MDE 
may also impose a maximum administrative penalty of $10,000 per violation and 
$100,000 total for a violation. Each day a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
Administrative penalties must be assessed with consideration given to specified factors. 
Criminal (misdemeanor) penalties may also be imposed, with a maximum fine of 
$25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a first offense and a maximum fine of 
$50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years for a subsequent offense. Each day on 
which a violation occurs is a separate violation. Additional criminal penalties apply for 
knowingly making false statements in required documents and for other specified actions. 
The Attorney General is in charge of prosecuting and defending cases that arise on behalf 
of the State. 
 
However, under the bill, a penalty may not be imposed on a producer for failing to properly 
register with MDE, as specified, unless MDE first issues a written notice of the violation 
to the producer and the producer does not register within 90 days after receiving the written 
notice. 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 331/ Page 11 
The bill prohibits a person from (1) disposing of a redeemed redeemable beverage 
container in a landfill or an incinerator or (2) redeeming, attempting to redeem, receiving, 
storing, transporting, distributing, or otherwise facilitating or aiding in the redemption of 
specified materials with an intent to defraud. MDE must establish administrative penalties 
for violations of these prohibitions. The penalty amount must be based on the number of 
beverage containers and refund amounts involved. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2032, if the beverage container stewardship organization has not met 
specified redemption rates for the immediately preceding two years MDE must assess an 
administrative penalty on the beverage container stewardship organization. Each year that 
the beverage container stewardship organization fails to meet the specified redemption 
rates is a separate violation. The bill establishes a formula for the calculation of such an 
administrative penalty. 
 
MDE may alter the administrative penalties described above as necessary to ensure that 
penalty amounts exceed the costs to comply with the bill. 
 
Penalties collected under these provisions must be transferred to the State Recycling  
Trust Fund and used only to cover MDE’s costs of planning, implementing, administering, 
monitoring, enforcing, and evaluating the program. 
 
Immunity:  Any person participating in a beverage container stewardship plan is immune 
from liability under State laws concerning antitrust and restraint of trade for cooperative 
activities associated with the collection, transport, processing, recycling, reuse, and 
management of empty redeemable beverage containers. 
 
New Account within the State Recycling Trust Fund:  Specified fees and penalties collected 
under the bill are transferred to MDE’s State Recycling Trust Fund. The Comptroller must 
establish a separate account within the fund for the deposit of such funds. The separate 
account may only be used to (1) cover the costs to administer, monitor, evaluate, and 
enforce the program; (2) compensate local governments, as specified; and (3) meet or 
exceed the performance targets established under the bill. Funds transferred under the bill 
to the new account do not revert to the general fund. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Solid Waste Management in Maryland 
 
The solid waste infrastructure in Maryland consists of both permitted and nonpermitted 
facilities, and solid waste is managed through a combination of recycling, composting, 
landfilling, incineration, storage, and exporting for disposal or recycling. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 331/ Page 12 
Maryland’s recycling policy is guided by MRA, which sets mandatory recycling rates for 
State government and local jurisdictions, as well as a voluntary statewide waste diversion 
goal of 60% and a voluntary statewide recycling goal of 55% by 2020. Each county 
(including Baltimore City), must recycle at least 20% or 35% of the county’s solid waste 
stream, depending on the county’s population. Each county (including Baltimore City) 
must also prepare a recycling plan that addresses how the jurisdiction will achieve its 
mandatory recycling rate. 
 
The Office of Recycling 
 
MDE’s Office of Recycling, among other things, reviews county recycling plans and 
coordinates the efforts of the State to facilitate the implementation of the recycling goals 
at the county level. Counties are required to periodically report solid waste and recycling 
data to the department. 
 
MDE submits a combined annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly that 
meets two statutory reporting requirements relating to solid waste management and 
recycling/waste diversion in the State. (Maryland Solid Waste Management and Diversion 
Report). 
 
Statewide Recycling Needs Assessment 
 
Chapter 465 of 2023 required the Office of Recycling to hire an independent consultant to 
conduct a statewide recycling needs assessment (completed in February 2025), which was 
required to, among other things, include (1) analysis of the costs and benefits, and potential 
environmental impact, of implementing an extended producer responsibility program for 
packaging materials (including beverage containers) and (2) recommendations on the best 
practices to follow from successful extended producer responsibility programs in other 
states and countries. The Act also established a producer responsibility advisory council to 
provide advice and recommendations regarding establishing and implementing a producer 
responsibility program in the State for packaging materials. 
 
Producer Responsibility for Packaging and Paper Products 
 
Chapter 431 of 2025 (1) establishes a producer responsibility program in statute for 
packaging and paper products; (2) retains the producer responsibility advisory council 
established under Chapter 465 to provide advice and recommendations to MDE, producer 
responsibility organizations, and producers on the implementation of the program; and (3) 
requires that a statewide recycling needs assessment be conducted again in 2034 and at 
least once every 10 years thereafter. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 331/ Page 13 
Chapter 431 requires producers of packaging and paper products to submit, individually or 
as part of a producer responsibility organization (a nonprofit organization created by a 
group of producers) a producer responsibility plan to MDE by July 1, 2028, and every 
five years thereafter, for review and approval. MDE must approve or reject the plan within 
120 days, and implementation of the plan must begin no later than six months after the plan 
is approved. Both the needs assessments and MDE’s administration of the producer 
responsibility program are funded by producers through the producer responsibility 
organization(s). 
 
“Packaging” is defined to included beverage containers; however, “beverage container” is 
defined to not include a prepackaged beverage container that is covered under a beverage 
container deposit return program in the State, and statute explicitly states that the program 
may not be construed to preclude the separate adoption of a beverage container deposit 
return program in the State. 
 
The statutory requirements of a producer responsibility plan under the program generally 
place responsibility on producers of the packaging and paper products to: 
 
 
establish five-year performance goals relevant to the packaging or paper product 
(“covered material”) regarding recycling rates, composting rates, reuse rates, return 
rates, waste reduction, percentage postconsumer recycled content of covered 
materials, and/or greenhouse gas reduction; 
 
meet those goals through various methods, including (1) direct investments or 
reimbursements for improved infrastructure for reuse, composting, and recycling; 
(2) product design improvement; (3) increased convenience of waste reduction, 
reuse, collection, recycling, and composting; and (4) public outreach, education, and 
communication; 
 
reimburse service providers (including local governments) for a portion of the costs 
(at least 50% by July 1, 2028, 75% by July 1, 2029, and 90% by July 1, 2030, and 
thereafter) of collecting, transferring, transporting, sorting, processing, recovering, 
preparing, or otherwise managing covered materials for purposes of waste 
reduction, reuse, recycling, or composting (and public education and outreach 
related to those activities); 
 
establish a system for paying for service provider reimbursement and other actions 
under the plan through fees from producers, without any new or additional 
consumer-facing fee; and 
 
ensure postconsumer materials are delivered to responsible end markets. 
 
In addition to not precluding the separate adoption of a beverage container deposit return 
program in the State, the program may not be construed to: 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 331/ Page 14 
 
prohibit a local government, service provider, or any other entity from selling 
recycled materials or compost to end markets and retaining revenues from those 
sales; 
 
affect the authority of a publicly or privately owned materials recycling facility or 
composting facility to determine which entities may use the facility; or 
 
limit the ability of local governments, materials recycling facilities, or composting 
facilities to make decisions on recycling infrastructure purchases, including 
processing equipment. 
 
State Recycling Trust Fund  
 
The State Recycling Trust Fund is a special fund, administered by MDE, that is used to: 
 
 
carry out the purposes of MDE’s Land Management Administration; 
 
provide grants to (1) counties to develop and implement local recycling plans; 
(2) counties that have addressed methods for the separate collection and recycling 
of covered electronic devices; and (3) municipalities to be used to implement local 
covered electronic device recycling programs; 
 
cover specified costs of the Paint Stewardship Program (established under 
Chapters 587 and 588 of 2024); 
 
cover costs of statewide recycling needs assessments (pursuant to Chapter 431); and 
 
cover costs of producer responsibility plan review, oversight, and enforcement 
(pursuant to Chapter 431). 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State finances are not materially affected in fiscal 2026. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment Administrative Costs and Related Fee and 
Penalty Revenue 
 
“Beverage container stewardship organization” is defined as a nonprofit organization 
created by producers to implement a beverage container stewardship plan and approved by 
MDE. The narrative and figures immediately below are an assessment of the fiscal impact 
on MDE under that scenario (i.e., where MDE approves a beverage container stewardship 
organization created by producers). See further below, however, for a brief discussion of 
how the fiscal impact on MDE differs under the contingency included in the bill where 
MDE needs to establish or designate a beverage container stewardship organization if no 
application to operate a beverage container stewardship organization is submitted by 
producers for MDE’s approval. 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 331/ Page 15 
 
Beverage Container Stewardship Organization Formed by Producers  
 
The bill contemplates that registration fees and penalties will fully fund MDE’s costs to 
implement the bill. MDE begins to incur costs in fiscal 2027, and it is assumed general 
funds are needed to support those costs in fiscal 2027. The bill requires that the producer 
registration fee be set in a manner that, for the first year of the program during which 
registration fees are collected (assumed to be fiscal 2028), covers the start-up costs of the 
program that are incurred by the department and financed from the general fund. While 
general funds may be used to cover costs for the earlier portion of fiscal 2028, because the 
general fund is reimbursed by fee revenues collected in fiscal 2028, it is assumed, for the 
purposes of this analysis, that the general fund is kept whole and that there is no overall 
effect on general fund expenditures in fiscal 2028. Instead, special fund revenues from 
registration fees are assumed to wholly offset MDE’s administrative costs in fiscal 2028. 
This analysis also assumes that general fund revenues increase in fiscal 2028 (mentioned 
below), reflecting reimbursement of the general fund, with registration fees collected in 
fiscal 2028, for the start-up costs of the program in fiscal 2027. 
 
 
 
Administrative Costs 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $360,757 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 
120-day start-up delay. Special fund expenditures increase by $518,638 in fiscal 2028, by 
$566,347 in fiscal 2029, and by at least $551,197 annually thereafter. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring three natural resource planners in fiscal 2027, a 0.5 Assistant Attorney 
General (AAG) position and 0.5 paralegal position in fiscal 2027, and one environmental 
compliance specialist in fiscal 2029. The estimate also includes the cost of a review of the 
beverage container stewardship plan by an independent financial auditor in fiscal 2028. 
 
The three natural resources planners are hired in fiscal 2027, along with the 0.5 AAG and 
0.5 paralegal, to begin implementing the bill by (1) developing regulations, processes, 
training, guidance documents, and generally establishing the framework for the program; 
(2) conducting outreach to regulated entities; (3) evaluating and approving a beverage 
container stewardship organization to represent producers, in early fiscal 2028; 
(4) establishing registration forms and conducting the initial registration of producers (by 
March 1, 2028), and setting a registration fee; (5) establishing and staffing the advisory 
council; and (6) receiving and reviewing the beverage container stewardship plan (received 
by March 1, 2028). The environmental compliance specialist is hired in fiscal 2029 to  
(1) conduct compliance inspections and investigate complaints and (2) generally 
implement and enforce the bill once the beverage container stewardship plan is in place. 
The estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the 
purchase of a vehicle in fiscal 2029), and ongoing operating expenses. The information and 
assumptions used in calculating the estimate are stated below: 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 331/ Page 16 
 
the bill applies to a large number of affected entities, including producers, a 
beverage container stewardship organization, retailers, and on-premises sellers who 
are not already known by MDE, requiring a significant amount of outreach and 
administrative organization; 
 
the breadth of the program and MDE’s responsibilities under it will require ongoing 
dedicated staff, including legal staff to provide advice, help draft regulations, and 
provide enforcement support and defense of MDE actions under the program; and 
 
MDE indicates that it is not able to implement the bill with existing staff and 
fiscal resources. 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Positions (New) 
4.0 
0.0 
1.0 
0.0 
Salaries/Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$315,936 
$405,619 
$508,425 
$532,191 
Vehicle Purchases 
0 
0 
32,000 
0 
Plan Review (by Auditor) 
0 
100,000 
0 
0 
Operating Expenses 
    44,821 
    13,019 
    25,922 
    19,006 
Total MDE Admin. Exps. 
$360,757 
$518,638 
$566,347 
$551,197 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. As noted above, beginning in 
fiscal 2028, it is assumed that all costs incurred by MDE are covered with special funds. 
 
Registration Fee and Penalty Revenue 
 
MDE must set registration fees at a level that, when taken in combination with anticipated 
penalty revenues, (1) will be sufficient to cover MDE’s estimated costs of planning, 
implementing, administering, monitoring, enforcing, and evaluating the program and 
(2) for the first year of the program during which registration fees are collected, cover the 
start-up costs of the program that were incurred by the department and financed from the 
general fund. Thus, it is assumed that, from a combination of registration fees and penalties, 
special fund revenues increase correspondingly to MDE special fund expenditures 
beginning in fiscal 2028. In addition, as discussed above, general fund revenues increase 
in fiscal 2028 in an amount equal to the general fund expenditures in fiscal 2027 ($360,757) 
to reimburse the general fund for the start-up costs of the program in fiscal 2027. 
 
Beverage Container Stewardship Organization Established or Designated by the 
Department 
 
MDE may incur additional costs (in addition to those identified above) if no application to 
operate a beverage container stewardship organization is submitted by October 1, 2027, 
and, pursuant to the bill, MDE must establish or designate a beverage container stewardship 
organization. This analysis assumes, however, pursuant to the definition of “beverage 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 331/ Page 17 
container stewardship organization,” that the beverage container stewardship organization 
will still be a nonprofit organization and it will not fall to MDE to take on the role of the 
beverage stewardship organization and develop and implement a beverage container 
stewardship plan. And, pursuant to the bill, MDE is reimbursed for any additional costs it 
incurs to establish or designate a beverage container stewardship organization through the 
registration fees paid by producers that cover the start-up costs of the program that are 
incurred by the department and financed from the general fund. 
 
Funding and Administration of the Beverage Container Recycling Refund Grant Program 
 
Funding of the Beverage Container Recycling Refund Grant Program does not directly 
affect State finances. The program is funded by 10% of all unclaimed deposits, transferred, 
beginning January 1, 2030, from the beverage container stewardship organization to CBT. 
While CBT is established in State law and receives a portion of its funding through the 
State, its finances are managed by the Board of Trustees of CBT, independent of the State 
budget. 
 
Direct Impacts on Other State Agencies  
 
Any impact on State agency operations and finances related to recycling is largely 
unknown. Higher education institutions may be redemption facilities, retailers, and/or  
on-premises sellers under the bill but are assumed to be compensated for any associated 
costs through handling fees paid by beverage container stewardship organizations to 
redemption facilities, retailers, and on-premises sellers pursuant to the bill. Although the 
overall impact on State agency recycling costs is unknown, for the purposes of this 
fiscal and policy note, it is assumed that any such impact is not significant. 
 
For a discussion of the bill’s potential effects on higher education institutions (as grant 
recipients) and State agencies as consumers of affected products, see the Additional 
Comments section below. 
 
The Maryland Environmental Service (MES), a nonbudgeted State entity, indicates that its 
Environmental Operations group may be meaningfully affected in future years by a 
reduction in revenues, expenditures, and staff to the extent the bill reduces the demand 
from local governments for recycling services. MES currently operates materials recycling 
facilities in Montgomery and Prince George’s counties, as well as the Midshore Regional 
Recycling Program (for residents in Caroline, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot counties). 
 
It should be noted that the enactment of this bill appears to cause the beverage containers 
affected by this bill to no longer be “covered materials” under the producer responsibility 
program for packaging and paper products enacted under Chapter 431, due to the definition 
of “beverage container” under Chapter 431 excluding a “prepackaged beverage container 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 331/ Page 18 
that is covered under a beverage container deposit return program in the State” – effectively 
removing beverage containers and the beverage container producers (with respect to the 
beverage containers) from the producer responsibility program. It appears that any 
evaluation of the bill’s effect on those involved in, or affected by, the solid waste 
management of beverage containers in the State should account for the comparative effect 
of the producer responsibility program for packaging and paper products (on solid waste 
management of beverage containers) that occurs in the absence of this bill. 
 
The producer responsibility program under Chapter 431, which applies to beverage 
containers (in the absence of enactment of this bill) as well as other products, and the 
Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund and Litter Reduction Program established 
by this bill, have similarities in their goals and implementation (both involve placing 
responsibility on producers of beverage containers for funding and improving efforts to 
reduce beverage container waste in the State), but they likely will also have differences in 
the impacts they have on those involved in, or affected by, solid waste management of 
beverage containers in the State. The extent and detail of those differences, however, are 
both (1) beyond the scope of this analysis and (2) presumably difficult to predict before 
knowing the content of the producer responsibility plan and beverage container 
stewardship plan that are approved under the respective programs. 
 
State Highway Administration Litter Removal Costs 
 
While not a direct impact of the bill, State Highway Administration (SHA) litter removal 
costs may decrease to the extent that beverage container redemption under the bill reduces 
the amount of beverage container litter on State highways. Information on an SHA litter 
removal webpage indicates that SHA’s annual spending on both routine litter removal and 
remediation of illegal dumping (disposal of larger, bulkier items) ranged from $8.9 million 
to $18.5 million between 2020 and 2024, with the significant range in costs appearing to 
be due to enhanced cleanup efforts begun by SHA in 2023. SHA indicates that most of the 
work is accomplished through contracts, with contract costs of $13.4 million and 
$13.0 million in fiscal 2024 and 2025, respectively. The extent to which increased beverage 
container recovery and recycling under the bill reduces beverage container litter 
(one component of overall litter) on State highways, and the extent to which that reduction 
affects SHA’s overall litter removal costs (paid for through the Transportation Trust Fund), 
cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
No Material Effect from Criminal Penalties 
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions is not anticipated to materially 
affect State incarceration expenditures. 
 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 331/ Page 19 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Because the bill requires redeemed empty redeemable beverage 
containers to be collected for return to the beverage container stewardship organization for 
sale as scrap material to finance the program, it appears to shift possession of recyclable 
materials, and associated revenues, from a county/municipality to the beverage container 
stewardship organization. The program established by the bill appears designed to 
compensate affected entities (local governments, redemption facilities, retailers, 
on-premises sellers) for costs, or lost revenue, associated with the program through various 
funding sources available to the beverage container stewardship organization (including 
unclaimed deposits not transferred to CBT, fees collected by the organization from 
producers, and the revenues mentioned above from the sale of scrap material). The bill 
provides for that compensation through: 
 
 
the bill’s authorization, through December 31, 2031, for a portion of program 
revenues to be used to compensate a local government for any net loss of revenue 
to the local government’s waste management system that can be documented and 
attributed to the program; 
 
payments – beginning January 1, 2029, and continuing until reimbursement 
payments under the producer responsibility program begin – from the beverage 
container stewardship organization to a material recovery facility to cover the costs 
of collecting, sorting, processing, and transporting empty unredeemed redeemable 
beverage containers for recycling, reuse, or refilling; and 
 
handling fees paid by the beverage container stewardship organization to 
redemption facilities (including those established by local governments), retailers, 
on-premises sellers, or other persons that accept empty redeemable beverage 
containers for redemption (which are set by MDE and may be increased by the 
department if necessary to encourage the establishment of more redemption 
facilities). 
 
There are competing perspectives and information – which this analysis is not able to 
resolve – on the net effect of (1) local governments’ reduced scrap material revenues under 
the bill and (2) local governments’ waste management savings under the bill: 
 
(1) 
The Maryland Association of Counties, MES, and the Northeast Maryland Waste 
Disposal Authority have indicated that the bill reduces revenue from the sale of 
scrap materials from beverage container recycling, which supports the broader costs 
of local governments’ recycling efforts (beyond the processing costs of the beverage 
containers), requiring increased local government spending in order to continue 
recycling of other materials. 
(2) 
But the bill provides for compensation for “any net loss of revenue” to a local 
government’s waste management system, temporarily through 2031, provides 
payments to material recovery facilities for specified beverage container recovery 
costs, and anticipates savings (through its description of “net loss of revenue”) that 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 331/ Page 20 
at least partially offset loss of revenue. The bill is intended to significantly increase 
the percentage of beverage containers recycled in the State and anticipates local 
governments experiencing savings from several potential sources, including 
reduced costs of landfilling and incinerating beverage containers that are not 
recycled and reduced costs of litter collection. 
 
Local governments are also eligible for grant funding under the bill. For a discussion of the 
potential effects on local governments as grant recipients and consumers of affected 
products, see the Additional Comments section below. 
 
As mentioned above under the State Fiscal Effect, the enactment of this bill appears to 
cause the beverage containers affected by the bill to no longer be “covered materials” under 
the producer responsibility program for packaging and paper products enacted under 
Chapter 431, and any evaluation of the bill’s effect on local governments should account 
for the comparative effect of the producer responsibility program for packaging and paper 
products (on solid waste management of beverage containers) that occurs in the absence of 
this bill. 
 
The application of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to materially affect local 
incarceration expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:   
 
Effect on Small Business Producers and Others 
 
The bill likely has a meaningful impact on producers who are small businesses. The bill 
may also affect a range of small businesses, including retailers, on-premises sellers, 
distributors, bottlers, recyclers, and others. 
 
Affected producers incur costs to join the beverage container stewardship organization 
(including fees paid to the organization) and register with MDE. Small business bottlers or 
distributors may incur costs to ensure that redeemable beverage containers are marked in 
accordance with the bill. 
 
Small businesses engaged in the collection or transport of beverage containers for recycling 
may incur a reduction in revenues as a greater number of containers are returned to 
redemption centers rather than recycled through curbside programs. However, some small 
businesses may realize an additional business opportunity to operate as redemption centers. 
 
For a discussion of the potential effects on small businesses as grant recipients and 
consumers of affected products, see the Additional Comments section below. 
 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 331/ Page 21 
As mentioned above under the State Fiscal Effect and Local Fiscal Effect, the enactment 
of this bill appears to cause the beverage containers affected by the bill to no longer be 
“covered materials” under the producer responsibility program for packaging and paper 
products enacted under Chapter 431, and any evaluation of the bill’s effect on small 
businesses should account for the comparative effect of the producer responsibility 
program for packaging and paper products (on solid waste management of beverage 
containers) that occurs in the absence of this bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  Any State agency, local government, or small business that 
purchases beverage containers incurs additional costs to pay the beverage container deposit 
but may return bottles to recoup those costs. 
 
Eligible grant recipients under the Beverage Container Recycling Refund Grant Program 
include schools and institutions of higher education, nonprofit organizations, local 
governments, for-profit organizations, and P3s. Thus, grant revenues for State institutions 
of higher education, local governments, and small businesses may increase beginning in 
fiscal 2030; grant expenditures increase correspondingly for projects that increase the reuse 
and recycling of beverage containers in the State and reduce the volume of single-use 
beverage containers sold in the State and litter from beverage containers in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 346 and HB 232 of 2025; SB 642 and HB 735 of 2024; and HB 1089 
of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 342 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Chesapeake Bay Trust; City of 
Annapolis; Baltimore City Community College; Baltimore City Public Schools; Calvert 
and Prince George’s counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Association of Counties; Montgomery County Public Schools; Maryland Environmental 
Service; Morgan State University; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; Office 
of the Public Defender; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; State’s Attorneys’ Association; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
    
HB 331/ Page 22 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 22