START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 347 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 347 
(Delegate Pruski, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Workers' Compensation - Occupational Disease Presumptions - Hypertension 
 
 
This bill expands a workers’ compensation occupational disease presumption for specified 
public safety employees (generally firefighters) who have hypertension by establishing that 
an employee has demonstrated disablement from the hypertension (which is generally 
required to receive compensation benefits), if certain requirements are met, including 
having been prescribed medication to treat hypertension for at least 90 consecutive days. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase minimally beginning in FY 2027 
due to the bill’s expansion of the State’s occupational disease presumption for 
hypertension, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (Chesapeake) Effect:  Chesapeake 
expenditures may increase minimally beginning in FY 2027 to the extent that the bill 
results in additional workers’ compensation benefits payments on behalf of the State and 
local governments, as discussed below. Revenues increase to the extent that premiums are 
raised due to claims experience under the expanded occupational disease presumptions. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase minimally beginning in 
FY 2027 due to the bill’s expansion of occupational disease presumptions, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 347/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s occupational disease presumption applies only to a paid 
firefighter, paid fire fighting instructor, paid rescue squad member, paid advanced life 
support member, or sworn member of the Office of the State Fire Marshal employed by an 
airport authority, a county, a fire control district, a municipality, or the State. To 
demonstrate disablement and be deemed to have hypertension under the bill’s expanded 
occupational disease presumption, an individual must: 
 
 
have been diagnosed with hypertension by an authorized provider as defined in 
regulations adopted by the Workers’ Compensation Commission; 
 
have been prescribed medication to treat hypertension for at least 90 consecutive 
days; 
 
have completed at least two years of cumulative service within the State in the 
relevant occupation; and 
 
be employed, as specified, at the time of the claim application. 
 
Except as otherwise provided for under a collective bargaining agreement, an individual 
who qualifies for compensation under the bill may not be eligible to receive disability 
retirement benefits on the basis of the same condition. Also, an individual who has heart 
disease or lung disease under existing provisions must file a separate claim application for 
workers’ compensation; the bill does not prohibit an individual from filing a separate 
workers’ compensation claim under current statutory provisions. Additionally, an 
individual who files a claim under the bill may not receive duplicative benefits through a 
separate occupational disease presumption for the same condition. 
 
Current Law:  Workers’ compensation law establishes a presumption of compensable 
occupational disease for certain public safety employees who are exposed to unusual 
hazards in the course of their employment. It is assumed that these injuries or diseases are 
due to the employees’ work and, therefore, require no additional evidence in the filing of a 
claim for workers’ compensation. As shown further below, generally, presumptions are 
based on particular occupations and their associated health risks. 
 
A covered employee who receives a presumption is entitled to workers’ compensation 
benefits in addition to any benefits that the individual is entitled to receive under the 
retirement system in which the individual participated at the time of the claim. However, 
the weekly total of workers’ compensation and retirement benefits may not exceed the 
weekly salary that was paid to the individual; any necessary adjustment is made against the 
workers’ compensation benefits. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 347/ Page 3 
Type of Personnel/Occupation 
Type of Disease 
 
Volunteer and career firefighters, fire fighting 
instructors, rescue squad members, and 
advanced life support unit members; fire 
marshals employed by an airport authority, a 
county, a fire control district, a municipality, 
or the State  
 
Heart disease, hypertension, or lung disease 
that results in partial or total disability or death 
 
Leukemia or prostate, rectal, throat, multiple 
myeloma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, brain, 
bladder, kidney or renal cell, testicular, breast, 
thyroid, colon, or ovarian cancer under 
specified conditions 
 
 
Department of Natural Resources paid law 
enforcement employees, park police officers of 
the Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission, forest rangers, park 
rangers, and wildlife rangers  
 
 
Lyme disease under specified conditions 
 
Although statute is silent on the issue, occupational disease presumptions have long been 
considered rebuttable presumptions. Two court decisions address the use of “is presumed” 
in reference to occupational diseases in current law, specifying that the term “without 
contrary qualification, should be read to be a presumption, although rebuttable, of fact.” 
(See Board of County Commissioners v. Colgan, 274 Md. 193, 334 A.2d 89 (1975); and 
Montgomery County Fire Board v. Fisher, 53 Md. App. 435, 454 A.2d 394, aff’d, 
298 Md. 245, 468 A.2d 625 (1983).) However, the Court of Special Appeals (now the 
Appellate Court of Maryland) has stated that, “after the last injurious exposure to a hazard 
and the conclusion of employment the nexus between an occupational disease and an 
occupation becomes increasingly remote.” (See Montgomery County, Maryland v. Pirrone, 
109 Md. App. 201, 674 A.2d 98 (1996).) 
 
State/Chesapeake/Local Expenditures:  Any increase in expenditures depends on how 
many affected employees qualify for the occupational disease presumption in any given 
year and whether any of those employees would have received workers’ compensation for 
hypertension absent the bill. The Department of Legislative Services advises that a covered 
employee may still receive workers’ compensation for hypertension under current law; the 
presumptions established under the bill ensure no additional evidence is required to qualify 
for benefits. 
 
According to Chesapeake, it experienced 360 filed claims that included hypertension from 
2015 through 2024. During this period, Chesapeake advises that very few hypertension 
claims were denied due to a lack of traditional disablement. When traditional disablement 
did occur for hypertension, it most often meant a very limited disablement period for a 
covered employee to begin a new blood pressure medicine. Moreover, when denials for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 347/ Page 4 
lack of disablement did occur, most claims were simply refiled and accepted when this 
traditional disablement subsequently occurred to start a new medication. As such, 
Chesapeake does not foresee a significant increase in claims filed under the hypertension 
presumption as modified by the bill. 
 
Thus, State, Chesapeake, and local expenditures may increase to the extent that any 
additional claims are filed due to the bill; however, any such increase, if realized, is 
anticipated to be minimal. 
 
Additional Comments:  The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates 
that nearly half (48.1%) of all Americans have hypertension, only 22.5% of those adults 
with hypertension have it under control, and 45% of those with uncontrolled high blood 
pressure (roughly 37 million adults) have a blood pressure of 140/90 millimeters of 
mercury or higher. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 173 and HB 217 of 2025, SB 844 and HB 1145 of 2024, and SB 538 
and HB 919 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 90 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Charles, and Dorchester counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Subsequent 
Injury Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4