START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 351 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 351 
(Delegates Moon and Martinez) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Federal Agents - Digital Unmasking 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Office of the Attorney General or a State’s Attorney, on receipt of 
a complaint of “federal agent misconduct,” to direct the Department of State Police (DSP) 
to gather and securely retain as much “identifying digital data” as possible about the 
“federal agent” or federal agents who are the subject of the misconduct complaint. A 
complainant may obtain access to the identifying digital data relevant to the complainant’s 
complaint only pursuant to a court order issued in a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 civil rights case or a 
criminal proceeding involving the subject of the federal agent misconduct complaint. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The extent to which the bill may affect State finances cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time. However, the bill has a significant impact on the operations of DSP 
as law enforcement is generally restricted from accessing much of the identifying digital 
data described in the bill, and those restrictions are not altered by the bill. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Federal agent” means a federal law enforcement officer or a private 
contractor hired by the Department of Homeland Security to assist in federal law 
enforcement. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 351/ Page 2 
“Federal agent misconduct” means: 
 
 
use of excessive force by a federal agent against a member of the public; 
 
assault of a member of the public by a federal agent; 
 
kidnapping or unlawful detention of a member of the public by a federal agent; or 
 
engaging in actions by a federal agent that lead to a credible complaint of a civil 
rights violation under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. 
 
“Identifying digital data” means digital information that can help confirm the identity of a 
federal agent who is the subject of a complaint of federal agent misconduct, including: 
 
 
license plate data; 
 
cell tower data; 
 
cell phone data; 
 
location data; 
 
image search results data; 
 
GPS data; 
 
StingRay data; 
 
facial recognition data; and 
 
any other recoverable data that may help identify federal agents. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Electronic Device Location Data:  A court may issue an order authorizing or directing a 
law enforcement officer to use a cell site simulator or obtain location information from an 
electronic device after determining from an application that there is probable cause to 
believe that (1) a misdemeanor or felony has been, is being, or will be committed by the 
owner or user of the electronic device or by the individual about whom location 
information is being sought and (2) the information sought by the cell site simulator or the 
location information being sought is evidence of, or will lead to evidence of, the 
misdemeanor or felony being investigated or will lead to the apprehension of an individual 
for whom an arrest warrant has been previously issued. An application from law 
enforcement for a court order must be (1) in writing; (2) signed and sworn by the applicant; 
and (3) accompanied by an affidavit that sets forth the basis of the probable cause and 
contains facts within the personal knowledge of the affiant. A law enforcement officer may 
use a cell site simulator or obtain location information for a period not to exceed 48 hours 
in exigent circumstances or with the express consent of the user or owner of the electronic 
device. “Cell site simulator” means a device that mimics a cell tower and captures 
identifying information of electronic devices in the range of the device. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 351/ Page 3 
Facial Recognition Technology:  Generally, a police officer or other employee or agent of 
a law enforcement agency, in the furtherance of a criminal investigation, may only use 
facial recognition technology (FRT) in limited circumstances, including to investigate 
specified crimes of violence, specified human trafficking offenses, specified child abuse 
offenses, a specified child pornography offense, specified hate crime offenses, specified 
weapon crimes, specified animal cruelty offenses, specified drug offenses, a specified 
stalking offense, a criminal act that presents a substantial and ongoing threat to public 
safety or national security, or a crime under the laws of another state substantially 
equivalent to one of the crimes listed that involves a fugitive from justice charged with a 
crime in that state and sought for extradition under Title 9 of the Criminal Procedure 
Article. These provisions may not be construed to restrict the use of FRT for the purpose 
of (1) identifying a missing, deceased, or incapacitated person; (2) redacting the image of 
an individual from an image or video for release to protect the individual’s privacy; 
(3) forensic analysis of electronic media seized by law enforcement if the person identified 
in the seized media is not the subject of the criminal charges resulting from the analysis; 
(4) enhancing security systems to prevent unauthorized access to information, goods, 
materials, areas, or other properties under the custody or care of a law enforcement agency; 
or (5) conducting other legitimate activity unrelated to a criminal investigation. 
 
License Plate Data:  A law enforcement agency may not use “captured plate data” unless 
the agency has a “legitimate law enforcement purpose.” An employee of a law enforcement 
agency who violates this prohibition is subject to a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 
one year and/or a fine of $10,000. “Legitimate law enforcement purpose” means the 
investigation, detection, or analysis of a crime or a violation of the Maryland vehicle laws 
or the operation of terrorist or missing or endangered person searches or alerts. “Captured 
plate data” means the GPS coordinates, dates and times, photographs, license plate 
numbers, and any other data collected by or derived from an automatic license plate reader 
system. “Captured plate data” includes active data and historical data. 
 
Lawsuits Under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Federal Qualified Immunity:  42 U.S.C. § 1983 is a 
federal law that allows individuals to sue state or local government officials acting under 
color of law for constitutional rights violations. Plaintiffs can seek damages, injunctive 
relief, declaratory relief and attorney’s fees. Section 1983 lawsuits are against a person 
(e.g., the government employee). States and the federal government cannot be named as 
defendants in these lawsuits; however, local government units and municipalities can be 
named as defendants.  
 
In general, judges, prosecutors, and legislators performing their legitimate functions are 
examples of individuals who have absolute immunity from § 1983 lawsuits. Qualified 
immunity, which dates back to 1871 when Congress adopted 42 U.S.C. § 1983, is a legal 
doctrine created by the U.S. Supreme Court under which a government official is shielded 
from civil liability if the official’s actions do not violate “clearly established statutory or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 351/ Page 4 
constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known.” Harlow v. 
Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982). 
 
Police Accountability and Discipline:  Chapter 59 of 2021 established a statewide 
accountability and discipline process for police officers with procedural requirements for 
handling complaints of police misconduct that could lead to disciplinary action. The 
process includes requirements for the use of police accountability boards, administrative 
charging committees, and trial boards, as well as the authorization for a police officer who 
is the subject of a complaint of police misconduct to have the assistance of a representative. 
It extends to police officers of specified State and local agencies but does not extend to 
federal law enforcement agents. For more information on the statewide accountability and 
discipline process, see the Appendix – Police Accountability and Discipline Process. 
 
Additional Comments:  DSP advises that it cannot quantify or verify the number of 
federal officers or contract workers working in Maryland at any given time nor the number 
of complaints made against these officers. DSP follows all laws for obtaining information 
in criminal investigations. As described above, access to cell tower data, cell phone data, 
location data, and GPS data require a search warrant issued by a court, and that requirement 
is not altered by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery and Worcester counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 351/ Page 5 
Appendix – Police Accountability and Discipline Process 
 
 
Establishment of Accountability and Discipline Process for Police Officers 
 
Chapter 59 of 2021 repealed the Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights and established 
a statewide accountability and discipline process for police officers with procedural 
requirements for handling complaints of police misconduct that could lead to disciplinary 
action. The process includes requirements for the use of police accountability boards, 
administrative charging committees, and trial boards, as well as the authorization for a 
police officer who is the subject of a complaint of police misconduct to have the assistance 
of a representative. It extends to police officers of specified State and local agencies. More 
detail on the process is discussed below. 
 
A law enforcement agency may not negate or alter any of the requirements relating to  
Title 3, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article (which addresses police accountability and 
discipline) through collective bargaining, and collective bargaining may not be used to 
establish or alter any aspect of the process for disciplining a police officer. 
 
Police Accountability Boards:  Each county must have a police accountability board to: 
 
 
hold quarterly meetings with heads of law enforcement agencies and otherwise work 
with law enforcement agencies and the county government to improve matters of 
policing; 
 
appoint civilian members to charging committees and trial boards; 
 
receive complaints of police misconduct filed by members of the public; 
 
on a quarterly basis, review outcomes of disciplinary matters considered by 
charging committees; and 
 
by December 31 each year, submit a report to the governing body of the county that 
identifies any trends in the disciplinary process of police officers in the county and 
makes recommendations on changes to policy that would improve police 
accountability in the county. 
 
In addition, the local governing body must (1) establish the membership of and the budget 
and staff for a police accountability board; (2) appoint a chair for a police accountability 
board, as specified; and (3) establish the procedures for recordkeeping by a police 
accountability board. An active police officer may not be a member, and to the extent 
practicable, the membership must reflect the racial, gender, and cultural diversity of the 
county. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 351/ Page 6 
Administrative Charging Committees:  Each county must have one administrative charging 
committee to serve countywide law enforcement agencies and local law enforcement 
agencies in the county, and there must be at least one statewide administrative charging 
committee to serve statewide and bi-county law enforcement agencies. An administrative 
charging committee must (1) review the findings of a law enforcement agency’s 
investigation conducted and forwarded, as specified; (2) make a determination as to 
whether or not to administratively charge the police officer who is the subject of the 
investigation; (3) if the police officer is charged, recommend discipline in accordance with 
the law enforcement agency’s disciplinary matrix, as specified; (4) review any body camera 
footage that may be relevant to the matters covered in the complaint of misconduct; 
(5) authorize a police officer called to appear before an administrative charging committee 
to be accompanied by a representative; (6) issue a written opinion that describes in detail 
its findings, determinations, and recommendations; and (7) forward the written opinion to 
the chief of the law enforcement agency, the police officer, and the complainant. An 
administrative charging committee may request specified information and make specified 
determinations. 
 
Chapter 59 also established requirements regarding the composition of a county and 
statewide administrative charging committee. An individual must receive training on 
matters relating to police procedures from the Maryland Police Training and Standards 
Commission (MPTSC) before serving as a member of an administrative charging 
committee. 
 
Investigation of Complaints:  An individual may file a complaint of police misconduct with 
a police accountability board or the law enforcement agency that employs the police officer 
who is the subject of the complaint. A complaint of police misconduct filed with a police 
accountability board or the law enforcement agency must include specified information but 
need not be notarized. If filed with a police accountability board, the complaint must be 
forwarded to the appropriate law enforcement agency within three days of receipt, and each 
such complaint by a member of the public must be immediately reviewed by the 
investigating unit of the law enforcement agency. 
 
On completion of an investigation, regardless of whether the complaint originated from 
within the law enforcement agency or from an external source, the law enforcement agency 
must forward the investigatory files for the complaint to the appropriate administrative 
charging committee. For an incident involving a member of the public and a police officer, 
the process of review and investigation by the investigating unit through disposition by the 
administrative charging committee must be completed within 395 days after the filing of a 
complaint by a member of the public. 
 
A law enforcement agency must file any administrative charges arising out of an 
investigation of alleged police officer misconduct that is not required to be reviewed by an 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 351/ Page 7 
administrative charging committee within one year and one day after the date that the 
appropriate official employed by the law enforcement agency, as determined by written 
policy of the law enforcement agency, became aware of the incident that led to the 
investigation. However, if alleged police officer misconduct is the subject of a criminal 
investigation, an administrative charging committee or law enforcement agency must file 
any administrative charges within one year and one day after the date of (1) the 
investigating law enforcement agency’s timely determination that the matter is not related 
to criminal activity; (2) the disposition of all criminal charges filed against the police 
officer; or (3) the administrative charging committee’s or law enforcement agency’s receipt 
of timely notice that the appropriate prosecutorial authority declined to file criminal 
charges. 
 
Disciplinary Matrix:  MPTSC must develop and adopt, by regulation, a model uniform 
disciplinary matrix for use by each law enforcement agency in the State, and each law 
enforcement agency must adopt the matrix for all matters that may result in discipline of a 
police officer. 
 
Within 15 days after an administrative charging committee issues an administrative charge 
against a police officer, the chief of the law enforcement agency must offer discipline to 
the police officer who has been administratively charged in accordance with the 
disciplinary matrix. The chief may offer the same discipline that was recommended by the 
administrative charging committee or a higher degree of discipline within the applicable 
range of the disciplinary matrix but may not deviate below the discipline recommended by 
the administrative charging committee. If the police officer accepts the chief’s offer of 
discipline, the offered discipline must be imposed. However, if the police officer does not 
accept the chief’s offer of discipline, the matter must be referred to a trial board. At least 
30 days before a trial board proceeding begins, the police officer must be provided a copy 
of the investigatory record and notified of the charges against the police officer and the 
recommended disciplinary action. 
 
Trial Board Process:  Each law enforcement agency must establish a trial board process to 
adjudicate matters for which a police officer is subject to discipline; however, a small law 
enforcement agency may use the trial board process of another law enforcement agency by 
mutual agreement. Chapter 59 also established requirements regarding the composition of 
a trial board and requires an individual, before serving as a member of a trial board, to 
receive training on matters relating to police procedures from MPTSC. 
 
With specified exceptions, proceedings of a trial board must be open to the public. A trial 
board may administer oaths and issue subpoenas as necessary to complete its work. A 
complainant has the right to be notified of a trial board hearing and, with specified 
exceptions, the right to attend a trial board hearing. A police officer may be disciplined 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 351/ Page 8 
only for cause; with specified exceptions, a law enforcement agency has the burden of 
proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 
 
Within 45 days after the final hearing by a trial board, the trial board must issue a written 
decision reflecting the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of a majority of the 
trial board. Within 30 days after the date of issuance of a decision of a trial board, the 
decision may be appealed by the police officer, as specified. An appeal taken from a trial 
board decision must be on the record, and a trial board decision that is not appealed is final. 
 
Suspensions and Terminations:  Pending an investigatory, administrative charging 
committee, and trial board process, the chief may impose an emergency suspension with 
pay or, for at most 30 days, without pay if the chief determines that such a suspension is in 
the best interest of the public. If an administrative charging committee determines not to 
administratively charge a police officer in connection with the matter on which a 
suspension without pay is based, the police officer is entitled to receive back pay. 
 
A chief or a chief’s designee may suspend a police officer without pay and suspend the 
police officer’s police powers on an emergency basis if the police officer is charged with 
specified crimes. A police officer who was suspended without pay is entitled to receive 
back pay if the criminal charge or charges against the police officer result in a finding of 
not guilty, an acquittal, a dismissal, or a nolle prosequi. 
 
The chief must terminate the employment of a police officer who is convicted of a felony 
and may terminate the employment of a police officer who (1) receives a probation before 
judgment for a felony or (2) is convicted of a misdemeanor committed in the performance 
of duties as a police officer, misdemeanor second-degree assault, or a misdemeanor 
involving dishonesty, fraud, theft, or misrepresentation. 
 
In connection with a disciplinary matter, a police officer may be required to submit to blood 
alcohol tests; blood, breath, or urine tests for controlled dangerous substances; polygraph 
examinations; or interrogations that specifically relate to the subject matter of the 
investigation. If a police officer is required to submit to a test, examination, or interrogation 
and the police officer refuses to do so, the law enforcement agency may commence an 
action that may lead to a punitive measure as a result of the refusal. However, if a police 
officer is required to submit to a test, examination, interrogation, or polygraph examination, 
the results are not admissible or discoverable in a criminal proceeding against the police 
officer and the results of the polygraph examination are also not admissible or discoverable 
in a civil proceeding against the police officer. 
 
Victims’ Rights Advocates:  A law enforcement agency must designate an employee as a 
victims’ rights advocate, with specified duties, to act as the contact for the public within 
the agency on matters related to police misconduct. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 351/ Page 9 
Database to Track Complaints:  Each law enforcement agency must create a database that 
enables a complainant to enter the complainant’s case number to follow the status of the 
case, as specified. 
 
Police Officer Rights:  Both a police officer who is the subject of a complaint of police 
misconduct and a complainant may have the assistance of a representative in connection 
with disciplinary proceedings. 
 
A police officer may not be discharged, disciplined, demoted, or denied promotion, 
transfer, or reassignment, or otherwise discriminated against or threatened in regard to the 
police officer’s employment because the police officer (1) disclosed information that 
evidences mismanagement, a waste of government resources, a danger to public health or 
safety, or a violation of law or policy committed by another police officer or (2) lawfully 
exercised constitutional rights. A police officer may not be denied the right to bring suit 
arising out of the police officer’s official duties and has the same rights to engage in 
political activity as a State employee, except when on duty or acting in an official capacity. 
A law enforcement agency may not prohibit secondary employment by a police officer but 
may adopt reasonable regulations that relate to secondary employment by a police officer. 
 
Expungement and Destruction of Records:  A record relating to an administrative or 
criminal investigation of misconduct by a police officer, including an internal affairs 
investigatory record, a hearing record, and records relating to a disciplinary decision, may 
not be expunged or destroyed by a law enforcement agency. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9