START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 363 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 363 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Local Government - Grant for Recipients of State Child Tax Credit - 
Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes a county to provide by law for a grant modeled on the State child tax 
credit. Specifically, a county may provide for a grant for each qualified child (within the 
meaning of the State child tax credit) of a taxpayer whose federal adjusted gross income 
(AGI) is less than $15,000, if the taxpayer and each qualified child are residents (other than 
fiduciaries) who are domiciled in or maintain a principal residence or place of abode in the 
county on the last day of the tax year. A county may provide for the amount of the grant, 
which must be reduced by 10% for each $1,000 (or fraction thereof) by which the 
taxpayer’s federal adjusted gross income exceeds $15,000. A county that provides a grant 
under the bill must reimburse the Comptroller for reasonable expenses incurred to provide 
the county information necessary to implement the grant. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures may increase, likely minimally, 
beginning as early as FY 2027 to the extent the Comptroller incurs and receives 
reimbursement for administrative expenses.  
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase beginning as early as FY 2027 to the extent 
counties enact local child grant programs as authorized under the bill, as discussed below. 
Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 363/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Certain low-income taxpayers with one or more qualified children may 
claim a refundable State income tax credit of up to $500 per qualified child. A qualified 
child is a dependent of the taxpayer who is (1) younger than age 6 or (2) younger than age 
17 and is a child with a disability (as defined). Eligibility was previously limited to 
taxpayers with federal AGI of up to $15,000. The Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act of 2025 modified the credit to gradually phase out the benefit for taxpayers with federal 
AGI in excess of $15,000; thus, for tax year 2025 and beyond, taxpayers with federal AGI 
in excess of $15,000 may claim the credit for each qualified child at a reduced amount 
($500 reduced by $50 for each $1,000 or fraction thereof by which federal AGI exceeds 
$15,000). The credit fully phases out for taxpayers with federal AGI in excess of $24,000. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office 
may increase, likely minimally, beginning as early as fiscal 2027 to the extent the 
Comptroller incurs and receives reimbursement for expenses to provide counties with 
information necessary to implement local child grant programs. The Comptroller’s Office 
advises that the information sharing contemplated under the bill necessitates the hiring of 
one to two contractual attorneys for a period of six months to draft memoranda of 
understanding with counties that enact such programs, with estimated related costs ranging 
from about $90,000 to $180,000 in fiscal 2027 (assuming a four-month start-up delay from 
the bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date). However, the Department of Legislative Services 
notes that it is unknown whether and how many counties will enact local child grant 
programs under the bill and when any such programs will take effect.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures may increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027 
to the extent counties enact local child grant programs as authorized under the bill. Any 
such effect depends on the policy decisions of local governments and cannot be reliably 
predicted.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 468 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, 
Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 363/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3