START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 312 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 312 
(Delegate Simpson) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Redeposit of Accumulated 
Contributions - Alterations 
 
   
This bill allows a member of the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) who 
was previously a member of the Employees’ Pension System (EPS) or the Teachers’ 
Pension System (TPS) and withdrew their contributions to redeposit their withdrawn 
accumulated contributions, plus interest, to receive CORS service credit equivalent to the 
service credit that was previously forfeited when the member withdrew their contributions. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities increase, potentially significantly, but a reliable 
estimate is not feasible without data on past membership for eligible members, as discussed 
below. State pension contributions similarly increase by an indeterminate but potentially 
significant amount. Any costs are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 20% special 
funds, and 20% federal funds. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent that eligible members of the CORS municipal pool deposit 
their member contributions into CORS for service credit, liabilities for the municipal pool 
increase. However, a reliable estimate is not feasible without data on eligible members, as 
discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 312/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Members of CORS who previously terminated membership and withdrew 
accumulated contributions from CORS, the Employees’ Retirement System (ERS), or the 
Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS) may redeposit in a single payment the withdrawn 
accumulated contributions plus regular interest to receive CORS service credit for the 
period of employment during the former membership. 
 
Membership in a State Retirement and Pension System plan terminates when a member 
(1) has been separated from employment for more than four years (or five years, for 
TRS members); (2) becomes a retiree; (3) withdraws accumulated contribution; or (4) dies. 
Termination for ERS and TRS members also occurs if they transfer to EPS or TPS, and 
termination occurs for EPS and TPS members when they are separated from employment 
and rehired into a position that requires enrollment in a part of the EPS or TPS that is 
subject to a different rate of member contributions and benefit accrual. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the employee contribution rate under each applicable retirement system. 
As the exhibit shows, ERS and TRS offered members two plans that differed based on cost 
of living adjustments (COLAs) for benefits. Members who chose selection A contributed 
7% of their salary towards ERS or TRS and received COLAs that were not subject to rate 
caps, while members that chose selection B contributed 5% of their salary and received 
COLAs that were capped at 5%. Eligibility for ERS and TRS was limited to individuals 
hired on or before December 31, 1979. 
 
Prior to July 1, 1998, EPS and TPS were noncontributory for most members. 
Chapter 110 of 2006 phased in an employee contribution rate for the two systems, from 
2% in fiscal 2006 to 5% in fiscal 2009. Chapter 937 of 2011 made additional changes, 
raising the member contribution rate to 7.0%. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 312/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Pension Plan Contribution Rate 
ERS/TRS 
EPS/TPS 
CORS 
For Hires Before  
January 1, 1980 
Hired Before  
July 1, 2011 
Hired After 
June 30, 2011 
Employee 
Contribution 
Selection A:  7.0% 
Selection B:  5.0% 
None prior to 1998 
2.0% (1998-2006)  
3.0% in 2007  
4.0% in 2008  
5.0% (2009-2011) 
7.0% 
5.0% 
Source: Maryland Annotated Code; State Personnel and Pensions Article 
 
 
Purchase of Service Credit 
 
A member of CORS may purchase service credit for periods of employment during which 
the member (1) would have been entitled to purchase service credit under ERS and (2) is 
not otherwise entitled to service credit under CORS. To purchase service credit under this 
circumstance, the member must pay in a single payment the member contributions (for 
CORS) that would have been made for the period of employment for which service credit 
is being purchased, plus regular interest. A member may pay for such service credit at any 
time before retirement. 
 
A member of CORS may also purchase service credit for periods of employment for which 
the member is not otherwise entitled to service credit, including for up to 10 years for 
public or nonpublic school teaching service in the State. To purchase service under these 
circumstances, the member must pay the employer and member contributions required to 
fund the additional allowance. These purchases must be made in a single payment at the 
time of retirement. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Changes in Unfunded Pension Liabilities from Accumulated Employee Contributions 
 
The fiscal impact of the bill is determined in part by comparing the actual employee 
contributions and interest withdrawn from EPS or TPS and required to be redeposited under 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 312/ Page 4 
the bill with the amount the member would have contributed, with interest, had the member 
earned the same service entirely under CORS. Because EPS and TPS contribution rates 
were lower than the CORS rate from 1998 to 2009, but higher than the CORS rate after 
2011 (as shown in Exhibit 1), the bill could either increase or decrease State pension 
liabilities depending on when a member’s prior service was earned. To the extent that a 
member’s EPS or TPS service corresponds primarily to years in which contribution rates 
were below the CORS rate, the member likely withdrew, and thus must redeposit, an 
amount that is less than the CORS-equivalent amount while still being eligible to receive 
the full service credit. Consequently, the State must make up the difference, thereby 
increasing unfunded pension liabilities. Conversely, to the extent a member’s service 
corresponds primarily to years in which the EPS or TPS contribution rates exceed the 
CORS rate, the member likely withdrew and, under the bill, must redeposit an amount more 
than the CORS-equivalent amount for the same service credit. The bill does not provide 
any offsetting credit or refund to a member whose redeposit exceeds the amount that would 
have been required under CORS, meaning that such a member would pay more for the 
same service credit, and unfunded pension liabilities decrease as a result. 
 
The State Retirement Agency (SRA) advises that relevant service and salary data for 
affected CORS members is not available because the system does not retain membership 
and service credit data for withdrawn members. As a result, a reliable estimate of the bill’s 
net effect is not feasible. However, SRA is able to confirm that 253 active CORS members 
have withdrawn their EPS or TPS member contributions and would be eligible to redeposit 
those accumulated contributions plus interest into CORS for service credit under the bill. 
Of those 253 members, 89 members would be able to redeposit member contributions less 
than the CORS-equivalent amount for service credit, 31 members would be able to 
redeposit member contributions equal to the CORS-equivalent amount for the same service 
credit, and 133 members would have to deposit more than the CORS-equivalent amount 
for the same service credit. Without knowing how many years of credit each member would 
claim, a reliable estimate of the net effect cannot be made. 
 
In addition to the individual membership data needed to estimate the net effect on unfunded 
pension liabilities, any estimate of the net effect also requires knowing how many members 
from each group would take advantage of the opportunity to “buy back” their service credit, 
which cannot be known in advance.  
 
For the system’s actuarial valuation, CORS and EPS/ERS are valued together, totaling 
approximately 61,000 members. As the bill potentially affects only up to 253 members, it 
is likely that the overall effect of some or all of them redepositing withdrawn contributions 
to CORS is minimal and has no discernible effect on employer contribution rates for the 
State.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 312/ Page 5 
Changes in Unfunded Pension Liabilities from Accumulated Employer Contributions 
 
A more significant effect of the bill on unfunded pension liabilities relates to employer 
contributions the State previously made on behalf of EPS or TPS members. When an 
individual leaves State employment and terminates membership in a pension system by 
withdrawing their accumulated member contributions plus interest, the employer 
contributions previously made by the State on that individual’s behalf remain in the pension 
system. As a result, unfunded liabilities decrease because the system retains assets that 
were contributed to fund benefits that are no longer needed to pay benefits to the withdrawn 
member. Actuarial valuations incorporate assumptions about member withdrawals and 
terminations, but valuations may still be updated to reflect actual experience. Accordingly, 
it is likely that any change in liabilities associated with the termination of membership for 
the 253 CORS members who would be eligible under the bill to redeposit withdrawn 
contributions has already been recognized in the most recent actuarial valuations of EPS 
and TPS. 
 
To the extent that eligible CORS members elect to deposit previously withdrawn EPS or 
TPS member contributions, plus interest, in exchange for service credit in CORS, CORS 
unfunded liabilities increase to reflect the employer contributions that are no longer 
available to pay their benefits in CORS. Should even a majority of eligible members elect 
to purchase this service credit, the resulting increase in unfunded liabilities is likely 
significant and results in a meaningful increase in State contribution rates beginning in 
fiscal 2029. However, a reliable estimate of this effect is not feasible without 
member-specific data and assumptions regarding how many eligible members would 
choose to buy back service under the bill. Costs are assumed to be allocated 60% general 
funds, 20% special funds, and 20% federal funds. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The 253 members discussed above include CORS members who are 
employees of participating governmental units and have previously withdrawn EPS or TPS 
member contributions. To the extent that eligible members deposit withdrawn funds into 
CORS for service credit, liabilities for the CORS municipal pool increase. However, a 
reliable estimate is not feasible without specific data on the eligible members. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 239 (Senator Lewis Young) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 312/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6