START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 348 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 348 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - License Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date of a racetrack license issued by the Baltimore City 
Board of License Commissioners for premises in the 5200 block of Park Heights Avenue 
until July 1, 2029. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates July 31, 2029.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City expenditures and revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
In Baltimore City, a racetrack license authorizes its holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at 
one or more locations in the confines of the racing park. The license fee is $100 per day 
that the park is operating, with additional annual fees of $500 if the licensee provides live 
entertainment, and/or $200 if the licensee provides outdoor table or café service.  
 
An alcoholic beverages license in Baltimore City generally expires 180 days after a license 
holder has closed a business or stopped selling alcoholic beverages at the licensed 
premises.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 348/ Page 2 
Additional Comments:  Pimlico Race Course, located on Park Avenue in Baltimore City, 
began a large renovation project in July 2025, requiring the shutdown of operations 
(including alcohol sales) until reopening.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 361 (Senator Attar) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2