START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 305 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 305 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore County - Nuisance Actions - Community Association 
 
 
This bill alters the definitions of “community association” and “local code violation” in 
statutory provisions that authorize a community association in Baltimore County to seek 
injunctive and other equitable relief in the Baltimore County Circuit Court for nuisance 
abatement. Among other provisions, the bill also (1) establishes additional notice 
requirements for nuisance actions and (2) repeals the requirement that the circuit court 
determine the amount and conditions of a specified bond to be filed by a community 
association that is seeking relief. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the finances or operations of 
Baltimore County. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, in Baltimore County, for the purpose of seeking injunctive relief for the 
abatement of a nuisance, “community association” is a Maryland nonprofit corporation 
that: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 305/ Page 2 
 
is comprised of at least 20% of the total number of households as members, with a 
minimum membership of 25 households, of a local community that consists of 
40 or more individual households as defined by specific geographic boundaries in 
the bylaws or charter of the community association; 
 
requires, as a condition of membership, the payment of monetary dues at least 
annually; 
 
is operated primarily for the promotion of social welfare and general neighborhood 
improvement and enhancement; 
 
has been in existence for at least one year when it files suit for abatement of a 
nuisance; 
 
is exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) 
or has been included in a specified Baltimore County publication for a period of at 
least one year prior to bringing an action to abate a nuisance; and 
 
is in good standing. 
 
Under the bill, a “community association” is a Maryland nonprofit association, corporation, 
or other organization that is (1) composed of residents of a community defined by specific 
geographic boundaries in the bylaws or charter of the community association; (2) operated 
primarily for the promotion of social welfare and general neighborhood improvement  
and enhancement; (3) exempt from taxation under specified sections of IRC; and 
(4) incorporated and in good standing with the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation. 
 
The bill specifies that “community association” includes a Maryland nonprofit association, 
corporation, or other organization that otherwise meets the definition of an individual 
community association but that represents two or more individual community associations. 
 
Under current law, “local code violation” is a violation under Title 22, “Nuisances” of the 
Baltimore County Code of 1988. The bill expands the definition to include the Buildings 
and Housing Article of the Baltimore County Code, and the references are updated to 
include the most recent 2015 version, as amended. “Local code violation” does not include 
a violation of specified provisions of the Baltimore County Code related to rent escrow; 
lead risk reduction standards; or any storm water management provision. 
 
Under current law, “nuisance” is an act or condition created, performed, or maintained on 
private property that constitutes a local code violation and that has specified adverse 
conditions within the boundaries of the community represented by the community 
association. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 305/ Page 3 
Nuisance Actions 
 
Pursuant to existing provisions, in Baltimore County, a community association may seek 
injunctive and other equitable relief in the Baltimore County Circuit Court for abatement 
of a nuisance after (1) meeting specified notice requirements and (2) showing that the 
nuisance has not been abated. No action can be initiated until 60 days after the community 
association notifies the county code enforcement agency, via certified mail with return 
receipt, of the violation and the intent to bring action. A nuisance action may not be brought 
if the county code enforcement agency has filed an action for equitable relief from the 
nuisance. 
 
Under the bill, if the Baltimore County Department of Housing and Community 
Development is the relevant code enforcement agency, a nuisance action is prohibited if 
the department provides a written response to the community association within 60 days 
of receiving the notice, indicating that the subject property is part of an active code 
enforcement plan. 
 
Under current law, a nuisance action may not be brought until 60 days after the community 
association provides notice, via certified mail with return receipt requested, to the tenant, 
if any, and the property’s owner of record. This notice must detail (1) the specific nature 
of the alleged nuisance; (2) the date and time it was first documented; (3) the precise 
location on the property where the nuisance is occurring; and (4) the desired resolution. 
 
The bill requires that the notice must be served on any tenant and the property’s owner of 
record in the same manner as service in a civil in personam action under the  
Maryland Rules. If certified mail is returned unclaimed, refused, deemed undeliverable by 
the post office, or signed for by someone other than the addressee, adequate notice may be 
given by regular mail and posting a copy of the notice on the property where the nuisance 
is allegedly occurring. 
 
Under the bill, an action against a residential rental property owner for a nuisance may not 
be brought unless an appropriate code enforcement agency has first issued a violation 
notice, as specified. Furthermore, for nuisances stemming from housing or building code 
violations, excluding recurrent sanitation violations, relief may not be granted unless a 
violation notice relating to the nuisance has been issued by a State or Baltimore County 
official and remains unresolved after 75 days. 
 
Required Bond 
 
Under current law, the court must determine the amount and conditions, if any, for a bond 
filed by the community association in an action for relief; the bill repeals this requirement. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 305/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 335 of 2025; HB 417 and SB 383 of 2024; and HB 116 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4