START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 357 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 357 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Municipalities - Election Dates - Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each municipality that maintains a website to prominently display on its 
website a list of all upcoming regular and special elections in the municipality, including 
the election date, whether the election is a regular or special municipal election, and each 
office to be voted on. The bill also requires each municipality to include, when reporting 
municipal election results to the State Board of Elections (SBE) (pursuant to an existing 
requirement), the date of the next regular municipal election and each office to be voted on 
at the election. SBE must prominently display on its website a list of all upcoming regular 
municipal elections reported by municipalities, including election dates and offices to be 
voted on, as well as a list indicating which municipalities have not yet reported upcoming 
regular municipal elections. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State election law governs the administration of federal, State, county, and 
Baltimore City elections held during statewide elections every two years, and special 
elections, but generally does not govern municipal elections other than those in 
Baltimore City (which is considered a “county” for purposes of State law). Municipal 
elections are primarily governed by each municipality’s law and occur at various times 
throughout the year and in odd- and even-numbered years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 357/ Page 2 
While State law governing elections generally does not apply to municipal elections, there 
are certain provisions of State law that address municipal elections, including a requirement 
that municipalities submit their election results to SBE to publish on the SBE website. A 
municipality must, within 30 days after the results of a municipal election are certified, 
submit to SBE an electronic copy of the election results for each office or question voted 
on at the election, including: 
 
 
vote totals for each office or question, reported separately by each of the following 
voting methods, if applicable:  (1) in-person early voting; (2) mail-in voting or  
vote-by-mail; (3) provisional voting; and (4) in-person election day voting; and 
 
the party affiliation of each candidate if the municipality conducts partisan elections. 
 
Immediately after a municipality submits its election results, SBE must publish the election 
results on the SBE website. The election results published by SBE must be organized by 
election year and the name of the municipality. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2