START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 319 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 319 
(Delegate Sample-Hughes) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Student Transportation - Sunset Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the sunset provisions of Chapters 197 and 198 of 2021, which authorize a 
county board of education to provide transportation for specified public school students to 
and from school using a vehicle other than a Type I or Type II school vehicle when a school 
vehicle cannot reasonably be provided. Chapters 197 and 198 also (1) require the Maryland 
State Department of Education (MSDE) to consult with county boards of education and 
the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to adopt regulations establishing minimum 
vehicle and driver safety standards for alternate student transportation and (2) broaden the 
definition of nonpublic school with respect to the transportation of students to mean any 
elementary or secondary school in the State that is not part of the public elementary and 
secondary education system. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures for student transportation services may decrease in 
certain local school systems beyond FY 2026. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Transportation companies may experience 
increased business from continued contracting with local school systems to transport 
students in certain situations beyond FY 2026. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Type I and Type II school vehicles are yellow school buses. Both a  
Type I and Type II school vehicle must be designed and constructed to carry passengers 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 319/ Page 2 
and meet the same construction and seating space requirements. However, a Type I vehicle 
must have a gross vehicle weight of 15,000 pounds or more and a Type II vehicle must 
have a gross vehicle weight of 15,000 pounds or less. 
 
With certain exemptions, MSDE generally requires Type I and Type II school vehicles to 
be used to transport students to and from school and school related activities when local 
school system sponsored transportation services are provided. In addition to the 
exemptions provided through Chapters 197 and 198 (described below), MSDE regulations 
allow other vehicles to be used if (1) the vehicle is a taxicab; (2) only one student is 
transported; or (3) the vehicle used is a commercial motor coach. 
 
Chapters 197 and 198 provide additional authorization to transport students using a vehicle 
other than a Type I or Type II school vehicle for (1) preschool-age students; (2) students 
with disabilities; (3) homeless youth; (4) children in foster care; (5) students without access 
to school buses; (6) students in a nonpublic school placement; or (7) students in dual 
enrollment programs or work programs or other educational programs based off the school 
campus. A county board may provide transportation to a different student group, as well, 
through a written determination by the board. Chapters 197 and 198 terminate July 1, 2026, 
at which time the students described above are no longer exempt from the general 
requirement to use Type I and Type II school vehicles to transport students. 
 
MSDE operationalized Chapters 197 and 198 with updates to Maryland regulations relating 
to “alternative school vehicles” in COMAR 13A.06.07 in January 2022. As part of the 
regulations and in consultation with MVA, MSDE adopted minimum safety standards for 
vehicle specifications, driver qualifications, and insurance and inspection requirements. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, local school systems may need to replace 
the use of some alternative school vehicles with Type I and Type II vehicles as  
Chapters 197 and 198 terminate. To the extent local school systems currently use 
alternative school vehicles to transport students, the bill prevents any additional 
expenditures associated with returning to Type I and Type II vehicles for those students. 
This includes students in unique situations, including when very few students may need to 
be transported on one route. 
 
In accordance with the reporting requirements of Chapters 197 and 198, MSDE published 
a report on Alternative School Transportation of Students by County Boards in 
December 2025. In the report, MSDE’s Pupil Transportation/Emergency Management 
Branch recommended the continued use of alternative school vehicles to provide flexibility 
to local boards of education in providing transportation to students as they provide access 
for students with barriers to transportation, optimize operational costs in low density or 
limited infrastructure situations, and allow quick response to emergent needs like driver 
shortage or vehicle unavailability. For the 2024-2025 school year, Anne Arundel, Carroll, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 319/ Page 3 
Cecil, Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, and Worcester counties all indicated that at 
least some contracted drivers transported students in vehicles authorized under 
Chapters 197 and 198 (though not all jurisdictions submitted a response to MSDE’s 
survey). 
 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools and St. Mary’s County Public Schools both further 
advise that the counties are experiencing a shortage of drivers possessing commercial 
drivers licenses required to drive Type I and Type II vehicles. Therefore, the school 
systems advise the bill may also help ensure there is a sufficient supply of drivers available 
to transport students. 
 
There is no impact for local school systems that do not use alternative vehicles to transport 
students. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to MSDE’s Fiscal 2025 End-of Year Pupil 
Transportation report, approximately 630,000 public school students receive transportation 
services. In total, local school systems use over 7,300 school vehicles for student 
transportation services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 292 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3