START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 448 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 448 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Facilities - Certified Recovery Residences - Unannounced Inspections 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to conduct at least 
two unannounced on-site inspections of each certified recovery residence annually to 
ensure compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements. Unannounced inspections 
must be in addition to the inspection for recertification. If, after an unannounced inspection, 
MDH determines that a certified recovery residence is not in compliance with 
requirements, MDH must provide notice to the certified recovery residence of its 
deficiencies and allow one month from the notice to address them. If the certified recovery 
residence fails to take corrective action within one month, MDH may instruct the 
credentialing entity to revoke the recovery residence’s certification.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by at least $373,600 beginning in 
FY 2027 for staff to conduct inspections. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing 
costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
373,600 
434,900 
455,300 
475,800 
496,500 
Net Effect 
($373,600) 
($434,900) 
($455,300) 
($475,800) 
($496,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 448/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A recovery residence is a service that provides alcohol- and drug-free 
housing to individuals with substance-related disorders or addictive disorders (including 
those that co-occur with mental disorders) and does not include clinical treatment services. 
 
MDH designated the Behavioral Health Administration as the approved credentialing 
entity for recovery residences, pursuant to Chapters 710 and 711 of 2016. The Maryland 
Certification 
of 
Recovery 
Residences 
oversees 
the 
application, 
certification, 
recertification, monitoring, and inspection of recovery residences to improve the quality of 
services. Maryland RecoveryNet partners with service providers across the State to fund 
access to recovery support services for individuals seeking treatment for substance use and 
co-occurring disorders. 
 
Chapter 580 of 2017 (the Recovery Residence Residential Rights Protection Act) requires 
MDH to publish a list of each recovery residence operating in each county of the State on 
its website with indicators as to whether the owner of a recovery residence has received a 
valid certificate of compliance.  
 
A certificate of compliance is valid for one year from the date of issuance. The 
credentialing entity may revoke the certificate of compliance if the credentialing entity 
finds that the recovery residence is not in compliance with requirements.  
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that, as of January 2026, there were 278 recovery 
residences located throughout the State. Under the bill, MDH must conduct at least 
556 additional unannounced inspections annually (at least two for each recovery 
residence). If any deficiencies are found during an inspection, MDH must notify the 
recovery residence and confirm that any deficiencies are corrected within 30 days. If 
deficiencies are not corrected, MDH may instruct the credentialing entity to revoke the 
recovery residence’s certification. 
 
MDH advises that these tasks would require 11 additional staff – eight full-time special 
program coordinators to conduct inspections, two administrative officers to provide 
support, and one administrator to train staff. When including salaries, fringe benefits, and 
travel expenses, MDH general fund expenditures would increase by approximately 
$1.1 million beginning in fiscal 2027. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
disagrees. There are already three field assessors and one manager responsible for 
certifying recovery residences and reviewing applications, and those individuals can likely 
help with administrative support and training new special program coordinators to conduct 
inspections. However, the work of conducting inspections would require at least 
five additional full-time staff. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 448/ Page 3 
Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by at least $373,622 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring five special program coordinators to perform inspections, notify recovery residences 
of deficiencies, and conduct any required follow-up. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, travel expenses, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
          5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$324,918 
Operating Expenses 
    48,704 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$373,622 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
DLS advises that, should the number of recovery residences grow significantly or the 
number of recovery residences with deficiencies be higher than anticipated, additional 
special program coordinators may be necessary to conduct the additional inspections. Each 
additional special program coordinator would cost more than $80,000 annually, including 
salary, fringe benefits, travel, and ongoing costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 878 (Senator Attar) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3