START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 493 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 493 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Judgeships - Circuit Court and District Court 
 
 
This bill alters the number of resident judges of the circuit court by adding one additional 
judgeship in St. Mary’s County. The bill also creates one additional District Court 
judgeship in District 11 (to be appointed from Washington County). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $786,900 in FY 2027 for 
two additional judges and associated staff; future year expenditures reflect annualization. 
The FY 2027 budget as introduced includes funding for this purpose. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
786,900 
995,800 
1,013,600 
1,032,200 
1,051,300 
Net Effect 
($786,900) 
($995,800) 
($1,013,600) 
($1,032,200) 
($1,051,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County expenditures increase by approximately $85,500 in 
FY 2027 and by $114,000 annually thereafter for staff and ongoing operating costs. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 493/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  There are 176 circuit court judges in the State, including 3 in 
St. Mary’s County. 
 
For purposes of the operation and administration of the District Court, the State is divided 
into 12 districts. District 11, which has 5 judges, includes Frederick and 
Washington counties. Of these judges, 3 are from Frederick County and 2 are from 
Washington County. 
 
To support the General Assembly’s role in establishing new judgeships, the Chief Judge 
of the Supreme Court of Maryland annually certifies to the General Assembly the need for 
additional judges in the State. The Judiciary uses best practices developed by the National 
Center for State Courts (NCSC) to calculate judicial need, which take into account the 
amount of judicial work generated on average per case filing within each distinct case type. 
Using the model developed by NCSC, judicial need for fiscal 2027 was primarily based on 
average and type of new case filings in the most recent three years (fiscal 2023 through 
2025). The certification of judicial workloads indicates a projected need of five additional 
judges throughout the State; the Judiciary is requesting one judge position for  
St. Mary’s County Circuit Court and one judge position for the District Court (to be 
appointed from Washington County). An additional circuit court judgeship was last created 
by Chapters 756 and 757 of 2024, which added one circuit court judge in  
Prince George’s County. Additional District Court judgeships were last created by 
Chapter 749 of 2019, which added one District Court judge each in St. Mary’s County and 
Anne Arundel County, and two District Court judges each in Prince George’s County and 
Baltimore County, for a total of six District Court judges. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $786,861 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of creating one circuit court judgeship in St. Mary’s County and the associated positions 
of one courtroom clerk and one law clerk with the judgeship (a total of three positions). 
The estimate also reflects the cost of creating one new District Court judgeship and the 
associated positions of one courtroom clerk and two contractual bailiffs (a total of 
four positions, including two contractual employees). The estimate includes salaries and 
fringe benefits, as well as operating expenses for the District Court. The fiscal 2027 budget 
as introduced includes funding for these positions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 493/ Page 3 
Positions  
5.0 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$750,298 
Operating Expenses – District Court* 
    36,563 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$786,861 
 
(* Because counties are generally responsible for funding certain operating expenses of the 
circuit courts, expenditures for operating expenses for St. Mary’s County are reflected in the 
fiscal estimate below) 
 
Future year expenditures generally reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover. The Department of Legislative Services notes, however, that this estimate only 
reflects the current salary (fiscal 2026 – $214,433) for a circuit court judge, and the current 
salary (fiscal 2026 – $201,333) for a District Court judge. Pursuant to statute, 
future increases in judicial salaries depend on any recommendations proposed by the 
Judicial Compensation Commission and subsequent action by the General Assembly. 
Legislation (Senate Joint Resolution 2 and House Joint Resolution 6 of 2026) proposing 
increases in judicial salaries from fiscal 2027 through 2030 has been introduced this 
session. General fund expenditures therefore may increase beyond what is estimated in this 
fiscal and policy note to the extent that judicial salaries are increased. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Local Expenditures:  St. Mary’s County anticipates expenditures of approximately 
$85,481 in fiscal 2027 for costs associated with operating expenses and hiring  
one full-time administrative assistant and one part-time bailiff to support the new 
circuit court judgeship; expenditures increase by at least $114,000 annually thereafter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 543 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 493/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4