START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 406 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 406 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Multiple Licenses Prohibition - 
Exceptions  
PG 313-26 
 
 
This bill removes the prohibition against the Prince George’s County Board of License 
Commissioners issuing multiple Class B (on-sale) beer and wine, or Class B (on-sale) beer, 
wine, and liquor (BWL) licenses to the same person or premises. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase to the extent that the board issues 
additional Class B licenses under the bill. Prince George’s County can handle any 
additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a person cannot have an interest in more than one alcoholic 
beverages license issued in Prince George’s County. However, the prohibition on holding 
multiple licenses does not apply in Prince George’s County to certain license holders, 
including bowling establishments, Class B-ECF/DS (education conference facility/dining 
service) BWL licenses, and Class BLX luxury restaurant licensees, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 406/ Page 2 
Class B (on-sale) Beer and Wine License 
 
The Class B (on-sale) beer and wine license generally authorizes the license holder to sell 
beer and light wine at a hotel or restaurant for on-premises consumption only. The 
annual license fee is $365. 
 
Class B (on-sale) Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
The Class B (on-sale) BWL license generally authorizes a restaurant to sell beer, wine, and 
liquor for on-premises consumption only. The annual license fee is $2,305. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  For each additional license issued, Prince George’s County revenues 
increase by $365 for a Class B beer and wine license and $2,305 for a Class B BWL license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2