START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 490 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 490 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Accountability and 
Implementation Board) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - The Blueprint for Maryland's Future - Revisions 
 
 
This bill makes several alterations to Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (the Blueprint) 
programs. These changes involve, among other provisions, State and local funding for 
low‑income students; local flexibility in the use of certain concentration of poverty grant 
(CPG) funding; teacher certification qualifications; career and technical education (CTE); 
college and career readiness (CCR); and the career ladder for educators in Maryland. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures in support of public schools increase by $228.5 million 
in FY 2027, by $82.7 million by FY 2029, and by relatively modest amounts beginning in 
FY 2030. Special fund revenues decrease by $4.7 million in FY 2027 and by $3.0 million 
in FY 2028. The FY 2027 State budget includes $228.4 million to cover the additional 
State funding for local school systems in the first year. This bill increases a mandated 
appropriation in FY 2027 through FY 2029.     
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
($4.7) 
($3.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0.1 
$310.8 
$82.7 
$0.1 
$0.1 
SF Expenditure 
$228.4 
($236.1) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($233.2) 
($77.7) 
($82.7) 
($0.1) 
($0.1)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system revenues and expenditures increase statewide in 
FY 2027 through FY 2029. For several counties, county appropriations to local school 
systems generally increase significantly from FY 2027 through FY 2029. This bill may 
increase a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 490/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Compensatory Aid and Concentration of Poverty Grants 
 
The current low-income student count, or “compensatory education enrollment,” 
methodology for the compensatory education aid program and CPG program, which 
accounts for school and school system participation in the federal Community Eligibility 
Provision (CEP, as discussed below) is extended for an additional year, through 
fiscal 2027.  
 
The bill repeals a current law sunset provision that, beginning in fiscal 2028, precludes the 
use of CPG program personnel and per pupil grants to provide for certain programs 
required under State regulations, including, but not limited to, fine arts programs.  
 
Teacher Certification 
 
Qualifications for initial teaching certification are modified. Passing a Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE)‑approved portfolio assessment constitutes an additional 
option toward qualification and accordingly submission of an MSDE‑sponsored 
apprenticeship program certificate may substitute for passage of a nationally recognized, 
portfolio‑based assessment of teaching ability. Teachers who graduate from an institution 
of higher education in another state or hold a professional license or certificate from another 
State may as another option submit documentation to MSDE of having received effective 
evaluations from a school system for two years.  
 
Career Ladder  
 
Under the career ladder, with respect to attaining the first tier within the administrator track 
(licensed principal) the date by which criteria must include a requirement that a teacher be 
a National Board Certification (NBC) teacher before the teacher may be a licensed 
principal is delayed from July 1, 2029, to July 1, 2034.  
 
Career and Technical Education and College and Career Readiness 
 
The bill repeals the CTE Skills Standards Advisory Committee and alters the purpose, 
composition, and duties of the CTE Committee. The CTE Committee must, in 
collaboration with and with approval of the Governor’s Workforce Development Board 
(GWDB), develop and maintain a list of high‑skill, high‑wage, or in-demand priority 
occupations for the State. For each listed occupation, the CTE Committee must develop, 
in collaboration with and approved by GWDB, publicly accessible career pathway 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 490/ Page 3 
information, that must include specified elements. All State agencies and relevant 
workforce development and education programs must use the occupational list and career 
pathway information as a guideline for curriculum alignment, credentialing, and career 
advancement.  
 
In addition to other clarifying changes about the CTE Committee’s structure and duties, 
the committee must make recommendations and provide guidance on setting occupational 
standards needed for a strong CTE system that forms the basis for the post‑CCR pathway, 
and make recommendations to State agencies and offices on adjustments to the CTE system 
to ensure that the system (1) remains globally competitive, (2) is administered according 
to best global practices, and (3) leverages CTE career pathways and occupational 
standards. In making its recommendations, the CTE Committee must strive to create a 
comprehensive, unified system of career progression that is attuned to the State’s 
workforce needs and meets other specified criteria.  
 
Other Provisions 
 
The bill extends from the end of fiscal 2027 to the end of fiscal 2030 the time frame during 
which State Board of Education (SBE) and Accountability and Implementation Board 
(AIB) may, in consultation with local school systems, may limit the number and types of 
courses that a student dually enrolled at the student’s public high school and at an 
institution of higher education may enroll in during the school year at the institution of 
higher education as part of the post‑CCR pathway. 
 
The definition of “wraparound services” as it applies to community schools is altered to 
include offering evidence‑based academic interventions, in addition to offering tutoring 
per current law.  
 
Local boards of education are no longer required to submit annual reports to MSDE on 
spending related to technology and on the percentage of students, teachers, and staff with 
digital devices and adequate connectivity in their homes. Accordingly, MSDE is no longer 
required to compile this information for submission to the General Assembly.  
 
Current Law:  For an overview of the Blueprint and other aspects of State and local 
funding of public schools in Maryland, see Appendix – Public School Funding in 
Maryland. 
 
Federal Community Eligibility Program 
 
The Healthy, Hunger‑Free Kids Act of 2010, in part, amended the federal National School 
Lunch Act to provide an alternative to household applications for free or reduced priced 
meals (FRPM) in high-poverty local school systems and schools. This alternative is CEP. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 490/ Page 4 
To be eligible, local school systems and schools must meet a minimum level of students 
directly certified for free meals – the ISP (identified student percentage) – which must be 
at least 25% of enrollment in the year prior to implementing the option, agree to serve free 
lunches and breakfasts to all students, and agree to cover with nonfederal funds any costs 
of providing free meals to all students above amounts provided in federal assistance. 
Identified students include those who qualify for free meals without an application, such 
as children from households receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families benefits, foster children, homeless students, 
migrant students, and others categorically eligible. 
 
Reimbursement is based on claiming percentages derived from the percentage of students 
directly certified as increased by use of a multiplier determined by the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA), which has been set at 1.6 since the inception of CEP. A local school 
system may choose to participate in CEP for all schools in a local school system or only 
some schools, depending on the eligibility districtwide and of the individual schools and 
financial considerations based on the anticipated level of federal reimbursement and other 
nonfederal support that may be available. For example, a school with a 25% student 
eligibility ISP, yields federal support for the equivalent of 40% (25% multiplied by 1.6), 
leaving an additional 60% to be covered outside of the federal CEP program. More 
information on CEP can be found on the USDA website.  
 
Compensatory Aid, Low-income Eligibility 
 
Since fiscal 2004, the compensatory aid formula, providing additional State support for 
students with educational needs resulting from educationally or economically 
disadvantaged environments, has used the number of students eligible for FRPM under 
federal school nutrition funding programs. Children from families (1) with incomes at or 
below 130% of the federal poverty level are eligible for free meals and (2) with incomes 
no greater than 185% of the federal poverty level are eligible for reduced-price meals. The 
State compensatory aid formula applies a per pupil cost to the FRPM student count. The 
compensatory enrollment count (used within the compensatory aid and CPG formulas) for 
local school systems that participate, in whole or in part, in CEP is the greater of:   
 
(1) the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students in CEP participating schools identified by direct certification 
for the prior fiscal year; and 
 
the number of students identified by the income information provided by the family 
to the school system on an alternative form developed by MSDE for the prior 
fiscal year; and 
 
the number of students eligible for FRPM from any schools not participating in CEP 
for the prior fiscal year; or 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 490/ Page 5 
(2) the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students eligible for FRPM from any schools not participating in CEP 
for the prior fiscal year; and 
 
for schools participating in CEP, the result of multiplying the prior fiscal year total 
enrollment by the percentage of FRPM-eligible students as compared to total 
enrollment in the year prior to participating in CEP. (However, for the purpose of 
this calculation, schools participating in CEP in the pilot year may use the 
percentage of FRPM-eligible students during the pilot year); or 
 
(3) the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students directly certified and who are enrolled in a public school in 
the county in the prior fiscal year. 
 
This provision of the State law is in effect through fiscal 2026. For fiscal year 2027 and 
each fiscal year thereafter, the greater of (1) the number of FRPM eligible students using 
the USDA count, or the alternative State form for the prior fiscal year or (2) the number of 
direct certification students who are enrolled in a public school in the county in the prior 
fiscal year.  
 
Concentration of Poverty Grants and Community Schools 
 
Blueprint legislation provides additional support for schools serving high concentrations 
of students living in poverty through the CPG Program. CPG funding has two components, 
a personnel grant and a per‑pupil grant.  
 
CPG personnel and per pupil grants may be used by eligible schools, through fiscal 2027, 
to provide for certain programs required under State regulations for a range of subjects, 
including (but not limited to) programs for fine arts, science, mathematics, social studies, 
CTE, English and world languages, and environmental education. The bill allows for this 
same use of CPG funds in each year following fiscal 2027 as well. The fiscal 2027 budget 
as introduced includes $572.7 million for CPG funding to public schools. Consistent with 
recent annual funding levels, the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced also includes $731,530 in 
general funds for public school fine arts grants.  
 
Schools that receive CPG funding operate as community schools. “Wraparound services” 
within the context of community schooling, includes, among many other components, 
offering evidence-based in-school and in-person tutoring, provided during the school day. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 490/ Page 6 
Teacher Certification 
 
To qualify for certification in the State, a teacher who graduated from an institution of 
higher education in another state or holds a professional license or certificate from another 
state must (1) pass an examination of teaching ability within 18 months of being hired by 
a local school system; (2) hold an active NBC; or (3) complete a comprehensive induction 
program. Individuals who have graduated from a teacher preparation program or an 
alternative teacher preparation program, passing a portfolio‑based assessment of a 
nationally accredited teacher program is one option toward qualifying for initial teaching 
certification in Maryland. 
 
Career Ladder 
 
By July 1, 2029, to reach the first tier within the administrator track (licensed principal) a 
teacher must be an NBC teacher.  
 
Career and Technical Education 
 
Chapter 36 of 2021 (Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation) created the CTE 
Committee as a unit within the GWDB. The purpose of the committee is to build an 
integrated, globally competitive framework for providing CTE to Maryland students in 
public schools, postsecondary institutions, and the workforce. The committee is staffed by 
the Maryland Department of Labor. Chapter 36 also created the CTE Skills Standards 
Advisory Committee to make recommendations and provide advice to the CTE Committee 
on setting the occupational standards necessary for a strong CTE system. The advisory 
committee’s recommendations must form the basis for a post college and career readiness 
(post‑CCR) CTE pathway required by the Blueprint.  
 
Dual Enrollment and the Post-college and Career Ready Pathway  
 
Under Chapter 164 of 2024, to phase in expansion of dual enrollment to maximize the 
number of students who can earn the maximum number of dual enrollment credits 
consistent with the phased increases in school funding, SBE and AIB, in consultation with 
each local education agency, may, for fiscal 2025 through 2027, limit the number and types 
of courses that a student dually enrolled at a public high school and at an institution of 
higher education may enroll in during the school year at the institution of higher education 
as part of the post‑CCR pathway.  
 
Local School System Technology Use and Spending 
 
Local boards of education must submit annual reports to MSDE on spending related to 
technology and on the percentage of students, teachers, and staff with digital devices and 
adequate connectivity in their homes. MSDE must compile this information for submission 
to the General Assembly.  

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 490/ Page 7 
State Funding for Affected Programs 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $1.7 billion for compensatory education, 
$572.7 million for CPG, and $166.6 million for education effort adjustment funding, 
netting to $228.4 million above mandated State funding for these three aid programs.   
 
State Revenues:  As discussed below, the bill increases the Blueprint for Maryland’s 
Future Fund (BMFF) expenditures in fiscal 2027. This results in a lower average BMFF 
fund balance during fiscal 2027 and fiscal 2028, and consequently BMFF interest earnings 
decrease by approximately $4.7 million in fiscal 2027 and $3.0 million in fiscal 2028.   
 
State Expenditures:  The projected fiscal 2027 to 2031 impact of the bill, by program, is 
detailed in Exhibit 1. These changes are driven by the change in the “compensatory 
education enrollment” count for fall of 2025 under the bill, as shown in Exhibit 2. While 
the enrollment count change results in a one‑year increase in compensatory education 
funding, CPG funding is altered over three years, primarily because per pupil CPG funding 
is based upon three‑year average percentage of compensatory education enrollment 
students at each school. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
State Aid Expenditure Changes by Program 
($ in Thousands) 
 
Program 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Compensatory Education 
$137,826  
$0  
$0  
$0  
$0 
Concentration of Poverty Grants 
24,120  
73,693  
82,622  
0  
0 
Education Effort Adjustment 
66,502  
0  
0  
0  
0 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
0  
872  
(53)  
9  
(2) 
Total Change 
$228,448  
$74,566  
$82,568  
$9  
($2) 
 
 
General fund and BMFF impacts under the bill are shown on page one of this fiscal and 
policy note. BMFF special fund revenues are projected under current law to be sufficient 
to cover mandated annual increases in expenditures for the Blueprint through fiscal 2027. 
Thus, increases to Blueprint program expenditures under the bill in fiscal 2027, 
approximately $228.4 million, are covered by BMFF special funds. However, current 
projections indicate that revenues in the BMFF, including prior-year fund balances, will be 
less than the amount required to cover current law increases to annual expenditures under 
the Blueprint beginning in fiscal 2028. Due to this set of factors and decreased BMFF 
interest earnings, in fiscal 2028, general fund expenditures increase by about 
$310.7 million. General fund expenditures increase by $82.6 million in fiscal 2029 and 
change by negligible amounts in subsequent years.  

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 490/ Page 8 
In addition to the formula program costs described above, the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission (MHEC) will incur staffing costs in order to assure that relevant 
postsecondary programs align with a focus on the priority occupations list established 
under the bill and to direct and coordinate the development of an integrated, globally 
competitive framework for providing CTE to Maryland students in postsecondary 
education. General fund expenditures increase by $96,616, which accounts for a 90‑day 
start‑up delay from the bill’s effective date. Though MHEC advises it will require 
three additional positions, this estimate reflects the cost of hiring one additional education 
policy analyst. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$76,475 
Other Expenses 
     20,141 
Total FY 2027 MHEC Expenditures 
$96,616 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County government expenditures for certain jurisdictions increase 
due to increased compensatory enrollment totals under the bill, which increase local share, 
and thus for some counties increases minimum required effort. The course of anticipated 
county government expenditures is further altered by changes in education effort 
adjustment and GTB local share relief outcomes resulting from changes to the local share 
of compensatory education. Exhibit 3 shows the anticipated changes in county government 
funding for public schools under the bill.    
 
Exhibit 4 shows the estimated change in State aid received by public schools by county, 
consistent with statewide formula program changes shown in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 5 shows 
the combined impact of both State aid and local appropriations changes by county for 
fiscal 2027 through 2031. Local school system expenditures change accordingly. Changes 
to State aid and county effort on behalf of local school systems largely offset, beginning in 
fiscal 2030. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grants Spending Flexibility 
 
The bill’s provision that, beginning in fiscal 2028, allows local school systems to realize 
increased flexibility in the use of CPG personnel and per pupil grants, particularly in 
support of fine arts programming, does not in itself alter local school system expenditures. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 490/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 2 
Change to Compensatory Education Enrollment 
Fall of 2025 
 
County 
Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Diff. 
% Diff. 
Allegany  
4,135 
4,650 
515 
12% 
Anne Arundel  
33,374 
33,374 
0 
0% 
Baltimore City 
48,651 
62,037 
13,386 
28% 
Baltimore  
53,703 
55,991 
2,288 
4% 
Calvert  
3,988 
3,988 
0 
0% 
Caroline  
3,016 
3,677 
661 
22% 
Carroll  
7,130 
7,130 
0 
0% 
Cecil 
6,962 
6,983 
21 
0% 
Charles 
12,174 
12,738 
564 
5% 
Dorchester  
2,845 
2,878 
33 
1% 
Frederick  
15,240 
15,240 
0 
0% 
Garrett 
775 
1,772 
997 
129% 
Harford  
14,208 
14,213 
5 
0% 
Howard  
16,410 
16,596 
186 
1% 
Kent  
1,046 
1,092 
46 
4% 
Montgomery  
58,509 
63,850 
5,341 
9% 
Prince George’s  
79,069 
86,870 
7,801 
10% 
Queen Anne’s  
2,577 
2,577 
0 
0% 
St. Mary’s  
6,055 
6,171 
116 
2% 
Somerset 
1,914 
1,915 
1 
0% 
Talbot 
2,398 
2,398 
0 
0% 
Washington  
11,910 
12,830 
920 
8% 
Wicomico  
8,472 
9,063 
591 
7% 
Worcester   
3,301 
3,393 
92 
3% 
Total 
397,862 
431,426 
33,564 
8% 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 490/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 3 
Estimated Change in Local Appropriations under the Bill 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Allegany  
$0.0  
$0.0  
$0.0  
$0.0  
$0.0  
Anne Arundel  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Baltimore City 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Baltimore  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Calvert  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Caroline  
676.9  
186.3  
(77.4)  
32.7  
(13.8)  
Carroll  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Cecil 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Charles 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Dorchester  
322.8  
(24.2)  
1.4  
(0.1)  
0.0  
Frederick  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Garrett 
2,058.7  
1,467.7  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Harford  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Howard  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Kent  
259.2  
50.9  
95.1  
0.0  
0.0  
Montgomery  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Prince George’s  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Queen Anne’s  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
St. Mary’s  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Somerset 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Talbot 
0.2  
(45.4)  
0.6  
0.0  
0.0  
Washington  
2,955.8  
(355.7)  
41.3  
(4.8)  
0.7  
Wicomico  
490.5  
(208.9)  
88.1  
(36.8)  
15.2  
Worcester   
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Total 
$6,764.1  
$1,070.7  
$149.0  
($9.0) 
$2.1  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 490/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 4 
Estimated Change in State Aid to Public Schools under the Bill 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Allegany  
$3,198.2  
$309.1  
$735.2  
$0.0  
$0.0  
Anne Arundel  
15.1  
(150.4) 
(14.9) 
0.0  
0.0  
Baltimore City 
113,938.6  
39,895.7  
36,297.6  
0.0  
0.0  
Baltimore  
7,243.3  
798.3  
3,775.3  
0.0  
0.0  
Calvert  
(154.8) 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Caroline  
4,234.4  
1,446.0  
1,609.0  
(32.7) 
13.8  
Carroll  
(275.7) 
293.9  
12.6  
0.0  
0.0  
Cecil 
(197.0) 
(270.6) 
15.2  
0.0  
0.0  
Charles 
2,497.1  
533.9  
1,185.7  
0.0  
0.0  
Dorchester  
(51.1) 
98.4  
33.3  
0.1  
0.0  
Frederick  
(617.8) 
65.2  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Garrett 
3,497.4  
305.8  
1,209.2  
0.0  
0.0  
Harford  
(547.4) 
(255.9) 
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Howard  
165.5  
86.7  
193.9  
0.0  
0.0  
Kent  
156.6  
13.7  
28.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Montgomery  
18,893.1  
3,782.2  
5,382.9  
0.0  
0.0  
Prince George’s  
67,614.3  
23,770.5  
27,719.9  
0.0  
0.0  
Queen Anne’s  
0.1  
(0.2) 
(0.1) 
0.0  
0.0  
St. Mary’s  
290.5  
341.5  
391.4  
0.0  
0.0  
Somerset 
(110.2) 
123.7  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Talbot 
0.6  
(13.5) 
(0.6) 
0.0  
0.0  
Washington  
4,996.2  
1,919.4  
2,825.3  
4.8  
(0.7) 
Wicomico  
3,364.1  
1,124.7  
1,139.1  
36.8  
(15.2) 
Worcester   
297.0  
28.1  
30.2  
0.0  
0.0  
Unallocated 
0.0  
319.4  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
Total 
$228,448.1  $74,565.7  
$82,568.4  
$9.0  
($2.1) 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 490/ Page 12 
 
Exhibit 5 
Estimated Change in State Aid and Local Appropriations under the Bill 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Allegany  
$3,198  
$309  
$735  
$0  
$0  
Anne Arundel  
15  
(150) 
(15) 
0  
0  
Baltimore City 
113,939  
39,896  
36,298  
0  
0  
Baltimore  
7,243  
798  
3,775  
0  
0  
Calvert  
(155)  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Caroline  
4,911  
1,632  
1,532  
0  
0  
Carroll  
(276)  
294  
13  
0  
0  
Cecil 
(197)  
(271)  
15  
0  
0  
Charles 
2,497  
534  
1,186  
0  
0  
Dorchester  
272  
74  
35  
0  
0  
Frederick  
(618)  
65  
0  
0  
0  
Garrett 
5,556  
1,773  
1,209  
0  
0  
Harford  
(547)  
(256) 
0  
0  
0  
Howard  
166  
87  
194  
0  
0  
Kent  
416  
65  
123  
0  
0  
Montgomery  
18,893  
3,782  
5,383  
0  
0  
Prince George’s  
67,614  
23,771  
27,720  
0  
0  
Queen Anne’s  
0  
(0)  
(0)  
0  
0  
St. Mary’s  
290  
342  
391  
0  
0  
Somerset 
(110)  
124  
0  
0  
0  
Talbot 
1  
(59)  
0  
0  
0  
Washington  
7,952  
1,564  
2,867  
0  
0  
Wicomico  
3,855  
916  
1,227  
0  
0  
Worcester   
297  
28  
30  
0  
0  
Unallocated 
0  
319  
0  
0  
0  
Total 
$235,212  
$75,317  
$82,717  
$0  
$0  
 
 
Other Provisions 
 
AIB advises that the delay in the Blueprint deadline (to July 1, 2034) by which newly 
licensed principals must hold NBC may result in local savings in salaries or NBC fees. It 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 490/ Page 13 
is assumed that any such savings, which cannot be quantified at this time, are not realized 
until fiscal 2030 at the earliest. 
 
It is assumed that if specified entities exercise authority to limit the number and types of 
courses that a dually enrolled student may take, the number of students taking advantage 
of dual enrollment courses increases, but there is no determinate impact on the number of 
courses for public institutions of higher education to provide to dual enrollment students. 
Therefore, the effect on local board of education payments for dual enrollment is 
indeterminate but assumed to be minimal on a statewide basis.  
 
Including additional evidence-based academic interventions among the many components 
of wraparound services is not anticipated to alter local expenditures for wraparound 
services.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 311 (The President)(By Request - Accountability and 
Implementation Board) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland Department of Labor; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Association of Counties; Accountability 
and Implementation Board; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 490/ Page 14 
Appendix – Public School Funding in Maryland 
 
 
State Aid for Public Schools 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future and Education Funding Formulas 
 
The majority of direct State aid to public schools (excluding teachers’ retirement) is 
determined by enrollment-based funding formulas generally found in Title 5, Subtitle 2 of 
the Education Article. This includes the foundation formula, which makes use of a  
per pupil foundation amount (PPFA) and an “enrollment count,” which is the greater of 
(1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment and (2) the three-year moving 
average of FTE enrollment. Collectively, the formulas account for a uniform base cost  
per pupil that is necessary to provide general education services to students in every local 
school system and address the additional costs associated with educating three student 
populations:  special education students; students eligible for free and reduced-price meals; 
and students who are English learners. Under Chapter 237 of 2025, beginning in 
fiscal 2026, the special education, compensatory education, and English learner formulas 
– structured similarly to the foundation program, but targeting the three student populations 
mentioned above – use statutory per-pupil dollar amounts (rather than percentage weights 
of PPFA), with amounts specified through fiscal 2033 and inflation adjustments thereafter. 
 
Most State education aid formulas also include wealth equalization across counties, 
compensating for differences in local wealth by providing less aid per pupil to the more 
wealthy counties and more aid per pupil to the less wealthy counties. Although on the 
whole most State aid formulas are designed to have the State pay roughly one-half of 
program costs, the State’s share for the less wealthy counties is higher than 50%, and the 
State’s share for more wealthy counties is lower than 50%. For purposes of determining 
State and local shares of funding, wealth equals the sum of 100% of assessed public utilities 
real property value, 40% of the assessed value of all other real property, 50% of the 
assessed value of personal property, and 100% of net taxable income. 
 
Major education aid programs include the foundation formula, comparable wage index 
(CWI), guaranteed tax base (GTB), compensatory education, concentration of poverty 
grants (CPG), English learner, special education, full-day prekindergarten, college and 
career ready (CCR), transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), career 
ladder, and transportation grant programs. 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint) legislation, including Chapter 771  
of 2019; Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021; and Chapter 33 of 2022 established new programs 
and updated education funding formulas, to among other provisions provide additional 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 490/ Page 15 
support for schools serving high concentrations of students living in poverty, including 
community schools and wraparound services, and increased support for students learning 
English and students with disabilities. Chapter 237, among other provisions, curtailed 
foundation program per pupil funding. 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) was created by Chapter 771 as the 
successor to the Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education Fund. The BMFF 
is intended to assist in providing adequate funding for early childhood education and 
primary and secondary education to provide a world-class education to students in 
Maryland. 
 
Comparable Wage Index 
 
CWI provides additional funds to local school systems with above-average personnel costs 
but does not decrease funding for local school systems with below-average costs. 
CWI adjustment values are fixed in statute and range from 0.047 in Frederick County to 
0.166 in Montgomery County. The formula multiplies the adjustment value by the 
foundation program for a given county, which is the PPFA multiplied by the enrollment 
count for the county. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The GTB program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions to maintain or 
increase local education tax effort, i.e., local education appropriation as a percentage of 
local tax base. The program provides additional State education aid to counties that 
(1) have less than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and (2) provide local 
education funding above the minimum local share required by the Foundation Program. 
The program uses local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for 
each eligible local school system. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grant Program 
 
Blueprint legislation provides additional support for schools serving high concentrations 
of students living in poverty through the CPG Program. CPG funding has two components, 
a personnel grant and a per-pupil grant. 
 
Personnel Grants are provided to employ a community school coordinator with specified 
qualifications and provide full-time coverage by at least one health care practitioner. A 
county that provides health coverage or community school services with funds other than 
the personnel grant must continue to provide those services through fiscal 2030. If the 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 490/ Page 16 
personnel grant provided to an eligible school exceeds the costs to employ those positions 
and provide health coverage, the eligible school may use excess funds to provide 
wraparound services and complete the community school needs assessment. The personnel 
grant is a State-funded categorical amount that increases with inflation. 
 
Per-pupil Grants are provided for each qualifying school following the completion of a 
community school needs assessment, and each eligible school must use the per-pupil grant 
to provide wraparound services and other programs and services as identified in the school 
needs assessment. CPG funds must generally be distributed by the local board to each 
eligible school. However, if the local school system has at least 10 eligible schools or at 
least 35% of a local school system’s schools are eligible schools, the local board may 
expend up to 50% of CPG personnel and per-pupil grants on behalf of eligible schools on 
program costs that directly benefit the school, and in accordance with a plan developed in 
consultation with eligible schools that ensures that each eligible school receives the 
required positions/coverage and services. Per-pupil grants are only wealth equalized for 
districts that receive the minimum State funding (40%) under the compensatory education 
formula; for all other districts, the State pays the full amount. The local funding percentage 
is based on the compensatory education wealth equalization formula. 
 
The following table lays out the phase-in of the two components of the funding. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grants Phase-in 
 
School Poverty Percentage Year Personnel Phased-in Year Per Pupil Phased-in 
> = 80% 
FY 2020 
FY 2022 
75%-80% 
FY 2021 
FY 2023 
70%-75% 
FY 2022 
FY 2024 
65%-70% 
FY 2023 
FY 2025 
60%-65% 
FY 2024 
FY 2026 
55%-60% 
FY 2025 
FY 2027 
 
School concentration percentages are based on a three-year average of compensatory 
education enrollment in each public school. 
 
For the per-pupil grant, schools receive funding along a sliding scale according to their 
CPG level, the three-year average percentage of compensatory education enrollment 
students at each school. Schools at or below 55% CPG level receive no funding per pupil. 
Schools above 55% and below 80% CPG level see the per-pupil amount increase until, for 
schools at or above 80% CPG level, per-pupil funding reaches the statutorily established 
per-pupil maximum amount. The per-pupil amount established by this sliding scale is then 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 490/ Page 17 
multiplied by a school’s compensatory education enrollment in the second prior fiscal year 
to get a calculated grant amount. A percentage increment of per-pupil funding is then 
applied for each of six years of eligibility, beginning with 16% in the first year of eligibility 
and culminating in 100% funding by the seventh year, is specified in statute as shown in 
the table below. 
 
Eligibility Year 
Share of CPG Per Pupil 
NOT ELIGIBLE 
0% 
Year 1 
16% 
Year 2 
32% 
Year 3 
37% 
Year 4 
55% 
Year 5 
66% 
Year 6 
75% 
Year 7 and Beyond 
100% 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2030, however, all schools receive 100% of the calculated per-pupil 
grant amount regardless of year of eligibility. 
 
College and Career Ready Funding 
 
It is the goal of the State that students enrolled in public school will meet the CCR standard 
adopted by the State Board of Education before the end of the 10th grade and no later than 
the time the student graduates from high school. In addition to funding for non-CCR and 
CCR students provided within the foundation formula, funding is provided for students in 
grades 9 through 12 who have met the CCR standard. Per-pupil funding, covered by both 
State and local shares, begins at $517 in fiscal 2022 and is inflation adjusted each 
subsequent year. These funds support various pathways and educational options available 
to students who meet the CCR standard. 
 
Career Ladder for Educators 
 
Under Chapter 36, as amended by Chapter 55, a four-level career ladder must be 
implemented by each local board of education by July 1, 2024. Level one is a  
State-certified teacher. Level two is a teacher pursuing a master’s degree, 30 credits of a  
State board-approved program of study, or National Board Certification (NBC). 
Level three is a teacher who has an NBC or, if NBC or a comparable assessment is not 
available in the teacher’s content area, a master’s degree in that area. Level three includes 
an assistant principal. Level four is a teacher on the teacher leadership track or 
administrative track of the career ladder, each of which is further divided into tiers. If a 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 490/ Page 18 
teacher achieves level three or four on the career ladder by being an NBC teacher, the 
teacher must retain NBC status in order to remain at that level. The State and county 
governments share the cost of required salary increases for educators reaching certain 
levels on the career ladder, including for attaining and retaining NBC status. 
 
Grow Your Own Educators 
 
Chapters 227 and 228 of 2024 established the Grow Your Own Educators Program to 
provide support to eligible provisional teachers and noncertified education support 
professionals interested in teaching who pledge to fulfill a service obligation. Administered 
by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), the program provides grants to 
local school systems in collaboratives for certain teacher candidates’ expenses and program 
administration costs. Chapter 237 made several alterations to the program, including 
clarifying that the program purpose is to support collaboratives that offer teacher licensure 
programs with on-the-job experiential learning for eligible individuals, not to directly 
support the individuals. 
 
Full-day Prekindergarten 
 
The full-day prekindergarten funding formula provides State and local funding for 
voluntary full-day prekindergarten for (1) children who are three or four years old from 
low-income families and homeless youths and whose family income is less than or equal 
to 300% of the federal poverty level (FPL) (Tier I children) and (2) four-year-olds from 
families whose income is – for fiscal 2026 funding – between 300% and 360% of FPL, and 
beginning fiscal 2027 between 300% and 600% of FPL (Tier II students). 
 
There is no family share for Tier I students. For Tier II students, a sliding scale developed 
by MSDE determines the family share. For four-year-olds from families with income above 
600% (Tier III), the family share covers the full cost of full-day prekindergarten. However, 
a local board may provide up to 100% of the family share on behalf of the family. Local 
governments are required to fund the local share of the full-day prekindergarten program. 
The funding formula for full-day prekindergarten is based in part on the per-pupil amount. 
The per-pupil amount is $14,473 for fiscal 2026, escalates to $19,950 in fiscal 2027 and 
2028, and increases annually by inflation beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 
Beginning in the 2024-2025 school year, prekindergarten slots provided by eligible private 
providers must account for at least 10% of the total prekindergarten slots provided by 
eligible prekindergarten providers in each county. The proportion of eligible private 
provider prekindergarten slots in each county increases by 10 percentage points every 
school year, until, in the 2028-2029 school year, and each subsequent school year, eligible 
private provider prekindergarten slots account for at least 50% of eligible prekindergarten 
provider prekindergarten slots in each county. 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 490/ Page 19 
Priority in expanding full-day prekindergarten slots is given to three- and four-year-olds 
who are Tier I children, children with disabilities regardless of family income, and children 
living in homes where English is not the primary spoken language. The proportion of 
enrolled Tier I children who are three- and four-year-olds must increase annually until all 
such children are enrolled in a full-day prekindergarten program. 
 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program 
 
The Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program, administered by MSDE, is intended to 
broaden the availability of high-quality prekindergarten and school readiness services 
throughout the State for children and their families in coordination with the expansion of 
publicly funded full-day prekindergarten under the Blueprint. The program is a competitive 
grant program to provide grants to qualified providers, including (1) a local board of 
education or (2) if partnering with a local board under a memorandum of understanding, a 
State accredited or nationally accredited child care program or a nonpublic school approved 
by MSDE to provide prekindergarten services. 
 
Grants may be used to add available slots to expand prekindergarten services, including 
(1) establishing or expanding full-day prekindergarten for eligible young children and 
(2) expanding existing half-day prekindergarten programs into full-day prekindergarten for 
eligible young children. Grants may not be used (1) to supplant existing funding for 
prekindergarten services; (2) for capital improvements; or (3) to fund the same full-day 
prekindergarten slot that is funded under the full-day prekindergarten program established 
by Blueprint legislation. 
 
Through fiscal 2029, the Governor must annually appropriate to the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Fund (established to provide funds to the program) an amount that is at least 
equal to the total amount of all funds received by the program in the prior fiscal year. 
Beginning in fiscal 2030, funds appropriated to the Prekindergarten Expansion Fund must 
be consolidated into the publicly funded full-day prekindergarten program. 
 
Public School Transportation 
 
All school systems are required to arrange transportation to and from school for all public 
school students and are required to provide transportation to and from school for all 
disabled students. The State provides annual aid to public schools for the purpose of 
funding student transportation. The funding consists of two parts:  a base grant that is 
adjusted annually; and a per-pupil grant based on the number of students with special 
transportation needs. 
 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 490/ Page 20 
Local Funding for Public Schools 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board equivalent to the greater of the per-pupil maintenance of 
effort (MOE) requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The 
per-pupil MOE amount is based upon the enrollment count as defined above. The local 
share of major education aid programs equals the local share of the foundation formula, 
compensatory 
education, 
English 
learner, 
special 
education, 
CWI, 
full-day 
prekindergarten, CCR, transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), and 
career ladder grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from the compensatory education 
State funding floor are required to fund the local share of CPG. However, for some 
counties, the combined local share across these several programs is subject to adjustments 
described below. Additionally, under Chapter 336 of 2024, the State and county 
governments must pay for Blueprint implementation coordinator salaries in the same 
proportion as the foundation program. 
 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several other funding formula programs. The law also includes a 
mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund each year. This 
involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by dividing the 
county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An “education effort 
index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average education effort” 
is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for each county, which is the 
county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid), is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or 
(3) at least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased up 
from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. State 
relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education effort 
adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per-pupil MOE is met each year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the GTB program, the 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 490/ Page 21 
local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except that for Baltimore City 
only the amount above $10.0 million may be reduced from the local share; (2) if a county 
receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% for the foundation and 
40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at least 0.13, the local 
share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, the local share may 
not be reduced to below the required per-pupil MOE amount. 
 
Minimum School Funding Requirement 
 
Each local board of education must distribute to its public schools at least 75% of the 
applicable per-pupil funding amounts generated under the foundation program and most 
major education aid formulas. In addition, local boards must distribute 100% of the 
per-pupil amounts provided under the concentration of poverty grant program and for 
eligible private provider prekindergarten slots. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 21