START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 426 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 426 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Petition for Guardianship of the Property of Alleged Disabled Person - Stay of 
Civil Actions and Proceedings 
 
 
This bill, on the filing of a petition for guardianship of the property of an alleged disabled 
person, authorizes a party to the guardianship to file a request for the stay of specified civil 
actions or proceedings with the court presiding over the civil action or proceeding. The 
party to the guardianship must give specified notice to the parties to the civil action and 
notify the court granting the stay, and any party to the action, if a guardian is appointed or 
the petition is denied, dismissed, or withdrawn. The court must lift the stay if a guardian is 
appointed or the petition is denied, and a stay may not remain in effect for more than 
90 days after the filing of the petition. The bill applies prospectively and may not be applied 
or interpreted to have any effect on or application to any petition for the guardianship of 
the property of an alleged disabled person filed before the bill’s effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing resources, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 426/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Request for a Stay of Civil Actions or Proceedings 
 
The bill, on the filing of a petition for guardianship of the property of an alleged disabled 
person, authorizes a party to the guardianship to file, with a court presiding over a civil 
action or proceeding against the alleged disabled person, a request for the stay of any of 
the following civil actions or proceedings, as specified:   
 
 
an action for failure to pay rent; 
 
a warrant of restitution; 
 
an action for wrongful detainer; 
 
a foreclosure action; 
 
a sheriff’s sale; and 
 
an action against the property of the alleged disabled person. 
 
The court must lift a stay on (1) the appointment of a temporary or permanent guardian of 
the property of the disabled person, whichever occurs first, or (2) the denial of the petition. 
A stay may not remain in effect for more than 90 days after the filing of the petition. 
 
Stay – Notice and Service of Process 
 
A party to the guardianship of the property of an alleged disabled person requesting the 
stay of a civil action specified above must (1) provide notice of the petition and the request 
for the stay to all parties to that action and (2) notify a court granting a stay, and any party 
to the action, of the appointment of a temporary or permanent guardian of the property of 
the disabled person, or the denial, dismissal, or withdrawal of the petition. 
 
Service of process on an alleged disabled person for an action stayed pursuant to the bill 
must be accomplished by serving the temporary or permanent guardian of the property of 
the disabled person. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Civil Actions or Proceedings 
 
Statute authorizes actions identified in the bill as described below:   
 
 
Action for Failure to Pay Rent – A landlord may file a complaint in District Court 
for repossession of the premises for a tenant’s failure to pay rent after providing 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 426/ Page 3 
written notice to the tenant of the landlord’s intent, as specified. A summons is 
issued and served by a constable or sheriff notifying the tenant to appear before the 
District Court (and answer the complaint) at a trial held on the fifth day after the 
filing of the complaint. 
 
Warrant of Restitution – If judgment by the District Court in a failure to pay rent 
action is in favor of the landlord and the tenant does not return the premises to the 
landlord or otherwise satisfy the judgment by paying the applicable rent and late 
fees within 7 days, as specified, the court must, at any time after 7 days have elapsed, 
issue a warrant of restitution if requested by the landlord within 60 days, as 
specified. A warrant of restitution is forwarded to the local sheriff’s office who is 
then authorized to carry out the eviction. 
 
Action for Wrongful Detainer – Subject to specified exceptions, if a person holds 
possession of a property to which he or she is not entitled, a person claiming 
possession may file a complaint, in writing, with the District Court, which must 
immediately summon the person in possession of the property to appear before the 
court to show why the court should not restore possession of the property to the 
person who filed the complaint. 
 
Residential Property Foreclosure Action – An action to foreclose a mortgage or 
deed of trust on residential property may not be filed until the later of  
(1) 90 days after a default in a condition on which the mortgage or deed of trust 
specifies that a sale may be made or (2) 45 days after a notice of intent to foreclose 
is sent. A complaint to foreclose must be filed with the circuit court, and a copy 
must be served on the mortgagor or grantor. 
 
Sheriff’s Sale – a sheriff or constable to whom any writ of execution is directed may 
seize and sell (subject to specified notice requirements) the legal or equitable 
interest of the defendant named in the writ in real or personal property and distribute 
the proceeds pursuant to the Maryland Rules. 
 
Guardianship of the Property of a Disabled Person 
 
A circuit court is authorized, on petition and after notice or hearing as required by law or 
the Maryland Rules, to appoint a guardian of the property of a disabled person. A guardian 
must be appointed if the court determines that (1) the person is unable to manage effectively 
the person’s property and affairs because of physical or mental disability, disease, habitual 
drunkenness, drug addiction, imprisonment, compulsory hospitalization, detention by a 
foreign power, or disappearance and (2) the person has or may be entitled to property or 
benefits that require proper management. Unless the alleged disabled person has chosen 
counsel, the court must appoint an attorney to represent the alleged disabled person in the 
protective proceeding. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 426/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises the bill can be 
implemented with existing resources. The Judiciary has indicated that programming is 
needed to implement the bill, at a cost of $142,238; however, DLS advises that the bill can 
reasonably be implemented without programming changes. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on any small businesses 
that are plaintiffs in the actions listed in the bill that may experience a delay or loss of 
revenues as a result of a stay pursuant to the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 756 of 2025 and HB 359 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
me/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4