START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 402 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 402 
(Delegate Holmes, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Common Ownership Communities - Ombudsman Unit, Governing Document 
Database, and Local Commissions 
 
 
This bill establishes the Common Ownership Community Ombudsman Unit (COCOU) 
within the Office of the Attorney General’s (OAG) Consumer Protection Division. The bill 
also requires common ownership communities (COCs) to file certain governing documents 
with the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), which the 
department must use to create a publicly assessable database. Furthermore, the bill 
establishes specific requirements for local common ownership commissions created by 
local governments, including requirements related to membership, fees, coordination with 
other local government agencies, and the registration of COCs. The bill also establishes 
procedures and requirements for dispute resolution. Provisions established under the bill 
related to local commissions and dispute resolution supersede any inconsistent provisions 
of local law that conflict with the bill to the extent of the conflict. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $720,000 in FY 2027, and by minimal 
amounts annually thereafter, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for OAG and 
DHCD increase by a total of $343,016 in FY 2027. Future year expenditures reflect 
annualization, inflation, and termination of contractual programming costs.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$720,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$343,000 
$350,200 
$366,400 
$382,800 
$399,500 
Net Effect 
$377,000 
(–) 
(–) 
(–) 
(–)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 402/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase to the extent local governments 
utilize their authority under the bill to establish local common ownership commissions or 
incur costs to conform operations of existing commissions to the bill’s requirements. Local 
government revenues increase if local governments establish fees, as authorized under the 
bill. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “common ownership community” means a condominium; cooperative housing 
corporation; or a homeowners association (HOA), as those terms are defined in applicable 
statute, as specified. The bill explicitly excludes a time‐share project (as defined in 
§ 11A-101 of the Real Property Article) from the definition in certain provisions.  
 
A “dispute” means a disagreement between at least two parties that involves:   
 
 
the authority of a governing body of a COC to (1) require or prohibit any action 
involving a unit or common element; (2) require any person to pay a fee, a fine, or 
an assessment; (3) spend COC funds; or (4) alter or add to a common element; or 
 
the failure of a governing body of a COC to (1) properly conduct an election; 
(2) give adequate notice of a meeting or other action; (3) properly conduct a 
meeting; (4) properly adopt a budget or rules; (5) maintain or audit books and 
records; (6) allow inspection of books and records; (7) maintain or repair a common 
element if the failure results in significant personal injury or property damage; or 
(8) exercise its judgment in good faith concerning the enforcement of the governing 
documents against any person that is subject to those documents. 
 
However, a dispute does not include a disagreement that involves title to any unit or 
common element; the percentage interest or vote allocable to a unit; the interpretation or 
enforcement of any warranty; the collection of an assessment validly levied against a party; 
or the exercise of the judgment or discretion of a COC regarding any legally authorized 
action.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 402/ Page 3 
Common Ownership Community Ombudsman Unit  
 
As specified, COCOU is generally responsible for monitoring changes in relevant laws, 
publishing information concerning COCs on the OAG website, assisting members in 
understanding their rights, and providing referrals to alternative dispute resolution services 
when requested. 
 
The unit must receive and respond to complaints from members regarding final adverse 
decisions made by a governing body or COC manager. In response to a complaint, or on 
the ombudsman’s initiative, the unit must:   
 
 
refer the complaint to an appropriate local commission for further review of whether 
the final adverse decision conflicts with laws or regulations governing COCs in the 
jurisdiction; or  
 
determine whether the final adverse decision conflicts with laws or regulations 
governing COCs and promptly notify the complainant of the determination. 
 
If COCOU determines that a final adverse decision conflicts with laws or regulations 
governing COCs, it must promptly notify the member, the governing board, and, if 
applicable, the COC manager. If, within one year of issuing a determination, the 
ombudsman receives a subsequent complaint for the same violation, COCOU must refer 
the matter to the appropriate local commission. 
COCOU must include a full‐time ombudsman and staff as provided in the State budget. 
The ombudsman, appointed by the Attorney General, must be a member of the 
Maryland Bar. Beginning December 1, 2028, COCOU is required to report its activities 
annually to DHCD and the General Assembly, including information on complaints 
received, assistance requested, actions taken, referrals made, and the outcomes of 
complaints. 
Common Ownership Communities – Database and Filings  
The bill requires COCs to file copies of their governing documents (and any amendments 
to the documents) with DHCD. COCs that fail to comply are subject to a $500 fine. The 
bill requires DHCD to develop and maintain a publicly accessible online database of these 
filed documents. DHCD may charge up to $100 for an initial filing and up to $25 for any 
amendment to a governing document. 
 
Local Government Commissions – In General 
 
Membership:  If a local government establishes a local commission on common ownership 
communities, the commission must include members (1) who are owners in a COC and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 402/ Page 4 
(2) represent certain professions, as specified. Each local government must also determine 
the total number of members of the local commission.  
 
In addition, a designee of the local government and a designee of a county agency dealing 
with planning, environment, permitting, transportation, or housing and community affairs 
must serve as nonvoting members. 
 
The chair and vice chair of a local commission must be elected from among the voting 
membership of the local commission. A local government establishing a commission must 
adopt procedures for the appointment and terms of members; however, a member of a local 
commission may not serve more than two consecutive terms.  
 
Operating Requirements and Procedures:  A local commission must meet at least monthly. 
A member of a local commission may not receive compensation as a member but is entitled 
to reimbursement for expenses under the standard county travel regulations. A local 
commission must:   
 
 
adopt rules of professional conduct as appropriate for members and staff; 
 
keep a record of its proceedings; 
 
examine the needs of COCs in the county; 
 
advise county government and appropriate State and federal agencies on matters 
relating to COCs; and 
 
provide training on the responsibilities of a local commission’s members to the 
governing body of a COC by (1) developing an educational curriculum for new 
members and (2) approving an alternative educational curriculum for new members.  
 
A local commission may:   
 
 
employ staff as authorized by a local government; 
 
establish a process for resolving disciplinary matters pending before the local 
commission through nonjudicial dispute resolution processes; 
 
develop educational and training opportunities for governing bodies; 
 
adopt additional bylaws necessary to carry out the business of the local commission; 
and; 
 
adopt any additional regulations, procedures, or standards consistent with the 
mission of the local commission and to carry out the requirements of the bill.  
 
If a local government establishes a local commission, the local government must designate 
a county agency or office to, among other responsibilities:   
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 402/ Page 5 
 
disseminate educational materials regarding programs that assist COCs; 
 
conduct educational programs to promote the operation of COCs; 
 
maintain information and a referral system for all county services related to COCs; 
 
provide technical assistance to governing bodies on specified matters; 
 
advise COCs and professional association managers of changes in the laws and 
regulations that affect their communities or operations; and 
 
operate a dispute resolution process to furnish mediation and administrative 
hearings.  
 
When establishing a local common ownership commission, the local government must 
require COCs in the county to register with the local commission annually, using a form 
meeting specified requirements. If a COC fails to register or makes a false statement on the 
registration form, the entity becomes ineligible to file a dispute. 
 
Authorized Fees:  A local government that establishes a local common ownership 
commission may authorize the collection of a reasonable fee for services provided by the 
commission. Any authorized fee must be used to cover the cost of maintaining the local 
commission, as specified. If collection of a fee by a local commission is authorized, the 
local commission must publish the fee schedule.  
 
Local Government Commissions – Dispute Resolution  
 
In General:  A local commission may hear any dispute between parties. However, a party 
may not file a dispute with a local commission until (1) the party has made a good faith 
effort to exhaust all procedures and remedies provided by the governing documents of the 
COC and (2) at least 60 days after a procedure or remedy has been initiated with the 
governing body of a COC.  
 
If the governing body of a COC determines that a dispute exists, it must notify the other 
parties of the option to file the dispute with a local commission. The governing body of a 
COC is prohibited from taking action to enforce or implement the decision of the governing 
body for 14 days following notification of all other parties.  
 
Stays:  Unless specified otherwise, on the filing of a dispute with a local commission, the 
decision of the governing body of a COC must be stayed and may not be enforced or 
implemented, other than by filing a civil action, until the completion of the dispute process.  
 
The bill authorizes the governing body of a COC to submit a request to lift an automatic 
stay under the bill and establishes related procedures, including those governing service 
and the formation of a panel to consider requests for relief from stays (and grant requests, 
as appropriate and specified in the bill).  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 402/ Page 6 
Procedures:  Following the filing of a dispute with a local commission, the designated 
local coordinating agency may investigate facts and assemble documents relevant to the 
dispute and may prepare a summary of the issues in the dispute for use by the local 
commission. The designated agency may (1) notify a party if it finds that a dispute was not 
properly filed and (2) notify each party of the dispute regarding possible sanctions.  
 
If the designated agency finds that (assuming all facts alleged by the party that filed the 
dispute are true) there are no reasonable grounds to conclude that a violation of applicable 
law or any governing document has occurred, the designated agency must inform the local 
commission. 
 
On receipt of the results of an investigation by a designated agency, a local commission 
may (1) if it finds that there are no reasonable grounds to conclude that a violation of 
applicable law or any governing document has occurred, dismiss the dispute; (2) request 
additional investigation by the designated agency; or (3) schedule a hearing on the dispute. 
A local commission may reconsider the dismissal of a dispute if any party files a motion 
to reconsider, as specified.  
 
Mediation:  Any party in a dispute may request mediation. If a party requests mediation, 
the local commission must notify all parties of the request and of the mediation session. A 
local commission must provide a qualified mediator to meet with the parties within 30 days 
after a party requests mediation to attempt to settle the dispute.  
 
However, if a party refuses to attend a mediation session, or if mediation does not 
successfully resolve the dispute within 10 days after the first mediation session is held, the 
local commission must promptly schedule a hearing.  
 
Hearings:  If a hearing is scheduled, the chair of the local commission must convene a 
panel to hear the dispute. The bill specifies requirements for membership of the panel. A 
hearing panel must hold a hearing on each dispute that is not resolved through mediation 
under the bill unless the local commission determines that the dispute is identical to another 
dispute between the same parties on which a hearing has already been held under the bill’s 
provisions or is clearly not within the jurisdiction of the local commission.  
 
A local commission must provide specified notice of a hearing to all parties. A party or 
witness may be advised by counsel at a hearing. If a party, after proper notice, does not 
appear at the scheduled hearing, the hearing panel may order any relief for another party 
that the facts on record warrant.  
 
The hearing panel must apply State and county laws and all relevant case law to the facts 
of the dispute. A decision of the hearing panel is binding on the parties. A local commission 
may enforce a decision of the hearing panel by appropriate legal action. In addition to any 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 402/ Page 7 
other enforcement action, a local commission may (1) file for injunctive relief to enforce 
or correct any violation and (2) file to recover damages for a loss sustained as a result of a 
violation.  
 
A hearing panel may award costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees, to any party if any 
other party (1) filed or maintained a frivolous dispute, or filed or maintained a dispute in 
bad faith; (2) refused to participate in mediation of a dispute; or (3) substantially delayed 
or hindered the dispute resolution process without good cause. In addition, a hearing panel 
may require a losing party in a dispute to pay all or part of any filing fee. A local 
government may establish additional hearing procedures and requirements, as specified.  
 
Appeals:  Any party may appeal a hearing panel decision to a court with proper jurisdiction. 
An appeal of a decision must be consolidated with any case arising from the same facts. 
The court hearing an appeal must sustain the decision of the hearing panel unless the 
decision is inconsistent with applicable law, lacks substantial evidence, or is arbitrary and 
capricious.  
 
Civil Cause of Action:  A party may file a civil action arising from a governing document 
or a law regulating the powers of a governing body of a COC. If the court is notified that a 
dispute has been filed with a local commission in accordance with the bill, the court may 
postpone a proceeding for at least 90 days. The court may hear the action de novo if a 
hearing panel assigned to the dispute has not issued a decision on the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, State statute includes the Maryland Condominium Act, the 
Maryland Homeowners Association Act, and the Maryland Cooperative Housing 
Corporation Act, all of which regulate various aspects of COC operations.  
 
For more information on condominiums, HOAs, and cooperative housing corporations, 
commonly known as COCs, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase by an estimated $720,000 in fiscal 2027 
from filing fees collected as COCs in the State file governing documents with DHCD, as 
required by the bill. General fund revenues increase by $100 for each COC that files with 
DHCD (assuming the department exercises its authority to levy the maximum fee 
permissible under the bill). Although the precise number of COCs in the State is unknown, 
this estimate reflects 2024 information from the Foundation for Community Association 
Research, which estimated approximately 7,200 COCs in Maryland. This analysis assumes 
that each existing COC files within the first fiscal year of implementation (i.e., during 
fiscal 2027).  
 
General fund revenues may further increase from fees collected for noncompliant 
communities or amendments to governing documents; the bill authorizes DHCD to assess 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 402/ Page 8 
fees of up to $500 and $25, respectively. Additionally, while any significant revenue effect 
from filing fees is assumed to occur in fiscal 2027 to account for the initial influx of COC 
filings, general fund revenues increase in the out‐years by $100 for each newly established 
COC that files with DHCD and to the extent that amendments are filed or fees are assessed 
on noncompliant COCs. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase for OAG and DHCD by 
$343,016 in fiscal 2027 to staff COCOU and develop the database required under the bill. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
Additional staff within OAG are required in order to establish the new ombudsman unit 
under the bill. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $293,012 in fiscal 2027, 
which assumes a 90‐day start‐up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one assistant Attorney General to serve as the 
ombudsman, one administrator, and one administrative clerk.  
 
Full-Time Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$268,318 
One-time Startup Costs 
18,446 
Other Operating Costs  
      6,248 
FY 2026 OAG Expenditures 
$293,012 
 
Future years reflect annualization and other ongoing operating costs. Additional resources 
may be needed in future years, depending on the total workload caused the bill’s 
requirements. However, without experience under the bill, the Department of Legislative 
Services is unable to reliably estimate the need for any additional staff beyond those 
accounted for in this fiscal and policy note. To the extent, however, that additional 
resources are required, OAG can request additional positions through the annual budget 
process. 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
DHCD advises that current staff are unable to complete the bill’s requirement to initially 
develop and program a database capable of maintaining the governing documents of each 
COC within the State and make those documents publicly available. Accordingly, 
general fund expenditures for DHCD increase by $50,004 in fiscal 2027 only for 
contractual costs associated with database development and programming. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 402/ Page 9 
Judiciary 
 
Any impact on the judiciary is anticipated to be minimal and handled within existing 
budgeted resources. To the extent that the Judiciary is unable to handle the bill’s changes, 
additional resources may be requested.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not require local governments to establish local 
commissions on COCs. To the extent that a local government elects to establish such a 
commission, local government expenditures likely increase. The bill’s impact on local 
government revenues depends upon whether a county establishes fees in accordance with 
the bill’s provisions; depending on the amount of any potential fees charged, such fees may 
partially, if not fully, cover operating costs.  
 
Counties that have already elected to establish local commissions are, however, subject to 
the bill’s requirements and may incur associated costs to conform current commission 
operations to the requirements under the bill. For example, Charles County (which 
administers a local government Homeowners Association Dispute Resolution Board) 
estimates the need for at least four additional staff members, with associated expenditures 
of at least $358,293 on an annual basis. These costs may be offset to the extent the county 
alters its current fee structure to cover the additional expense. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The impact is potentially meaningful if local governments 
establish commissions and COCs are subject to more fees and costs related to the dispute 
resolution process as specified under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 306 and SB 866 of 2025 and HB 1457 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; Office of 
the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 402/ Page 10 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 10