START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 476 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 476 
(Delegate Ziegler, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Civil Actions - Noneconomic Damages - Personal Injury and Wrongful Death 
 
 
This bill repeals the limitations (caps) on noneconomic damages in civil actions for 
personal injury or wrongful death and related provisions. The bill does not alter the caps 
on damages in medical malpractice cases, which are addressed in a different statute. The 
bill applies prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or 
application to any cause of action arising before October 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
expenditures, as discussed below. The bill may have an operational effect on the Judiciary. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may have an operational effect on the circuit courts. Revenues are 
not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There is no cap on economic damages or punitive damages in Maryland. 
However, there are caps on noneconomic damages. “Noneconomic damages” means 
(1) for personal injury actions – pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment, 
disfigurement, loss of consortium, or other nonpecuniary injury and (2) for wrongful death 
actions – mental anguish, emotional pain and suffering, loss of society, companionship, 
comfort, protection, care, marital care, parental care, filial care, attention, advice, counsel, 
training, guidance, or education, or other noneconomic damages authorized under specified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 476/ Page 2 
statutes pertaining to wrongful death causes of action. “Noneconomic damages” does not 
include punitive damages. 
 
In any action for damages for personal injury or wrongful death (excluding medical 
malpractice) in which the cause of action arises on or after October 1, 1994, an award for 
noneconomic damages may not exceed $500,000. This limitation increases by $15,000  
on October 1 of each year, beginning on October 1, 1995. The increased amount must  
apply to causes of action arising between October 1 of that year and September 30 of the 
following year, inclusive. (As of October 1, 2026, this cap will be $980,000.) This 
limitation applies in a personal injury action to each direct victim of tortious conduct and 
all persons who claim injury by or through that victim.  
 
In a wrongful death action (excluding medical malpractice) in which there are two or more 
claimants or beneficiaries, an award for noneconomic damages may not exceed 150% of 
the limitation listed above, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share 
in the award. (As of October 1, 2026, this cap will be $1,470,000). The cap applies 
separately to a wrongful death claim and a survival action. (Thus, the cap for a wrongful 
death claim involving two or more claimants or beneficiaries accompanied by a survival 
action is $2,450,000 as of October 1, 2026.) 
 
An award by the health claims arbitration panel in accordance with specified provisions 
for damages in which the cause of action arose before January 1, 2005, must be considered 
an award for purposes of these provisions. 
 
In a jury trial, the jury may not be informed of these limitations on damages. If the jury 
awards an amount for noneconomic damages that exceeds the applicable limitation, the 
court must reduce the amount to conform to the limitation. In a wrongful death action in 
which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, if the jury awards an amount for 
noneconomic damages that exceeds the applicable limitation, the court must reduce the 
award in accordance with specified provisions. 
 
These provisions do not apply to a verdict for damages under Title 3, Subtitle 2A of the 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article (medical malpractice). 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures may increase significantly if the Maryland Transit 
Administration (MTA) has to pay higher noneconomic damages or insurance premiums 
under the bill. Should the bill result in a noticeable increase in litigation and time spent on 
civil cases in the circuit courts, the bill may have an operational impact on the Judiciary.  
 
The bill does not affect the liability limits under the Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA). 
Among other provisions, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for 
injuries arising from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 476/ Page 3 
if liability of the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a 
violation of a constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following 
limits on liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic 
damages may not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident 
or occurrence, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the 
award; and (2) in a wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or 
beneficiaries, an award for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless 
of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award. Separate provisions 
apply to claims involving child sexual abuse.  
 
While most State agencies are covered by the liability limits of MTCA, MTA’s tort liability 
is governed by the Transportation Article. Unlike MTCA, the Transportation Article does 
not include a limit on liability. 
 
MTA advises that removal of the noneconomic damages cap likely leads to significantly 
greater awards and settlements against MTA, and a lack of predictability in litigating and 
settling MTA cases. Also, it is possible that this change may affect MTA’s access to excess 
insurance or deductible amounts. MTA has a self-insured retention of $10.0 million for 
local bus and $5.0 million for rail. Noneconomic damages are considered during all 
settlement negotiations. MTA advises that it has settled 14 claims that ranged from 
$490,000 to $7.0 million within the last eight years and has several pedestrian and fatality 
cases that are reserved at $5.0 million. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Should the bill result in a noticeable increase in litigation and time 
spent on civil cases in the circuit courts, the bill may have an operational impact on the 
circuit courts. 
 
With respect to local governments, the liability limits of the Local Government Tort Claims 
Act (LGTCA) continue to apply despite the bill’s provisions. In general, LGTCA limits 
the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual claim and $800,000 per total 
claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from tortious acts or omissions 
(including intentional and constitutional torts). However, for claims arising on or after 
July 1, 2022, if the liability of a local government arises from intentional tortious acts or 
omissions or a violation of a constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, 
the following limits on liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and 
noneconomic damages may not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the 
same incident or occurrence, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who 
share in the award; and (2) in a wrongful death action in which there are two or more 
claimants 
or 
beneficiaries, 
an 
award 
for 
noneconomic 
damages 
may 
not 
exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the 
award. Separate provisions apply to claims involving child sexual abuse. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 476/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  The bill has a meaningful impact on small business law firms that 
litigate applicable cases and small businesses that are parties to applicable civil actions. 
Depending on the overall effect of the bill on the insurance market, the bill may have a 
meaningful effect on insurance costs for small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 584 and HB 113 of 2025; SB 538 and HB 83 of 2024; and HB 862 of 
2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 474 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Maryland Health Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4