START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 405 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 405 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Condominiums and Homeowners Associations - Governing Documents - Electric 
Vehicle Recharging Equipment 
 
 
This bill prohibits the governing documents of a condominium or homeowners association 
(HOA) from prohibiting or unreasonably restricting the installation (or authorization of 
installation) of electric vehicle recharging equipment in common or limited common use 
parking spaces. The bill establishes that such installations are subject to the budget process 
for a comparable common area/element renovation or alteration of similar cost or 
magnitude and requires the governing body to assess community parking capacity before 
installation or authorization. Additionally, the governing body of a condominium or HOA 
may grant a license, renewable at the discretion of the governing body, for up to three years 
on any common element necessary for equipment installation or electricity supply. The bill 
applies retroactively and must be applied to and interpreted to affect any covenant or 
restriction, or provision in a declaration, bylaws, or rules, recorded or adopted on or before 
the bill’s effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Electric vehicle recharging equipment” means property in the State that 
is used for recharging motor vehicles propelled by electricity, including motor vehicles and 
electric bicycles. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 405/ Page 2 
Sections 11‐111.4 and 11B-111.8 of the Real Property Article govern the process for the 
installation and use of electric vehicle recharging equipment within a condominium or 
HOA community, respectively, in a unit/lot owner’s deeded parking space or a parking 
space that is specifically designated for use by a particular owner. Generally, if approval 
is required, the governing body of the condominium or HOA must process and review an 
application for approval of the installation/use of electric vehicle recharging equipment in 
the same manner as an application for approval of an architectural modification to the 
condominium/dwelling within an HOA. The governing body must approve the installation 
if it does not unreasonably impede the normal use of an area outside the unit/lot owner’s 
parking space and is reasonably possible. The governing body of a condominium or HOA 
is authorized under these provisions to grant a license for up to three years, renewable at 
the discretion of the governing body, on any common element necessary for the installation 
of equipment or for the supply of electricity to any electric vehicle recharging equipment. 
 
Before installing electric vehicle recharging equipment, an owner must either provide a 
certificate of insurance to the condominium or HOA naming the entity as an additional 
insured or reimburse the association for any increased insurance premiums attributable to 
the electric vehicle recharging equipment. Insurance coverage for the electric vehicle 
recharging equipment must be maintained for as long as the equipment and all related 
components are installed. 
 
Any provisions of governing documents for condominiums and HOAs (including the 
bylaws, covenants, or other restrictions) are void and unenforceable if they (1) are in 
conflict with the aforementioned provisions or (2) effectively prohibit or unreasonably 
restrict the installation or use of electric vehicle recharging equipment in a unit/lot owner’s 
deeded parking space or a parking space that is specifically designated for use by a 
particular owner. 
 
For more information on condominiums and HOAs – which, along with cooperative 
housing corporations, are collectively known as common ownership communities – see the 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 673 of 2025 and HB 1010 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 405/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Energy Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 405/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 4