START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 467 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 467 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Correctional Services - Maryland Parole Commission - Improvements in 
Transparency and Equity 
 
 
This bill establishes that the Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) does not have the 
authority to permanently deny parole and that an incarcerated individual is entitled to a 
subsequent parole hearing at specified intervals, based on length of sentence, after each 
parole hearing that results in a denial of parole. In addition, the bill (1) establishes 
requirements for hearings and hearing recordings; (2) alters the information that each 
hearing examiner and commissioner determining whether an incarcerated individual is 
suitable for parole, and MPC before entering into a predetermined parole release 
agreement, must consider; (3) alters the information that MPC must provide to an 
incarcerated individual relating to a parole hearing; (4) requires that each commissioner’s 
reasoning and justifications for a vote to approve or deny parole be made available to the 
public; (5) decreases, from 21 days to 14 days, the period of time after a hearing within 
which the hearing examiner must give a written report of its findings and recommendation 
to approve or deny parole to MPC, the Commissioner of Correction, and the incarcerated 
individual (and requires that the report include the reasoning and justifications for the 
recommendation); (6) requires prompt written notice of MPC’s final decision, as specified; 
and (7) requires MPC’s annual report to the Governor to include specified information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $238,800 in FY 2027. 
Future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
238,800 
272,700 
285,800 
298,900 
312,000 
Net Effect 
($238,800) 
($272,700) 
($285,800) 
($298,900) 
($312,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 467/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Information Provided to the Incarcerated Individual:  The bill requires MPC to provide an 
incarcerated individual copies of all documents that MPC or the hearing examiner will use 
in determining whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole (instead of 
allowing the incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative, on 
request, access to examine any documents before the hearing). Existing provisions 
regarding documents (or portions of documents) not available for examination still apply. 
 
Victim Impact Statement:  Each hearing examiner and commissioner determining whether 
an incarcerated individual is suitable for parole, and MPC before entering into a 
predetermined parole release agreement, must consider, in addition to an updated victim 
impact statement, any victim’s original or subsequently filed victim impact statement and 
any victim recommendation prepared for the parole release hearing, as specified. 
 
Prompt Written Notice of Final Decision:  The bill requires MPC to promptly give the 
incarcerated individual written notice of its final decision to approve or deny parole. If the 
final decision is to deny parole, within 14 days after the hearing, MPC must give the 
incarcerated individual a written report of its findings, including the reasoning and 
justifications for the decision, and written notice of the date of the incarcerated individual’s 
next parole hearing. 
 
Hearings and Hearing Recordings:  An incarcerated individual is entitled to a subsequent 
parole hearing after each parole hearing that results in a denial of parole at the following 
intervals: 
 
 
not later than two years after the parole hearing for an incarcerated individual 
sentenced to a period of incarceration of 10 years or less; 
 
not later than three years after the parole hearing for an incarcerated individual 
sentenced to a period of incarceration exceeding 10 years but not more than 
20 years; and 
 
not later than three years after the first parole hearing and not later than five years 
thereafter for an incarcerated individual sentenced to a period of incarceration 
exceeding 20 years for a crime against an individual. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 467/ Page 3 
MPC must record each hearing. Each hearing recording must be (1) redacted of all 
personally identifiable information of the victim and (2) made readily available to the 
incarcerated individual. Each hearing recording must be retained electronically for 
three years after the incarcerated individual is released from incarceration, all 
postincarceration supervision is completed, and all appeals are exhausted, whichever 
happens last. 
 
Any statements, recommendations, and other materials considered by MPC must be 
incorporated into the recording of the hearing, unless confidentiality is necessary to 
preserve institutional security or the security of persons who might be endangered by 
disclosure. 
 
At the conclusion of each hearing, the presiding commissioner must state MPC’s findings, 
reasoning, and justifications on the record. 
 
Annual Report to the Governor:  The annual report that MPC must submit to the Governor 
pursuant to current law must include the following information, disaggregated by race of 
the relevant incarcerated individuals: 
 
 
the number of cases in which MPC granted parole; 
 
the number of cases in which MPC denied parole and the reason for each denial; 
 
the number of incarcerated individuals who were granted administrative release; 
 
the number of hearings held and the purpose of each hearing; and 
 
the number of incarcerated individuals who are parole-eligible but have not been 
granted parole. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Parole – Generally:  Parole is a discretionary and conditional release from imprisonment 
determined after a hearing for an incarcerated individual who is eligible to be considered 
for parole. If parole is granted, the incarcerated individual is allowed to serve the remainder 
of the sentence in the community, subject to the terms and conditions specified in a written 
parole order. 
 
MPC has jurisdiction regarding parole for eligible incarcerated individuals sentenced to 
State correctional facilities and local detention centers. Incarcerated individuals in the 
Patuxent Institution who are eligible for parole are under the jurisdiction of the 
Patuxent Board of Review. 
 
Maryland Parole Commission:  Among other powers, MPC has the exclusive power to 
hear cases for parole or administrative release in which:   

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 467/ Page 4 
 
the Commissioner of Correction, after reviewing the recommendation of the 
appropriate managing official, objects to a parole; 
 
the incarcerated individual was convicted of a homicide; 
 
the incarcerated individual is serving a sentence of life imprisonment; 
 
the parole hearing is open to the public, as specified; 
 
the incarcerated individual fails to meet the requirements of the administrative 
release process, as specified; 
 
a victim requests a hearing, as specified; or 
 
MPC finds that a hearing for administrative release is necessary, as specified. 
 
In addition, MPC has the exclusive power to (1) hear exceptions to recommendations of a 
hearing examiner or a commissioner acting as a hearing examiner and (2) review 
summarily all recommendations of a hearing examiner or a commissioner acting as a 
hearing examiner to which an exception has not been filed. 
 
MPC may adopt regulations governing the conduct of proceedings before it or the hearing 
examiners and the review and disposition of written exceptions to the recommendation of 
a hearing examiner. 
 
Parole Eligibility:  Incarcerated individuals sentenced to serve less than six months are not 
eligible for parole. When incarcerated individuals serving sentences of incarceration of 
six months or more have served one-fourth of their sentences, they are entitled to be 
considered for parole, with specified exceptions. 
 
Parole Hearings:  MPC or its hearing examiners must hear cases for parole release at least 
once each month at each correctional facility in the Division of Correction and as often as 
necessary at other correctional facilities in the State at which incarcerated individuals 
eligible for parole consideration are confined. 
 
Before any hearing on parole release, MPC must give the incarcerated individual adequate 
and timely written notice of (1) the date, time, and place of the hearing, and (2) the factors 
that MPC or the hearing examiner will consider in determining whether the incarcerated 
individual is suitable for parole. The notice must also indicate that, before the hearing, the 
incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative may, on request, 
examine any document that MPC or a hearing examiner will use in determining whether 
the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole. However, a document, or a portion of it, 
is not available for examination under specified conditions. 
 
MPC must delete the address and phone number of the victim or the victim’s designated 
representative from a document before the incarcerated individual or the incarcerated 
individual’s representative examines the document. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 467/ Page 5 
A parole hearing must be open to the public if a victim makes a written request and 
maintains a current address on file or a victim or a victim’s representative files a 
notification request form, as specified, and within a reasonable amount of time before a 
scheduled hearing, the victim makes a written request that the hearing be open to the public. 
 
The vote of each commissioner when acting collectively or in a panel, to approve or deny 
parole, and a vote to close or restrict access to a parole hearing must be made available to 
the public. Generally, the victim or victim’s representative has the right to attend an open 
parole hearing; however, MPC or a panel of commissioners may (1) restrict the number of 
individuals allowed to attend a parole hearing because of facility physical limitations or 
security requirements; (2) deny admission or continued attendance at a parole hearing to 
an individual who is disruptive or threatens or presents a danger to the security of the 
facility in which the hearing is being held or to other attendees or participants; (3) close a 
parole hearing to deliberate on the evidence and any other relevant information received at 
the hearing; or (4) close a parole hearing on written request of the chief law enforcement 
official responsible for an ongoing criminal investigation related to the incarcerated 
individual, if the ongoing investigation could be compromised. These provisions do not 
limit MPC’s authority to hold a parole hearing through a video conference or other means 
of electronic transmission. 
 
Generally, a parole hearing is held before a single hearing examiner or a parole 
commissioner acting as a hearing examiner. However, if the incarcerated individual is 
serving a sentence for homicide or is serving a sentence of life imprisonment or if a victim 
requested that the hearing be opened to public attendance, a parole hearing is held before 
a panel of at least two commissioners. 
 
Consideration of Factors in Determining Suitability for Parole:  Each hearing examiner 
and commissioner determining whether an incarcerated individual is suitable for parole, 
and MPC before entering into a predetermined parole release agreement, must consider: 
 
 
the circumstances surrounding the crime; 
 
the physical, mental, and moral qualifications of the incarcerated individual; 
 
the progress of the incarcerated individual during confinement, including the 
academic progress of the incarcerated individual in the mandatory education 
program, as specified; 
 
a report on a drug or alcohol evaluation that has been conducted on the incarcerated 
individual, including any recommendations concerning the incarcerated 
individual’s amenability for treatment and the availability of an appropriate 
treatment program; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 467/ Page 6 
 
whether, taking into account the totality of the circumstances, including the age of 
the incarcerated individual, there is reasonable probability that the incarcerated 
individual, if released on parole, will not recidivate; 
 
whether release of the incarcerated individual on parole is compatible with public 
safety; 
 
an updated victim impact statement or recommendation, as specified; 
 
any recommendation made by the sentencing judge at the time of sentencing; 
 
any information that is presented to a commissioner at a meeting with the victim; 
 
any testimony presented to MPC by the victim or the victim’s designated 
representative; and 
 
compliance with the case plan, as specified. 
 
Proceedings Before a Hearing Examiner:  The MPC chairperson must assign hearing 
examiners, or commissioners acting as hearing examiners, as required to hear cases for 
parole. Each proceeding before a hearing examiner must be conducted in accordance with 
the following provisions: 
 
 
MPC must keep a record of each hearing conducted by a hearing examiner; 
 
a hearing examiner must determine if an incarcerated individual is suitable for 
parole in accordance with the factors and other information specified above; at the 
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing examiner must inform the incarcerated 
individual of the hearing examiner’s recommendation for parole or denial of parole. 
Within 21 days after the hearing, the hearing examiner must give to MPC, the 
Commissioner of Correction, and the incarcerated individual a written report of the 
hearing examiner’s findings and recommendation for parole or denial of parole. The 
Commissioner of Correction or the incarcerated individual may file with MPC 
written exceptions to the report of a hearing examiner no later than 5 days after the 
report is received; 
 
one commissioner assigned by the MPC chairperson must review summarily the 
recommendation of the hearing examiner. MPC, on its own initiative or on the filing 
of an exception, may schedule a hearing on the record by MPC in its entirety or by 
a panel of at least two commissioners assigned by the MPC chairperson. MPC or a 
panel must render a written decision on the appeal. The decision of MPC or the 
panel is final; and 
 
if an exception is not filed and MPC does not act on its own initiative within the 
five-day appeal period, the recommendation of the hearing examiner is approved. 
 
Recommendations and Decisions:  MPC may grant parole, deny parole, or decide to rehear 
the case at a future date. The hearing examiner must verbally inform the incarcerated 
individual of the hearing examiner’s recommendation immediately after the hearing and 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 467/ Page 7 
submit a written report of findings and recommendations to MPC, the Commissioner of 
Correction, and the incarcerated individual within 21 days after the hearing. After receiving 
the recommendation, a parole commissioner is required to review the written 
recommendations of the hearing examiner. The commissioner may either approve or 
disapprove the hearing examiner’s recommendation. If the recommendation is approved, 
the decision is sent to the incarcerated individual and to the Commissioner of Correction. 
If the recommendation is disapproved, the decision is sent to a two-commissioner panel for 
the issuance of a final decision. 
 
The incarcerated individual and the Commissioner of Correction have five days after 
receipt of the hearing examiner’s written decision to file with MPC a written exception to 
the hearing examiner’s recommendations. If an exception is not filed, the recommendation 
of the hearing examiner is adopted. If an exception is filed, MPC or a panel of at least 
two commissioners assigned by the chairperson of MPC may schedule an appeal hearing. 
The appeal hearing is on the record, and the decision of MPC or the panel is final. 
 
Decisions of a two-commissioner panel must be unanimous. When the members of a 
two‑commissioner panel disagree, the chairperson of MPC must convene a three‑member 
panel to hear the case. Decisions by more than two commissioners are by majority vote. 
 
MPC must inform the incarcerated individual and the appropriate correctional authority of 
MPC’s decision as soon as possible. If parole is denied, MPC must give the incarcerated 
individual a written report of its findings within 30 days after the hearing. 
 
Other Duties:  MPC also reviews cases and makes recommendations to the Governor 
concerning medical parole of an incarcerated individual serving a sentence of life 
imprisonment. In addition, MPC reviews cases concerning pardons, commutations, or 
other clemency at the request of the Governor. 
 
State Expenditures:  MPC advises that the commission conducts approximately 
4,800 parole hearings per year. According to MPC, incarcerated individuals may request 
reconsideration approximately every one to two years after a hearing and denial of parole. 
MPC also advises that it does not currently permanently deny parole for any incarcerated 
individual serving a sentence eligible for parole. By policy, MPC records all parole 
hearings, and a copy of the audio recording may be requested by the incarcerated individual 
or the individual’s representative for a fee of $30 per recording. 
 
MPC can handle any subsequent parole hearings at the intervals required by the bill with 
existing resources; however, in order for MPC to implement the bill’s various other 
changes to the parole process, MPC needs additional staff. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures increase by at least $238,843 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring four office 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 467/ Page 8 
secretaries to (1) redact all personally identifiable information of the victim from each 
hearing recording; (2) provide the additional required information to incarcerated 
individuals within shortened timeframes; (3) provide additional information regarding 
votes to approve or deny parole to the public; and (4) include additional information in its 
annual report, as required by the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$202,280 
Operating Expenses 
    36,563 
Minimum FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$238,843 
 
Future year minimum expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any costs for packaging and postage to provide copies of 
documents to incarcerated individuals as required by the bill. Accordingly, costs are likely 
higher. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1147 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 822 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8