START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 438 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 438 
(Delegate Pasteur, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Government, 
Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Adult Prison School Board Model Development Committee 
 
 
This bill establishes the Adult Prison School Board Model Development Committee to 
(1) develop a comprehensive plan, with specified elements, for a school board system to 
oversee correctional education for individuals subject to the criminal and juvenile justice 
systems, and (2) conduct a fiscal mapping project for correctional education that examines 
funding models for the proposed board. The Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE) must provide staff for the committee. The committee must submit an interim 
report of findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly on or 
before June 1, 2027, and a final report on June 1, 2028. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, 
and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $111,500 in 
FY 2027 and $98,800 in FY 2028 for contractual staff. Any expense reimbursements for 
committee members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
111,500 
98,800 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($111,500) 
($98,800) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 438/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies commission membership and requires that members 
serve without compensation, though members are entitled to reimbursement for expenses 
under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The comprehensive plan must include (1) educational standards aligned with educational 
standards for school systems in the State, and (2) a recommendation for the school board 
to be made up of individuals who are residents of the State and who represent various 
State agencies and professional backgrounds as specified. 
 
The fiscal mapping project must examine the needs and options necessary to sustain a 
school board system, including (1) examining funding sources; (2) determining funding 
levels required for specified purposes; and (3) developing an independent relationship with 
the Department of Budget and Management to establish and manage capital and operating 
budgets. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 945 and 946 of 2024 and Chapter 110 of 2025 established and 
subsequently extended the Prison Education Delivery Reform Commission, staffed by the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy. The commission must (1) convene an 
advisory stakeholder group, as specified; (2) work with the advisory stakeholder group, 
including conducting roundtable discussion forums seeking public input in all geographic 
regions of the State; (3) develop an education-focused statewide framework of policies to 
invest in strategies to increase public safety and reduce recidivism of adult offenders, using 
a data-driven approach; (4) research best practices for the primary, secondary, 
postsecondary, and career or vocational education of those who are subject to the criminal 
and juvenile justice systems; (5) identify measures to mitigate risk factors that contribute 
to adult contact with the criminal justice system, with a focus on education; (6) evaluate 
current workforce programs and their effectiveness, as specified; and (7) request technical 
assistance from specified organizations. Members may not receive compensation. The 
commission completed an interim report of its work thus far in June 2025. Under 
Chapter 110, the commission must submit an interim report of its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly by June 1, 2028, and a final report by 
January 1, 2029. 
 
In October 2025, the commission approved a set of recommendations for 2026, including 
(1) creating a plan for a school board system to oversee adult correctional education that 
includes various State agencies and (2) conducting a fiscal mapping project for correctional 
education with an interdepartmental strategic plan. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 438/ Page 3 
Correctional Education Council 
 
The Correctional Education Council is under the joint jurisdiction of the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) and the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services. The council must develop and recommend an educational and 
workforce training program for adult correctional institutions in the State. These programs 
must meet the special needs and circumstances of the inmates in each correctional 
institution. 
 
The Correctional Education Council must also adopt regulations for a mandatory education 
program for inmates who fail to attain specified minimum educational standards as well as 
regulations for a mandatory workforce skills training program. Further, the council must 
advocate and promote the interests of educational programs and workforce skills training 
opportunities in correctional institutions and regularly review these programs to ensure that 
educational and training needs of inmates are being met.  
 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning 
 
MD Labor’s Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) oversees 
Correctional Education throughout Maryland’s State correctional facilities. DWDAL’s 
Office of Correctional Education (OCE) provides career training opportunities “behind the 
fence.” Offerings vary by institution but include training in automotive skills, barbering, 
construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead to a portable, industry-recognized 
credential that contributes to an incarcerated individual’s employability after release. In 
addition to occupational programming, OCE oversees academic and transitional courses 
throughout Maryland’s correctional facilities. Academic programming includes GED 
preparation ahead of earning a Maryland high school diploma and English as a second 
language courses. Prior to release, incarcerated individuals may complete transitional 
courses to ease their reentrance to society. These offerings include classes in parenting, 
employment readiness, financial literacy, and life skills. 
 
MD Labor provides services to returning citizens through the Re-entry Navigator Initiative. 
Re-entry Navigators are a team of employment specialists located within the American Job 
Centers across the State who connect justice-involved job seekers with businesses by 
planning with prerelease individuals and supporting post-release job seekers. The 
navigators also continually establish a network of employer contacts who are interested in 
hiring their clients. More information on the Re-entry Navigator Initiative can be found on 
MD Labor’s website. 
 
Education of Children by the Department of Juvenile Services 
 
Chapter 147 of 2021 transferred the Juvenile Services Education Program from the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 438/ Page 4 
Maryland State Department of Education to the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) and 
established the Juvenile Services Education Board to oversee the program. Through the 
program, DJS oversees and provides comprehensive educational services to all juveniles 
placed in a DJS-operated detention and residential facility. 
 
State Expenditures:  Despite the bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date, it is assumed that State 
finances are not affected in fiscal 2026.  
 
Given the State’s fiscal difficulties, agency budgets have been constrained. Thus, the 
requirement to staff the committee and develop the interim and final reports may not be 
absorbable within the existing budgeted resources of MSDE. Instead, general fund 
expenditures may increase for one contractual position to support the work of the 
committee and conduct research related to the comprehensive plan and fiscal mapping 
project required by the bill. 
 
General expenditures increase by $111,518 in fiscal 2027 and $98,760 in fiscal 2028, 
which accounts for a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date and 
completion of the committee’s final report at the end of fiscal 2028. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one contractual support position in fiscal 2027 and 2028 to conduct 
research related to the comprehensive plan and fiscal mapping projects required by the bill. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses; the fiscal 2028 estimate also reflects the termination of one-time costs. 
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$101,683 
$95,955 
Operating Expenses 
      9,835 
     2,805 
Total State Expenditures 
$111,518 
$98,760 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Additional Comments:  MD Labor advises that, as the bill requires the Adult Prison 
School Board Model Development Committee’s interim and final reports to be submitted 
a year before the respective interim and final reports for the Prison Education Delivery 
Reform Commission, the committee may not be able to consider the work and 
recommendations of the commission in its reports, potentially resulting in a conflict 
between the recommendations issued by the two entities. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 438/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Office of the Correctional Ombudsman; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5