START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 486 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 486 
(Delegate Fennell) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Schools - Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day - Establishment 
 
 
This bill designates November 14 each year as “Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day” to 
commemorate Ruby Bridges who, on November 14, 1960, became the first 
African American student to integrate an all-White elementary school in New Orleans, 
Louisiana. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must make resource 
materials publicly available to assist local school systems in planning a program of 
education for Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day. The Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day 
resource materials provided by MSDE may include instructional materials, as specified, 
and must include resources to assist teachers to engage in discussions about civil rights and 
social justice. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can make resources publicly available for the program using existing 
resources; however, resources may be temporarily diverted from current priorities. 
  
Local Effect:  None. However, local school systems may choose to implement a program 
of education based on the resources made available by MSDE. Any impact is at the 
discretion of local school systems. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The public schools must devote a part of the day to appropriate exercises 
for the following days:  Washington’s Birthday; Lincoln’s Birthday; Veterans’ Day; 
Columbus Day; Arbor Day; Black History Month with an emphasis on Harriet Tubman 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 486/ Page 2 
and Frederick Douglass and the contributions they made in the fight against slavery; and 
any other day of national significance. 
 
The Maryland Standards and Frameworks in Social Studies provides students with several 
age-appropriate opportunities to learn about Ruby Bridges and civil rights, including those 
for grade 5 social studies, middle school U.S. history, and high school U.S. history and 
U.S. Government. State Frameworks are defined as supporting documents and provide 
guidance for implementing the State Standards in Social Studies, which are reviewed and 
adopted by the Maryland State Board of Education every eight years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1003 and HB 493 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 526 (Senator A. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City  
Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools;  
Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2