START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 456 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 456 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Alcoholic Beverages - Gift Basket Permit  
Ho. Co. 2-26 
 
 
This bill establishes a gift basket permit in Howard County. The bill authorizes the  
Howard County Board of License Commissioners to issue the permit to a person (1) whose 
primary business is the sale and delivery of flowers; (2) whose business includes the sale 
and delivery of gift baskets of flowers, food, or other items; and (3) who does not hold 
another alcoholic beverages license or permit. The board is prohibited from issuing a 
permit for use in conjunction with or on the premises of a chain store, supermarket, or 
discount house. A permit holder may sell and deliver, to consumers of a legal drinking age 
located in the county, gift baskets containing specified volumes of beer, wine, or liquor 
products, purchased from a retail license holder. The permit holder must maintain records 
and submit reports required by the board. The annual permit fee is $100. The bill also 
establishes that the prohibition against issuing alcoholic beverages licenses to 
establishments within specified distances from public schools does not apply to the 
issuance of a gift basket permit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Howard County revenues increase from additional permit fees, as discussed 
below. Howard County can monitor additional permits with existing resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 456/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Howard County revenues increase by $100 annually for each gift 
basket permit issued the bill. Howard County advises there are 15 florists in the county that 
may apply for the gift basket permit. For illustrative purposes only, if 15 individuals apply 
for the permit, Howard County revenues increase by $1,500 annually. Any increase in 
inspections and enforcement activity can likely be absorbed with existing county resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
me/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2