START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 431 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 431 
(Delegate Behler) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Recordation and Printing of Subdivision Plats - Alterations 
 
 
This bill updates various terms and makes other changes related to the recordation of 
subdivision plats. For example, the bill removes a specific requirement for the plat to be 
submitted for recordation using black ink on transparent mylar or black‐line photo process 
comparable to original quality that will conform to archival standards, instead requiring 
submission in a format that conforms to archival standards. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local government finances or 
operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, if a landowner in the State subdivides his/her land for 
commercial, industrial, or residential use, as specified, a plat of the subdivision must be 
recorded in the land records of the county where the land is located. If the landowner 
complies with the recordation requirements specified in the Real Property Article, the clerk 
of the court must generally accept and record the plat.  
 
The plat must be legible, accurately drawn to scale, and submitted for recordation, as 
further specified. The clerk must send a copy to the supervisor of assessments in the 
relevant county and one copy to the State Archivist, who must also record the plat. One half 
of the filing fee also must be sent to the State Archivist. The State Archivist must provide 
a copy of the plat to any supervisor of assessments of the State upon request. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 431/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland State Archives; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2