START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 472 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader - Revised 
House Bill 472 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Theatrical Production Tax Credit - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the theatrical production tax credit for an additional five years, through 
tax year 2031. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. Based on recent program activity, general fund 
revenues may decrease by about $0.5 million annually in FY 2028 through 2032 due to 
credits claimed against the personal income tax. To the extent credits are claimed against 
the corporate income tax, Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues and 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures also decrease (not shown 
below). Expenditures are otherwise not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease to the extent credits are claimed 
against the corporate income tax. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 258 and 259 of 2022 established a refundable State income tax 
credit for up to 25% of qualifying direct costs incurred by a qualified theatrical production 
entity for theatrical production activities in the State. “Theatrical production” means a 
for-profit, national touring or pre-Broadway live stage theatrical production. The credit is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 472/ Page 2 
available for tax years 2022 through 2026 only. The Department of Commerce administers 
the tax credit application, approval, and certification process and may approve up to 
$5.0 million in credits per fiscal year. Any unused amount may be issued in a subsequent 
year. Commerce may not approve credits totaling more than $2.0 million in aggregate for 
a single theatrical production.  
 
State Revenues:  As discussed above, the bill extends the theatrical production tax credit 
through tax year 2031. Absent the bill, the program terminates after tax year 2026. To date, 
Commerce has awarded a little over $1.0 million in theatrical production tax credits in total 
for fiscal 2024 and 2025. No credits were awarded for fiscal 2023. 
 
Based on recent program history, general fund revenues may decrease by about 
$0.5 million annually in fiscal 2028 through 2032 due to credits claimed against the 
personal income tax. To the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, 
HEIF and TTF revenues are also affected. Actual State revenue losses under the bill may 
exceed this estimate to the extent demand for the tax credit increases above historic levels, 
subject to the existing limitations on aggregate tax credit awards. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants may 
decrease in any of fiscal 2028 through 2032 to the extent credits are claimed against the 
corporate income tax. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local highway user revenues may decrease in any of fiscal 2028 through 
2032 to the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 440 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 18, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2