START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 474 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 474 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Dangerous Accumulations of Snow and Ice - Removal From 
Exposed Vehicle Surfaces (Clear Before You Drive Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from operating or towing a vehicle without first removing any 
accumulated snow and ice that poses a threat to persons or property from “exposed vehicle 
surfaces.” A police officer may enforce a violation of this prohibition only as a 
secondary offense, except when the violation contributes to an accident resulting in 
property damage, death, or serious bodily injury. Violations are subject to specified fines, 
which increase for repeat offenses, violations involving commercial vehicles, or violations 
that contribute to an accident resulting in property damage or another person’s death or 
serious bodily injury. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues from fines imposed in 
the District Court. Enforcement can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An “exposed vehicle surface” includes (1) a vehicle’s hood, trunk, 
windshield, windows, and roof; (2) the cab of a commercial or noncommercial truck;  
(3) the top of a trailer or semitrailer being towed by a motor vehicle; and (4) the top of a 
commercial trailer or semitrailer.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 474/ Page 2 
A violation of the bill’s prohibition is a misdemeanor and subject to the fines listed below.  
 
 
Noncommercial vehicles:  $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second offense, $100 for 
a third offense, and $200 for a fourth or subsequent offense.  
 
Commercial vehicles:  $75 for a first offense, $150 for a second offense, $300 for a 
third offense, $600 for a fourth offense, and $1,000 for a fifth or subsequent offense. 
 
Contributes to an accident that results in property damage or the death of or serious 
bodily injury to another person:  $200 to $1,000 for a noncommercial vehicle and 
$500 to $1,500 for a commercial vehicle. 
 
Current Law:  “Serious bodily injury” means an injury that creates a substantial risk of 
death or causes serious permanent or serious protracted (1) disfigurement; (2) loss of the 
function of any body part, organ, or mental faculty; or (3) impairment of the function of 
any body part or organ.  
 
With specified exceptions, § 21-1104(c) of the Transportation Article prohibits driving a 
vehicle on a highway with any object, material, or obstruction located in or on the vehicle 
(or hanging from the rearview mirror) in such a way as to interfere with the clear view of 
the driver through the windshield. Similarly, subject to specified exceptions, § 21‑1104(d) 
prohibits a person from driving a vehicle with any sign, poster, card, sticker, or other 
nontransparent material on the windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of the 
vehicle. A person who violates either prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject 
to a maximum fine of $500.  
 
The District Court prepayment penalties are $110 for a violation of § 21‑1104(c) and $70 
for a violation of § 21‑1104(d), and the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) must assess 
one point against a violator’s driver’s license for either offense. If, however, a violation 
contributes to an accident, the prepayment penalties increase to $150 and $110, 
respectively, and MVA must assess three points against the violator’s license.  
 
Generally, violations of the Maryland Vehicle Law are subject to primary enforcement. 
Accordingly, a police officer may detain a driver for a suspected violation of most 
provisions of the Maryland Vehicle Law without having to first suspect a violation of 
another State law. However, § 21‑1104(c) is among the provisions of the Maryland Vehicle 
Law that is subject only to secondary enforcement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 474/ Page 3 
Cross File:  SB 698 (Senator McCray) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3