START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 417 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 417 
(Delegate Pippy, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Criminal Law - Schedule III Controlled Dangerous Substances - Medetomidine 
and Xylazine 
 
 
This bill designates medetomidine and xylazine as Schedule III controlled dangerous 
substances (CDS) under the Maryland Controlled Dangerous Substances Act. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can handle any increase in court cases with existing budgeted 
resources. Penalties are not anticipated to materially affect State revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances. Any increase 
in workload for the circuit courts is not anticipated to be significant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State does not currently regulate medetomidine or xylazine. Under 
federal law (21 CFR § 522.1335 and 21 CFR § 522.2662), medetomidine and xylazine are 
only for use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian. Xylazine may also not be used 
on animals that produce domestic food. 
 
Under the Maryland Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, there are five schedules for 
CDS depending on their potential for abuse and acceptance for medical use. Schedule III 
consists of each CDS added to Schedule III by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
or designated as a Schedule III CDS by the federal government unless MDH objects. MDH 
may not add a substance to Schedule III unless it finds (1) a potential for abuse that is less 
than that for substances in Schedule I and Schedule II; (2) well documented and approved 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 417/ Page 2 
medical use of the substance in the United States; and (3) evidence that abuse of the 
substance may lead to moderate or low physical dependence or high psychological 
dependence. 
 
Generally, MDH may add a CDS by its own initiative or on petition from an interested 
party. To determine whether to add a substance, MDH must consider (1) the actual or 
relative potential for abuse; (2) if known, scientific evidence of the pharmacological effect; 
(3) the state of current scientific knowledge regarding the substance; (4) the history and 
current pattern of abuse of the substance; (5) the scope, duration, and significance of abuse 
of the substance; (6) any risk the substance poses to public health; (7) the ability of the 
substance to cause psychological or physiological dependence; and (8) whether the 
substance is an immediate precursor of a CDS. 
 
Under federal law, examples of Schedule III CDS are products containing certain quantities 
of codeine, ketamine, testosterone, and anabolic steroids. Under Maryland regulations 
(10.19.03.20), Schedule III also includes Fioricet and certain quantities of opium. 
 
Penalties 
 
Subject to specified exceptions, possessing or administering a CDS other than cannabis is 
a misdemeanor subject to the following penalties: 
 
 
imprisonment for up to one year and/or a fine of up to $5,000 for a first conviction; 
 
imprisonment for up to 18 months and/or a fine of up to $5,000 for a second or  
third conviction; and 
 
imprisonment for up to two years and/or a fine of up to $5,000 for a fourth or 
subsequent conviction. 
 
Also, under Title 5, Subtitle 6 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not: 
 
 
distribute, dispense, or possess with the intent to distribute a CDS; 
 
manufacture a CDS or manufacture, distribute, or possess a machine, equipment, or 
device that is adapted to produce a CDS with the intent to use it to produce, sell, or 
dispense a CDS; 
 
create, distribute, or possess with the intent to distribute a counterfeit substance; 
 
manufacture, distribute, or possess equipment designed to render a counterfeit 
substance; 
 
keep a common nuisance (any place resorted to for the purpose of illegally 
administering CDS or where such substances or controlled paraphernalia are 
illegally manufactured, distributed, dispensed, stored, or concealed); or 
 
pass, issue, make, or possess a false, counterfeit, or altered prescription for a CDS 
with the intent to distribute the CDS. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 417/ Page 3 
Exhibit 1 shows the applicable sentences for distribution of CDS and related offenses. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Penalties for Distribution of Controlled Dangerous Substances and Related Offenses 
 
Offense 
Current Penalty1, 2 
CDS (Other Than Schedule I or II Narcotic Drugs and Other Specified CDS) 
 
First-time Offender 
Maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment 
and/or $15,000 fine 
Repeat Offender 
Maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment 
and/or $15,000 fine 
CDS (Schedule I or II Narcotic Drug and Specified Drugs) 3 
 
First-time Offender 
Maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment 
and/or $15,000 fine 
Second-time Offender 
Maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment 
and/or $15,000 fine 
Third-time Offender 
Maximum penalty of 25 years imprisonment 
and/or a $25,000 fine (parole eligibility at 
50% of sentence) 
Fourth-time Offender 
Maximum penalty of 40 years imprisonment 
and/or a $25,000 fine (parole eligibility at 
50% of sentence) 
 
CDS:  controlled dangerous substance 
 
1 Repeat offenders are subject to twice the term of imprisonment and/or fines that are otherwise authorized. 
This authorization is made applicable only when the person has also been previously convicted of a crime 
of violence. 
2 Section 5-608.1 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from knowingly distributing or possessing 
with the intent to distribute (1) a mixture of CDS that contains heroin and a detectable amount of fentanyl 
or any analogue of fentanyl or (2) fentanyl or any analogue of fentanyl. In addition to any other penalty 
imposed, a person is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years. A sentence imposed for a violation of this 
prohibition must be served consecutively to any other sentence imposed.  
3 For example, cocaine and heroin. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 417/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  Medetomidine is a veterinary anesthetic drug often used on dogs 
and not approved for human use. Its effects are similar to those of xylazine. In August 2024, 
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that medetomidine is being 
detected as an adulterant in illicit drugs, overdoses, and drug paraphernalia. It is often 
detected alongside fentanyl in patients who overdosed on street drugs. While the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) has only approved medetomidine for veterinary use, 
another form of it called dexmedetomidine is approved for use as a sedative on humans. 
 
Xylazine is a veterinary tranquilizer and pain reliever that has also been detected alongside 
fentanyl in illicit drugs. It has been FDA-approved for use in veterinary medicine, but not 
humans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 435 (Senator Folden) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Comptroller’s 
Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - April 2, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4