START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 430 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 430 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Family Child Care Providers - National Guard and Military Reserves Members - 
Substitute Provider 
 
 
This bill requires a family child care provider who is a member of the National Guard or 
military reserves to designate a substitute to provide family child care during the family 
child care provider’s absence for required training and active service. The designated 
substitute may provide family child care during the provider’s absence for up to 45 working 
days (rather than up to 20 working days under current regulations) in any 12-month period. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can implement the 
bill’s changes with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, family child care homes and large family child care homes may 
not operate in the State unless they are registered. The State Board of Education is required 
to adopt regulations that relate to the registration of family child care homes and large 
family child care homes. A family child care home is a residence in which family child care 
is provided for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in which 
family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 430/ Page 2 
Similarly, the State Board of Education must adopt rules and regulations for licensing and 
operating child care centers. 
 
Provider Substitutes – Regulatory Requirements 
 
MSDE regulations require family child care providers to designate at least one substitute 
who is available on short notice to care for the children at the provider’s registered family 
child care home. 
 
An individual designated as a substitute may not be used in that capacity unless approved 
by MSDE. If information received by MSDE indicates that the individual may present a 
risk to the health, safety, or welfare of children in care, MSDE may disapprove the use of 
that substitute. MSDE must notify the provider of such a decision within 30 days of the 
request being submitted. 
 
A provider may use a substitute to (1) provide care for children during a temporary absence 
and (2) assist in providing care while the provider is present. Unless the office approves an 
additional number of days in advance, the use of substitutes to provide care in the 
provider’s absence is limited to a total of 20 working days in any 12-month period 
(counting only days on which substitute care is provided for more than two hours). 
 
A substitute must meet specified criteria (i.e., be at least age 18, be familiar with the 
relevant family child care requirements, complete the required forms, apply for a federal 
and State background check, submit a non-Maryland state criminal background check if 
the individual recently resided out of state, and present no risk to the health, safety, or 
welfare of children). 
 
Before allowing a substitute to provide or to assist in providing care, the provider must 
orient the substitute to child health and safety matters, as specified. 
 
During the provider’s absence, a substitute is responsible for meeting relevant requirements 
related to supervision and protection of each child in care and operation of the family 
child care home. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Family child care providers who are members of the 
National Guard or military reserves may benefit, as the bill authorizes a longer period of 
time for the use of substitute providers. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 430/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3