START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 429 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 429 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
On-Farm Organics and Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion Grant Programs - 
Established 
 
 
This bill establishes, beginning July 1, 2028, (1) a Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion 
Grant Program and a County Wasted Food Reduction Block Grant Program, both 
administered by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), in consultation with 
the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDE), and (2) an On-Farm Organics Diversion 
and Recycling Grant Program, administered by MDA, in consultation with MDE. MDE 
and MDA must identify and apply for sources of funding for the grant programs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No impact assumed in FY 2027. Under one set of assumptions, general fund 
expenditures increase by $297,400 in FY 2028 for administrative costs; future years reflect 
ongoing administrative costs and grant awards. Although not reflected in the table below, 
to the extent other (non-State) sources of funding for the grant programs are secured, 
State revenues increase and the need for general funds to support the programs decreases. 
State entities may also be grant recipients, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
297,400 
3,295,700 
3,300,600 
3,312,600 
Net Effect 
$0 
($297,400) 
($3,295,700) 
($3,300,600) 
($3,312,600) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  County grant revenues and expenditures increase beginning in FY 2029. 
Other local entities may also be affected beginning as early as FY 2029, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 429/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
On-Farm Organics Diversion and Recycling Grant Program 
 
The bill establishes, beginning July 1, 2028, the On-Farm Organics Diversion and 
Recycling Grant Program within MDA. The stated purpose of the program is to award 
grants annually for developing and implementing on-farm organics recycling and compost 
use, wasted food prevention, and food rescue. MDA, in consultation with MDE, must 
administer the grant program and identify and apply for funding for the grant program. 
 
Eligible grant recipients are as follows:  (1) a farmer, an urban farmer, or an urban 
agricultural producer; (2) a soil conservation district; (3) an institution of higher education; 
(4) a nonprofit organization; (5) a business in the State that is in good standing with the 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) and is in partnership with a farmer, 
an urban farmer, or an urban agricultural producer; and (5) a consortium of any of those 
entities. An eligible person that receives a grant under this program may not receive a grant 
under the Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion Grant Program in the same calendar year. 
 
A project is eligible for a grant under the program if the project develops, maintains, or 
expands infrastructure, collection programs, education, or technical assistance in the 
State that (1) reduces the amount of wasted food generated; (2) rescues edible food for 
purposes of redistribution; (3) recovers wasted food as animal feed, as specified; 
(4) composts or recycles food residuals that are separated from packaging prior to 
collection, including at-home, community, and on-farm composting; (5) provides labor and 
wages in support of wasted food prevention, food rescue, and on-farm organics recycling 
and compost use; (6) provides best management practice training in relevant fields, as 
specified; (7) studies the impacts of compost application on on-farm nutrient and water 
quality management; or (8) assists in the payment of applicable permit application costs. 
 
In awarding grants under the program, MDA must, in consultation with MDE, prioritize 
projects that meet specified criteria. 
 
Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion Grant Program 
 
The bill establishes, beginning July 1, 2028, the Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion 
Grant Program within MDE. The stated purpose of the program is to award grants annually 
for infrastructure, programs, and education that reduce, rescue, and divert wasted food in 
the State. MDE, in consultation with MDA, must administer the grant program and identify 
and apply for funding for the grant program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 429/ Page 3 
Eligible grant recipients are as follows:  (1) a unit of State or local government; (2) a local 
education agency; (3) an institution of higher education; (4) a nonprofit organization; 
(5) a farmer, an urban farmer, or an urban agricultural producer; (6) a business in the State 
that is in good standing with SDAT; and (7) a consortium of any one of those entities. An 
eligible person that receives a grant under this program may not receive a grant under the 
On-Farm Organics Diversion and Recycling Grant Program in the same calendar year. 
 
A project is eligible for a grant under the program if the project develops, maintains, or 
expands infrastructure, collection programs, education, or technical assistance in the State 
that (1) reduces the amount of wasted food generated; (2) rescues edible food for purposes 
of redistribution; (3) recovers wasted food as animal feed, as specified; (4) composts or 
recycles food residuals that are separated from packaging prior to collection, including 
at-home, community, and on-farm composting; or (5) transitions from single-use food 
serviceware to durable and reusable food serviceware. 
 
In awarding grants under the program, MDE must, in consultation with MDA, prioritize 
projects that meet specified criteria. 
 
MDE, in consultation with MDA, must adopt regulations to implement the grant program. 
The regulations must include a simple common application procedure and a process to 
facilitate the participation of eligible entities that have limited resources or language 
barriers. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 31, 2028, and by each December 31 thereafter, MDA and MDE must report 
to the General Assembly on the On-Farm Organics Diversion and Recycling Grant 
Program and the Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion Grant Program. The reports must 
include specified information. 
 
County Wasted Food Reduction Block Grant Program 
 
The bill establishes, beginning July 1, 2028, a County Wasted Food Reduction Block Grant 
Program within MDE. The stated purpose of the program is to award grants to counties 
annually in amounts proportional to each county’s population. Funds received by a county 
must fund projects to develop, maintain, or expand infrastructure, programs, and education 
that reduce, rescue, and divert wasted food in the county. MDE, in consultation with MDA, 
must administer the grant program and identify and apply for funding for the grant 
program. 
 
In funding projects under the grant program, a county must prioritize projects that meet 
specified criteria. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 429/ Page 4 
Current Law: 
 
Solid Waste Infrastructure and Recycling in the State, Generally 
 
The solid waste infrastructure in Maryland consists of both permitted and nonpermitted 
facilities, and solid waste is managed through a combination of recycling, composting, 
landfilling, incineration, storage, and exporting for disposal or recycling. 
 
Maryland’s recycling policy is guided by the Maryland Recycling Act (MRA), which sets 
mandatory recycling rates for State government and local jurisdictions, as well as a 
voluntary statewide waste diversion goal of 60% and a voluntary statewide recycling goal 
of 55% by 2020. Each county (including Baltimore City) must recycle at least 20% or 
35% of the county’s solid waste stream, depending on the county’s population. Each 
county (including Baltimore City) must also prepare a recycling plan that addresses how 
the jurisdiction will achieve its mandatory recycling rate. 
 
The Office of Recycling 
 
MDE’s Office of Recycling, among other things, reviews county recycling plans and 
coordinates the efforts of the State to facilitate the implementation of the recycling goals 
at the county level. Counties are required to periodically report solid waste and recycling 
data to the department. 
 
MDE submits a combined annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly that 
meets two statutory reporting requirements relating to solid waste management and 
recycling/waste diversion in the State. (Maryland Solid Waste Management and Diversion 
Report). 
 
Chapter 465 of 2023 required the office to hire an independent consultant to conduct a 
statewide recycling needs assessment and report the results of the assessment to the 
Governor and the General Assembly by July 30, 2024. The statewide recycling needs 
assessment was submitted in February 2025. Chapter 431 of 2025 requires that a statewide 
recycling needs assessment be conducted again in 2034 and at least once every 10 years 
thereafter. 
 
Composting in Maryland 
 
Chapter 686 of 2013 required MDE to adopt regulations governing the permitting and 
operation of composting facilities. MDE promulgated the required regulations in 2014 by 
establishing Chapter 11 under COMAR 26.04, which specifies requirements related to the 
construction and operation of composting facilities in the State. Pursuant to Chapters 520 
and 521 of 2023, MDE must exempt specified operators of on-farm composting facilities 
from permitting requirements under COMAR 26.04.11.06. MDE has also established a 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 429/ Page 5 
general composting facility permit. By December 1, 2028, MDE is required to submit a 
report to the General Assembly that analyzes the impact of on-farm composting facilities 
in Maryland and provides specified information. 
 
Food Waste Diversion 
 
Chapters 439 and 440 of 2021 require certain generators of large quantities of food 
residuals to separate the food residuals from other solid waste and ensure that the food 
residuals are diverted from final disposal in a refuse disposal system. The implementation 
timeline for this requirement was staggered, based on weekly tonnages of food residuals, 
and began January 1, 2023. MDE promulgated implementing regulations in 2022 by 
establishing Chapter 13 under COMAR 26.04, which specifies requirements related to the 
diversion of food residuals from final disposal in a refuse disposal system. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Funding for the Grant Programs and Related Administrative Costs 
 
Although the bill requires MDE and MDA to identify and apply for funding for the grant 
programs, in the absence of an identified funding source for the programs, this analysis 
assumes that general funds are needed. To the extent the agencies are successful in 
identifying, applying for, and receiving funding from other (non-State) sources (such as 
federal funds), State revenues increase correspondingly and the need for general funds to 
support the programs decreases. Because it is unclear what other sources of funding may 
be available to support the grant programs, any such funding is not reflected in this analysis. 
 
Because the grant programs do not begin until July 1, 2028, this analysis assumes there is 
no fiscal impact in fiscal 2027. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by an 
estimated $297,364 in fiscal 2028 for MDE and MDA to begin to design and establish the 
grant programs. Beginning in fiscal 2029, general fund expenditures increase by at least 
$3,295,676 annually, reflecting ongoing administrative costs and grant awards. These 
effects are described in more detail below by agency. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment:  MDE general fund expenditures increase by 
$89,822 in fiscal 2028 and by at least $2,174,205 annually thereafter. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one natural resource planner (at the start of fiscal 2028) and one regulatory 
compliance engineer (at the start of fiscal 2029) to (1) develop regulations and establish 
and administer the Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion Grant Program and the 
County Wasted Food Reduction Block Grant Program; (2) review grant applications, issue 
grants, and oversee grant awards; and (3) develop training and marketing materials. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 429/ Page 6 
beginning in fiscal 2029, grant awards. This estimate is based on the following assumptions 
and information: 
 
 
the natural resource planner is hired on July 1, 2027, one year in advance of the date 
the grant programs begin, in order to begin establishing the programs; and 
 
for the grant programs to be viable, an estimated $2.0 million in grant awards – 
$1.0 million for each of the grant programs – must be made each year (beginning in 
fiscal 2029). 
 
 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Positions (New) 
1.0 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$79,387 
$160,938 
Grant Awards 
0 
2,000,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
  10,435 
       13,267 
Total MDE Expenditures 
$89,822 
$2,174,205 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover, 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and ongoing grant awards of $2.0 million 
annually ($1.0 million for each of the two MDE grant programs). 
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture:  MDA general fund expenditures increase by 
$207,542 in fiscal 2028 and by at least $1,121,471 annually thereafter. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one administrator (at the start of fiscal 2028) to develop and 
implement the On-Farm Organics Diversion and Recycling Grant Program. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The 
estimate also includes grant management software ($100,000 in fiscal 2028 and 
$25,000 annually thereafter) and grant awards beginning in fiscal 2029. This estimate is 
based on the following assumptions and information: 
 
 
the administrator is hired on July 1, 2027, one year in advance of the date the grant 
program begins, in order to begin establishing the program; and 
 
for the grant program to be viable, an estimated $1.0 million in grant awards must 
be made each year (beginning in fiscal 2029). 
 
 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Position 
1.0 
0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$97,707 
$93,666 
Grant Awards 
0 
1,000,000 
Grant Management Software 
100,000 
25,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
       9,835 
         2,805 
Total MDA Expenditures 
$207,542 
$1,121,471 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 429/ Page 7 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; (3) $25,000 annually for 
grant management software; and (4) ongoing grant awards of $1.0 million annually. 
 
State Entities as Eligible Grant Recipients 
 
To the extent that a unit of State government or a State institution of higher education 
receives grant funding from one of the new grant programs established under the bill, grant 
revenues and expenditures for any such entity increase correspondingly beginning as early 
as fiscal 2029. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that local governments, local education agencies, 
schools, soil conservation districts, or other local entities receive grant funding from the 
Wasted Food Reduction and Diversion Fund or the On-Farm Organics Diversion and 
Recycling Grant Program, local grant revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly 
beginning as early as fiscal 2029. 
 
County revenues and expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2029 due to the 
establishment of the County Wasted Food Reduction Block Grant Program. With respect 
to similar legislation introduced in a prior session, MDE noted that depending on the 
amount of grant funding a county receives and how the county uses that grant funding, the 
bill may help counties to meet their mandated MRA rates. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Grant revenues and expenditures for small businesses that are 
eligible for and receive grants under the bill increase beginning in fiscal 2029. For example, 
farmers benefit from additional funding to support the adoption of on-farm composting and 
the sale of composted material. Small businesses that provide the type of services, supplies, 
or functions that are eligible for grant funding under the bill may see an increase in the 
demand for their services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 134 and HB 42 of 2025; and HB 1318 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 599 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Environmental Service; 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Northeast 
Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 429/ Page 8 
City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Food Center Authority; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8