START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 461 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 461 
(Delegate Ziegler, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Rural Readiness Program and Rural Maryland 
Capacity Building Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Rural Readiness Program, administered by the Rural Maryland 
Council (RMC), to enhance the capacity of rural communities for economic development. 
The bill also creates the Rural Maryland Capacity Building Fund to award competitive 
grants – of up to $50,000 to eligible applicants that have completed the Rural Readiness 
Program – in support of collaborative planning and capacity building initiatives targeted at 
rural communities. Each October 1, RMC must report on the grants made in the previous 
fiscal year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $100,000 annually to 
capitalize the Rural Maryland Capacity Building Fund beginning in FY 2027. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly as awards are made. RMC can 
administer the Rural Readiness Program with existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
GF Expenditure 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
SF Expenditure 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governmental entities that choose to participate benefit from 
additional support, as discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 461/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
For purposes of the Rural Readiness Program and the Rural Maryland Capacity Building 
Fund, “rural community” is defined by reference to provisions governing the Rural 
Maryland Prosperity Investment Fund (RMPIF). Thus, the bill generally applies within 
18 specified counties.  
 
“Eligible applicant” means a nonprofit organization, a unit of local government, a 
State-recognized tribe, an institution of higher education in the State, a regional planning 
agency, or an economic or workforce development organization. State governmental 
entities are excluded from this definition. 
 
Rural Readiness Program 
 
The Rural Readiness Program is intended to enhance the capacity of rural communities for 
economic development, specifically by assisting eligible applicants with grant applications 
and development of projects that generate revenue. RMC must establish assessments, 
toolkits, and other resources to support the program. 
 
Upon successful completion of the program, an eligible applicant that receives a 
completion certificate is given priority for funding under two existing funds:  the Maryland 
Agricultural Education and Rural Development Assistance Fund (MAERDAF) and 
RMPIF. However, completion of the program is a prerequisite for an award under the new 
Rural Maryland Capacity Building Fund. 
 
Rural Maryland Capacity Building Fund 
 
The Rural Maryland Capacity Building Fund, a special, nonlapsing fund administered by 
RMC, may only be used for grants for certain purposes. More specifically, funding may 
support: 
 
 
collaborative planning and capacity building initiatives that address needs related to 
housing, broadband services, placemaking, energy, transportation, health, 
infrastructure, economic development, and workforce development; 
 
readiness for investment in and development of a rural community or property 
through, for example, development of property inventories, site development 
studies, site material development, site implementation or land assembly activities, 
and feasibility or market studies; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 461/ Page 3 
 
partnerships and planning to build readiness for future projects and collaborative 
initiatives; and 
 
cross-sector collaboration for community and stakeholder engagement that fosters 
planning and dialogue. 
 
Certain other uses of grant funding are specifically prohibited. 
 
The Maryland Agricultural Education and Rural Development Assistance Board must 
establish procedures for making an application, review the applications, and approve grant 
recipients and the amount of their award. As noted above, however, grants may only be 
awarded to applicants that have completed the Rural Readiness Program. Further, 
individual grant awards are capped at $50,000, and priority must be given to eligible 
applicants with multijurisdictional and multisector projects and a commitment to matching 
at least 20% of the total grant amount. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Rural Maryland Council 
 
RMC is a State rural development council that brings together citizens and representatives 
of public-sector entities and private-sector organizations to collaboratively address 
problems and challenges facing rural communities. For administrative and budgetary 
purposes, RMC is placed under the Maryland Department of Agriculture. RMC administers 
both RMPIF and MAERDAF with the assistance of the Maryland Agricultural Education 
and Rural Development Assistance Board. 
 
Rural Maryland Prosperity Investment Fund  
 
The purpose of RMPIF is to provide funding to rural regional and statewide planning and 
development organizations, institutions of higher education serving rural communities, 
rural community development organizations, and local governments acting in partnership 
with one another to promote the quality of life in rural areas. Funding must be disbursed 
according to a statutory formula, generally with one-third allocated equally to five regional 
councils as grants for rural regional planning and development assistance. The other 
two-thirds must be allocated as grants among four specified categories, one of which is to 
fund RMC and MAERDAF. Priority for grants must be given to organizations (in the 
specified categories) that have obtained an equal matching amount of funding from a 
source other than the State in the immediate prior fiscal year or have sufficient evidence of 
a commitment of a third-party funding source to provide an equal matching amount of 
funding in the current fiscal year. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 461/ Page 4 
For purposes of RMPIF, “rural community” is defined as an incorporated or unincorporated 
area of a county or group of counties in a rural area. “Rural area” means 18 counties as 
specified (Allegany, Calvert, Caroline, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Dorchester, Frederick, 
Garrett, Harford, Kent, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, Washington, 
Wicomico, and Worcester) as well as portions of other counties in close proximity to 
agricultural activity. 
 
Maryland Agricultural Education and Rural Development Assistance Fund 
 
MAERDAF provides funding to rural regional planning and economic development 
organizations and rural community development programs; it also augments the efforts of 
advanced technology centers that serve agricultural- and natural resources-based small 
businesses in rural areas through community colleges. The Maryland Agricultural 
Education and Rural Development Assistance Board reviews grant applications and makes 
recommendations to RMC regarding grant recipients and amounts. As for RMPIF, the 
board must give priority to organizations that have obtained an equal matching amount of 
funding from a source other than the State in the immediate prior fiscal year or have 
sufficient evidence of a commitment of a third-party funding source to provide an equal 
matching amount of funding in the current fiscal year. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  RMC advises that it can develop and administer the Rural Readiness 
Program with existing resources. RMC anticipates six to eight one- to two-hour learning 
sessions, most of which will be held virtually starting in the fall of 2026. RMC also expects 
to award as many as three to four grants under the new Rural Maryland Capacity Building 
Fund each year to eligible applicants that have completed the Rural Readiness Program. 
 
Accordingly, at least $100,000 in general fund expenditures is needed to capitalize the fund 
each year, starting in fiscal 2027; special fund revenues and expenditures increase 
correspondingly. This amount would fund two such awards at the maximum allowed 
($50,000); however, some awards are likely to be for lower amounts, particularly since 
awards are competitive and grantees must provide a 20% match. 
 
Although the bill adds completion of the Rural Readiness Program as a reason for giving 
funding priority for grants under RMPIF and MAERDAF, the amount of funding available 
in those funds is not affected. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $6.0 million 
for RMPIF; the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $118,485 for MAERDAF. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governmental entities (particularly towns, municipalities, 
regional planning agencies, and local community colleges) in rural communities are 
eligible applicants under both the Rural Readiness Program and the new Rural Maryland 
Capacity Building Fund. Accordingly, they may benefit from additional technical support 
and the ability to compete for grants of up to $50,000 per project. To receive a grant, they 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 461/ Page 5 
must, however, provide a 20% match. In addition, completion of the Rural Readiness 
Program affords them priority consideration under RMPIF and MAERDAF, without the 
equal matching requirement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:SB 300 (Senator Hester, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, 
Kent, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, Washington, and Wicomico counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Commerce; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
sj/ljm    
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5