START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 428 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 428 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Courts - Former Judge - Temporary Assignment 
 
 
This bill allows a former judge who previously won an election to judicial office to be 
recalled for temporary assignment, even if the judge’s most recent service as a judge was 
terminated by losing an election. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect the overall workload or finances of the 
Judiciary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect the overall workload or finances of the 
circuit courts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Generally, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of 
Maryland may assign any former judge to sit temporarily in any court if the assignment is 
approved by the administrative judge of the circuit in which the former judge is to be 
assigned and other specified requirements are met. 
 
Former judges may not be recalled for temporary assignment if the judge (1) was removed 
or involuntarily retired from judicial office pursuant to the Constitution or State law; 
(2) voluntarily retired by reason of disability; (3) had the most recent service as a judge 
terminated by reason of defeat for election to judicial office or by rejection of confirmation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 428/ Page 2 
by the Senate; (4) was censured by the Supreme Court of Maryland upon recommendation 
of the Commission on Judicial Disabilities; or (5) is engaged in the practice of law. 
 
The proposed fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes approximately $11.1 million in 
funding for retired judges; the Judiciary uses these judges to supplement current judicial 
resources. The Judiciary advises that the bill provides increased flexibility to select from 
an expanded pool of eligible judges to fill temporary assignments and meet occasional 
operational needs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 542 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2