START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 491 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 491 
(Delegate Phillips) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Victims of Sexually Assaultive Behavior - Request for 
Verbal Acknowledgement 
 
 
This bill prohibits a law enforcement agency, in interactions with a victim of sexually 
assaultive behavior, from making a request for verbal acknowledgment to waive certain 
rights, as otherwise specified in statute. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions set forth specific requirements in regard to law 
enforcement interactions with victims of sexually assaultive behavior. A law enforcement 
agency may not present to the victim a form purporting to (1) relieve the law enforcement 
agency of an obligation to the victim; (2) preclude or define the scope of an investigation 
by the law enforcement agency into an act allegedly committed against the victim;  
(3) prevent or limit a prosecution of an act allegedly committed against the victim;  
or (4) limit a private right of action of the victim pertaining to either an act allegedly 
committed against the victim or the victim’s interaction with the law enforcement agency. 
 
If a victim requests that the scope of an investigation be limited or that an investigation be 
temporarily or permanently suspended, the law enforcement agency must thoroughly 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 491/ Page 2 
document the request and follow up with the victim in accordance with practices 
recommended by the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission. 
 
Upon a violation by a law enforcement agency, an affected victim may bring an action 
seeking injunctive or declaratory relief. 
 
“Sexually assaultive behavior” is an act that would constitute (1) a sexual crime under  
Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article; (2) sexual abuse of a minor; (3) sexual 
abuse of a vulnerable adult; (4) a violation of 18 U.S.C. Chapter 109A (federal sexual abuse 
statutes); or (5) a violation of a law of another state, the United States, or a foreign country 
that is equivalent to these offenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 531 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, and Somerset counties; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2