START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 469 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 469 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Condominiums - Mandatory Insurance Coverage 
 
 
This bill requires unit owners in residential condominiums, subject to limited exception, to 
maintain certain insurance coverage that meets specified requirements. Unit owners must 
provide proof of the insurance to the council of unit owners annually and upon request. If 
a unit owner fails to maintain the required insurance, the council of unit owners may obtain 
a policy on the owner’s behalf and charge the premium as an assessment against the owner. 
In regard to an insurance policy acquired on behalf of a unit owner under these 
circumstances, the insurance carrier must pay directly to the council of unit owners the 
portion of the council’s deductible that the unit owner is responsible for, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s insurance requirements only apply to condominiums intended 
entirely for residential use and do not apply to detached units of a condominium. The 
insurance policy required under the bill must include:   
 
 
coverage for the council of unit owners’ property insurance deductible or a portion 
of the deductible, as specified; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 469/ Page 2 
 
sufficient coverage to repair or replace the unit owner’s personal property or the 
contents of the unit; 
 
loss of use coverage in an amount sufficient to provide at least 12 months of 
alternate housing if the owner is unable to live in the unit; 
 
personal liability coverage of at least $500,000; 
 
loss assessment coverage of at least $25,000; and 
 
dwelling or building property coverage of at least the greater of (1) $25,000 or 
(2) the amount necessary to repair and replace alterations, additions, betterments, 
and investments made or acquired by the current unit owner and upgrades conveyed 
to the unit owner that the owner is responsible for insuring under the bylaws. 
 
The bill also authorizes the bylaws of a condominium to require a unit owner to maintain 
an insurance policy with coverage in excess of that required under the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the Maryland Condominium Act (MCA) and the applicable 
governing documents (bylaws, rules, etc.) govern and regulate the operation and 
administration of condominiums in the State. MCA authorizes the bylaws of a 
condominium to require each unit owner to maintain a condominium unit 
owner insurance policy on the unit. If the bylaws require each unit owner to maintain unit 
owner insurance, the bylaws must also require each unit owner to provide evidence of the 
insurance coverage to the governing body on an annual basis. 
 
Insurance Policies Held by the Governing Body  
 
MCA specifies that no later than the first conveyance of a condominium unit to a person 
other than the developer, the council of unit owners must maintain, to the extent reasonably 
available:   
 
 
property insurance in amounts determined by the council of unit owners, but no less 
than any amount specified in the declaration or bylaws (1) for attached, multifamily 
dwelling units, or detached units located within a condominium not composed 
entirely of similarly detached units, on the common elements and units, exclusive 
of improvements and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the 
developer and (2) for detached units located within a condominium composed 
entirely of similar detached units, on the common elements only; and 
 
comprehensive general liability insurance, as specified. 
 
If any portion of the common elements and the units (generally exclusive of 
improvements/betterments installed in the units by owners) is damaged or destroyed, it 
must promptly be repaired or replaced by the council of unit owners unless (1) the 
condominium is terminated; (2) repair or replacement would be illegal under any State or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 469/ Page 3 
local health or safety statute or ordinance; or (3) 80% of the unit owners, including every 
owner of a unit or assigned limited common element which will not be rebuilt, vote not to 
rebuild. 
 
Generally, the cost of repair or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds and reserves 
is a common expense. A property insurance deductible is not a cost of repair or replacement 
in excess of insurance proceeds. When damage or destruction within the condominium 
originates from a unit, the owner of that unit is responsible for the council of unit owners’ 
property insurance deductible, up to a maximum of $10,000. 
 
Unit owners must be informed annually in writing of their responsibility for the council of 
unit owners’ property insurance deductible and the deductible’s amount. Any deductible 
amount exceeding the $10,000 for which a unit owner is responsible constitutes a common 
expense. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1541 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 747 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3