START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 407 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 407 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Prohibition on Transfer 
of Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor License  
PG 314-26 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners from 
approving the transfer or sale of a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license. If a Class A beer, 
wine, and liquor license expires or the license holder no longer wishes to retain the license, 
the license holder must return the license to the board. The board is prohibited from 
reissuing a returned license. This bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, except as specified, the board may not approve the transfer of a 
license from one location to another for at least two years after the issuance of a new license 
unless the board determines that the transfer to the new location is necessary to 
accommodate the public and the transferee has complied with specified residency 
requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 407/ Page 2 
In Prince George’s County, Class A beer, wine, and liquor licenses authorize the licensee 
to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail in a sealed package or container that may not be 
opened or consumed on the licensed premises. The annual license fee is $910. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1014 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2