START OF PAGE 1
HB0472/973425/1

BY: Ways and Means Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 472
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 2, before “Sunset” insert “Alterations and”; in line 3, strike
“extending the termination date” and substitute “limiting the excess amount of tax
credit certificates that the Department of Commerce may carry forward and issue in
subsequent taxable years”; in line 4, after “State;” insert “extending the termination
date of the credit;”; and after line 5, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 10–756(a)(1), (6), and (7) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 10–756(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, after line 13, insert:

“Article – Tax – General

10–756.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0472/973425/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 472
Page 2 of 3

(6) “Qualified theatrical production facility” means a facility located in
the State in which a theatrical production is performed.

(7) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Commerce.

(b) (1) A qualified theatrical production entity may claim a credit against
the State income tax for theatrical production activities in the State in an amount equal
to the amount stated in the tax credit certificate approved by the Secretary for a
theatrical production.

(2) If the tax credit allowed under this section in any taxable year
exceeds the total tax otherwise payable by the qualified theatrical production entity for
that taxable year, the qualified theatrical production entity may claim a refund in the
amount of the excess.

(f) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Secretary
may not issue tax credit certificates for credit amounts in the aggregate totaling more
than $5,000,000 in any fiscal year.

(2) [If] SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF
THIS SUBSECTION, IF the aggregate credit amounts under the tax credit certificates
issued by the Secretary total less than the maximum provided under paragraph (1) of
this subsection in any fiscal year, any excess amount may be carried forward and issued
under tax credit certificates in a subsequent fiscal year.

(3) THE AGGREGATE AMOUNT CARRIED FORWARD FROM ALL
PRIOR FISCAL YEARS IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SECTION
MAY NOT EXCEED $20,000,000.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0472/973425/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 472
Page 3 of 3

(4) The Secretary may not issue tax credit certificates for credit
amounts totaling more than $2,000,000 in the aggregate for a single theatrical
production.”.
END OF PAGE 3