START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 480 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 480 
(Delegate Fennell, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Transportation Network Companies - Deactivation of Operators 
 
 
This bill requires a transportation network company (TNC) to maintain and apply a written 
deactivation policy, as specified, that provides the policies and procedures for the 
deactivation of transportation network operators, including an internal appeal procedure. 
The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations.  
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Written Deactivation Policy Required 
 
A TNC must (1) maintain a written plain-language deactivation policy that provides the 
policies and procedures for the deactivation of operators and (2) make the policy available 
online through the company’s digital network application. The deactivation policy must:   
 
 
state that the deactivation policy is enforceable as a term of the TNC’s contract with 
the operator; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 480/ Page 2 
 
define “serious misconduct” and specify that serious misconduct includes (1) refusal 
to provide transportation network services for any reason related to a potential 
passenger’s disability, including the use of a mobility aid or travel with a service 
animal and (2) any other conduct that would constitute an act of apparent 
discrimination under federal or State law; 
 
include a nonexhaustive list of examples of conduct that constitutes serious 
misconduct under the deactivation policy; 
 
provide the operator with a reasonable understanding of what may constitute a 
violation that warrants deactivation under the policy; 
 
describe the procedures for notifying an operator of a deactivation and the reason 
for the deactivation; 
 
describe the procedures and eligibility criteria for the reconsideration of a 
deactivation decision and the process, consistent with specified requirements, for an 
operator to request a deactivation appeal with the TNC; and 
 
be specific enough for an operator to understand what constitutes a violation of the 
policy and how to avoid violating the policy. 
 
“Deactivate” or “deactivation” means an action by a TNC to permanently change an 
operator’s account status from eligible to provide transportation network services to 
ineligible to provide transportation network services. 
 
A TNC may not deactivate an operator for a violation not reasonably understood to be part 
of the TNC’s deactivation policy. A TNC may not rely solely on a passenger report as the 
basis for deactivation, unless the report:   
 
 
was submitted within 14 days after the date of the alleged incident; or 
 
involves (1) an alleged violation of a federal or State law; (2) an alleged violation 
of the TNC’s nondiscrimination policy; (3) an alleged act of fraud, as specified, 
including deliberately increasing the time or distance of a passenger trip; or  
(4) operator, road, or personal safety. 
 
Procedures for Deactivation 
 
Generally, a TNC must provide an operator with written notice of a deactivation on the 
date deactivation becomes effective. In the case of serious misconduct, the written notice 
must be provided within three days after the deactivation. A written notice must include 
(1) the reason for the deactivation; (2) information on the operator’s right to appeal the 
deactivation; and (3) instructions for an operator to appeal the deactivation.  
 
A TNC must allow an operator whose account is deactivated to withdraw earnings that 
accrued before the deactivation unless (1) the TNC reasonably believes that a portion of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 480/ Page 3 
the earnings are connected to criminal or fraudulent conduct, or (2) the withdrawal would 
violate a federal or State law. 
 
Procedures for Appeal 
 
A deactivation policy must include an appeals process for an operator to appeal a 
deactivation. An operator who is deactivated by a TNC has the right to appeal the 
deactivation beginning on the date the operator receives notice of the deactivation. The 
appeals process must provide an operator with at least 30 days to appeal the deactivation 
and an opportunity to provide the TNC, or a third party chosen by the TNC to assist in the 
process, with information to support the appeal. 
 
Generally, a TNC must review and make a final decision on an appeal within 15 days after 
receipt of the appeal and any information the operator provides to support the appeal. Either 
the TNC or the operator may request an additional 15 days to review and make a final 
decision on an appeal or provide supporting information, as appropriate. A TNC must 
consider all information provided by the operator during the appeals process. For an 
appealed deactivation to be upheld under the appeal process, a TNC or a third party must 
determine that under the totality of the circumstances there is evidence to find that it is 
more likely than not that a violation of the deactivation policy has occurred. 
 
Applicability 
 
The bill does not apply to an operator’s loss of access to a TNC’s digital network 
application if the loss of access (1) is contingent on an operator’s compliance with a license, 
insurance, or a regulatory requirement; (2) was implemented by the TNC for a legitimate 
financial, business, or economic reason and not related to the operator’s conduct; (3) is able 
to be resolved through unilateral action by the operator; or (4) is the result of access 
restrictions due to inclement weather or network outages. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 204 of 2015 established a regulatory framework for transportation 
network services that encompasses TNCs (i.e., companies such as Uber and Lyft) and 
transportation network operators (i.e., the drivers), including licensing, criminal history 
records checks, insurance requirements, and assessments. A TNC may not operate in the 
State unless the Public Service Commission (PSC) has issued a permit to the company. 
Generally, a transportation network operator may not provide transportation network 
services unless PSC has authorized the operator to operate on a provisional basis or has 
issued a valid temporary or permanent transportation network operator’s license to provide 
transportation network services. Neither statute nor regulations require or otherwise 
specifically address transportation network operator deactivations and appeals. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 480/ Page 4 
PSC must adopt regulations to ensure that TNCs and operators are making reasonable 
efforts to make transportation network services accessible to all people, including 
individuals with disabilities. 
 
“Transportation network company” means a company that operates in the State using a 
digital network to connect passengers to transportation network operators or transportation 
network partners for transportation network services. 
 
“Transportation network operator,” “transportation network partner,” or “transportation 
network driver” means an individual who:   
 
 
has been issued a transportation network operator’s license or is otherwise 
authorized, by PSC to provide transportation network services; 
 
receives, through a TNC’s digital network application, a connection to a potential 
passenger to transport the passenger between points chosen by the passenger in 
exchange for the payment of a fee to the TNC; and 
 
uses a motor vehicle that is owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the 
individual and is approved for use in providing transportation network services by 
PSC. 
 
“Transportation network services” means the activities of an operator during:   
 
 
transportation network coverage period one, during which the operator is logged 
onto and ready to accept a prearranged ride request made through a TNC’s digital 
network application; 
 
transportation network coverage period two, during which the operator accepts a 
ride request from a passenger that is prearranged through a TNC’s digital network 
application, and is traveling to a predetermined location to pick up the passenger; 
and  
 
transportation network coverage period three, during which the operator transports 
the passenger and continuing until the passenger departs the motor vehicle. 
 
“Transportation network services” does not include:   
 
 
providing taxicab services, sedan services, or limousine services; 
 
any shared expense carpool arrangement or service or other type of arrangement or 
service in which a driver receives a fee that does not exceed the driver’s costs 
associated with providing a ride; or 
 
transportation services that a nonprofit organization provides through the use of a 
volunteer driver and the volunteer driver’s personal vehicle. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 480/ Page 5 
Small Business Effect:  Transportation network operators potentially benefit from the 
deactivation appeal rights and related processes established by the bill. TNCs are generally 
not small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 747 and HB 1030 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 740 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Public 
Service 
Commission; 
Maryland 
Insurance 
Administration; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5