START OF PAGE 1
HB0467/933728/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 467
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “and Wolek” and substitute “Wolek,
Conaway, and Woods”; in line 6, after “individual” insert “and the incarcerated
individual’s representative”; and in line 15, after “public” insert “subject to certain
disclosure requirements”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2

On page 2, in line 20, strike “AND”; in line 22, after “PAROLE” insert “;

(6) THE NUMBER OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEWS COMPLETED BY
THE COMMISSION; AND

(7) THE NUMBER OF PAROLE REVOCATION HEARINGS HELD AND
THE OUTCOME OF EACH PAROLE REVOCATION HEARING”;

and in line 25, after “individual” insert “AND THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S
REPRESENTATIVE”.

On page 3, in line 8, after “parole” insert “, INCLUDING:

(I) THE CASE PLAN;

(II) THE PRE–PAROLE SUMMARY;
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0467/933728/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 467
Page 2 of 2

(III) THE FULL REPORT OF ANY RISK ASSESSMENT
COMPLETED IN PREPARATION FOR THE HEARING ON PAROLE RELEASE; AND

(IV) THE CASE MANAGER’S RECOMMENDATION”;

in line 12, after “opinion” insert “AND THE DIAGNOSING CLINICIAN HAS
DETERMINED IN WRITING THAT DISCLOSURE OF THE DIAGNOSTIC OPINION IS
CONTRAINDICATED”; and in line 32, strike “EACH COMMISSIONER’S” and substitute
“THE PANEL’S”.

On page 4, in line 1, strike “COMMISSIONER’S VOTE” and substitute “PANEL’S
DECISION”; and in line 30, strike “5” and substitute “30”.

On page 5, in line 8, strike “5–day” and substitute “30–DAY”.

On page 6, in line 4, after “Commission’s” insert “FINAL”; and in the same line,
after “possible” insert “, BUT NOT LATER THAN 12 MONTHS AFTER THE DATE OF THE
PAROLE HEARING, INCLUDING ANY SUBSEQUENT INFORMATION GATHERING OR
REVIEW”.

On page 7, in line 2, strike “AND”; in line 3, after “AVAILABLE” insert “AT NO
COST”; and in the same line, after “INDIVIDUAL” insert “; AND

(3) SUBJECT TO THE DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS OF § 3–602 OF THIS
ARTICLE ”.
END OF PAGE 2