START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 422 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 422 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Expedited Partner Therapy - Bacterial Vaginosis and Licensed 
Certified Midwives 
 
 
This bill adds bacterial vaginosis to the list of conditions for which antibiotic therapy can 
be provided to an individual under the State’s expedited partner therapy (EPT) program. 
The bill also authorizes a licensed certified midwife to provide antibiotic therapy under the 
program and replaces the term “sexually transmitted infection” with “an infection 
transmitted through sexual activity” with respect to the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health can update EPT regulations and 
provider materials with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  EPT is the practice of providing antibiotic therapy to the sexual partner of 
a patient diagnosed with certain sexually transmitted infections without an intervening 
medical evaluation to stop the further spread of the infection and reduce the likelihood of 
reinfection in the diagnosed patient. 
 
Chapter 183 of 2015 modified the existing Baltimore City EPT Pilot Program to make the 
provision of EPT a permanent option and authorize the use of EPT throughout Maryland. 
Physicians, advanced practice registered nurses with prescriptive authority, physician 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 422/ Page 2 
assistants, pharmacists, and certain registered nurses employed by local health departments 
may prescribe, dispense, or otherwise provide antibiotic therapy to any sexual partner of a 
patient diagnosed with chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis without making a physical 
assessment of the patient’s partner. 
 
Additional Comments:  Bacterial vaginosis is a condition that occurs when there is an 
imbalance of certain bacteria in the vagina. It can be treated with antibiotics. A recent study 
showed that certain male partner treatments for bacterial vaginosis are correlated with 
reduced recurrence of bacterial vaginosis in the short term. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 394 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2