START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 478 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 478 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification for Classroom Supplies Purchased by 
Teachers - Alteration 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the income tax subtraction modification for educator 
expenses 
to 
certain 
full-time 
prekindergarten 
teachers 
in 
publicly-funded  
full-day prekindergarten programs. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to  
tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease by about $80,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2027. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s change with existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues may decrease by about $50,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2027. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An eligible teacher may subtract from income up to $250 of unreimbursed 
expenses paid or incurred during the tax year for the purchase of classroom supplies if the 
supplies are used by (1) students in the classroom or (2) the eligible teacher to prepare for 
or during classroom teaching. “Eligible teacher” is defined as an individual who is a 
kindergarten through grade 12 classroom teacher in an elementary or secondary school in 
the State on a full-time basis for an academic year ending during the tax year. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 478/ Page 2 
The subtraction allowed does not include any amount excluded from federal adjusted gross 
income under the federal “above-the-line” deduction for unreimbursed educator expenses, 
which already flows through to the Maryland income tax return. The federal deduction is 
allowed for certain expenses paid or incurred by an eligible educator during the tax year 
for professional development or in connection with books, supplies, computer or other 
equipment, or supplementary materials, subject to an inflation-adjusted dollar amount 
limit. For tax year 2026, the dollar amount limit is $350. “Eligible educator” is defined as 
an individual who is a kindergarten through grade 12 teacher, instructor, counselor, 
principal, or aide in a school for at least 900 hours during a school year. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, general fund revenues may decrease by 
about $80,000 annually, and local income tax revenues may decrease by about 
$50,000 annually. This estimate is based on an analysis of historic claims for the educator 
expense subtraction modification and Maryland teacher employment statistics published 
by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Actual revenue losses under the bill may be less in 
the near term and greater in the long term due to the bill’s eligibility requirements and 
planned expansion of publicly-funded full-day prekindergarten under the Blueprint for 
Maryland’s Future. A more precise estimate is not feasible at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 262 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 25, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2