START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 449 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 449 
(Delegate Schmidt, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Juvenile Justice Restoration Act 
 
 
This bill authorizes a law enforcement officer to conduct an otherwise lawful custodial 
interrogation of a child, without the child first consulting with an attorney, if the child’s 
parent, guardian, or custodian of the child consents to the interrogation.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances and operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  If a law enforcement officer takes a child into custody, the officer must 
immediately notify, or cause to be notified, the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian in a 
manner reasonably calculated to give actual notice of the action. The notice must include 
the child’s location, provide the reason for the child being taken into custody, and instruct 
the parent, guardian, or custodian on how to make immediate in-person contact with the 
child.  
 
The custodial interrogation of a child by a law enforcement officer is prohibited until the 
child has consulted with an attorney, and the law enforcement officer has made an effort 
reasonably calculated to give actual notice to the parent, guardian, or custodian that the 
child will be interrogated. A child’s attorney consultation must be confidential and 
conducted in a manner consistent with the Maryland Rules of Professional Conduct and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 449/ Page 2 
may be conducted in person or by telephone or video conference. To the extent practicable 
and consistent with the Maryland Rules of Professional Conduct, an attorney providing 
consultation must communicate and coordinate with the parent, guardian, or custodian of 
the child in custody. The requirement of consultation with an attorney may not be waived 
and applies whether the child is proceeded against as a child or is charged as an adult.  
 
An exception to the notice and consultation requirements specified above authorizes a law 
enforcement officer to conduct an otherwise lawful custodial interrogation of a child if 
(1) the law enforcement officer reasonably believes that the information sought is 
necessary to protect against a threat to public safety and (2) the questions posed to the child 
by the law enforcement officer are limited to those questions reasonably necessary to obtain 
the information necessary to protect against the threat of public safety. Unless impossible, 
impracticable, or unsafe, an interrogation conducted under such circumstances must be 
recorded. A child being interrogated under such circumstances must be informed if the 
interrogation is being recorded.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a statement made by a child during a custodial 
interrogation is inadmissible in a delinquency proceeding or a criminal prosecution against 
that child if a law enforcement officer willfully failed to comply with statutorily mandated 
custodial interrogation requirements. The State may overcome the presumption by 
showing, by clear and convincing evidence, that the statement was made knowingly, 
intelligently, and voluntarily. These provisions may not be construed to render a statement 
by that child inadmissible in a proceeding against another individual.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 622 and SB 531 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Office of the Public 
Defender; Department of Juvenile Services; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2