START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 492 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 492 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Courtroom Security - Minimum Adequate Security Standard 
 
 
This bill establishes a minimum adequate security standard for courtroom security at all 
courthouse facilities in the State. Any entity responsible for providing courthouse security 
must use best efforts to meet the minimum standards for courtroom security. Certain 
standards are applicable beginning July 1, 2027, with additional standards beginning  
July 1, 2029. The bill requires a court security officer to meet the qualifications for a special 
peace officer, as defined in § 3‐301 of the Public Safety Article. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can comply with the bill’s requirements using existing 
resources. Although not contingent on the bill, the FY 2027 budget as introduced includes 
$5.6 million for the Judiciary to assist local jurisdictions in meeting minimum security 
standards. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, in some jurisdictions significantly, 
beginning in FY 2027 for local governments to hire additional staff for courtroom security. 
Potential increase in local government grant revenues and expenditures in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 492/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Beginning July 1, 2027, any entity responsible for providing courthouse 
security must use best efforts to have present during proceedings at least: 
 
 
one court security officer in each courtroom for any criminal, family, or juvenile 
proceeding; 
 
two court security officers in each courtroom for any proceeding involving an 
incarcerated individual or an individual who may be remanded to custody as a result 
of the proceeding; and 
 
one additional court security officer for every four or fewer courtrooms on each 
floor of the courthouse. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2029, any entity responsible for providing courthouse security must use 
best efforts to have present during proceedings at least: 
 
 
one court security officer in each courtroom for any proceeding; 
 
two court security officers in each courtroom for any proceeding involving an 
incarcerated individual or an individual who may be remanded to custody as a result 
of the proceeding; and 
 
one additional court security officer for every four or fewer courtrooms on each 
floor of the courthouse. 
 
Current Law/Background:  There are no minimum adequate security standards for 
courtroom security specified in statute. Generally, security for the appellate courts and the 
District Court is funded by the State. The security for circuit courts (and the  
orphans’ courts) is funded by county budgets and provided by the sheriffs’ offices in each 
county and Baltimore City. 
 
Chapters 414 and 415 of 2024 (Judge Andrew F. Wilkinson Judicial Security Act) created 
the Task Force to Ensure the Safety of Judicial Facilities, staffed by the Administrative 
Office of the Courts, to, among other things, identify (1) minimum requirements for 
courthouse safety, including the minimum number of security officers to be present in each 
type of judicial proceeding in a circuit court or in the District Court and (2) minimum 
qualifications for security officers. Also, the task force was required to develop a legislative 
proposal to ensure that the minimum standards are met. 
 
In December 2024, the task force issued its report, which, among other things, 
recommended minimum adequate security standards for courtrooms in the State and 
qualifications for court security officers; the prescribed staffing standards in the bill align 
with the task force’s recommendations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 492/ Page 3 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the Judiciary is responsible for the security 
of the Supreme Court of Maryland, the Appellate Court of Maryland, and the District Court 
of Maryland. The Judiciary advises that it has sufficient staffing levels to meet the 
minimum courthouse security standards for these courts. 
 
The Judiciary further advises that based on reported vacancies and funded positions, 
circuit courts in the State need an estimated 206 additional court security officers to meet 
the minimum security standards in fiscal 2028 and 2030. Accordingly, local expenditures 
increase, and in some jurisdictions significantly, beginning in fiscal 2027 for 
sheriff’s offices to hire additional staff in order to prepare to use best efforts to meet the 
minimum adequate security standards that first become effective July 1, 2027 (fiscal 2028). 
 
While noting that jurisdictions are not explicitly required to meet the minimum security 
standards, it is expected that the bill’s requirement for responsible entities to use best efforts 
requires local jurisdictions to hire additional staff. Based on responses from nine counties 
(including Baltimore City) to a request for information on the impact in fiscal 2027, the 
Department of Legislative Services advises that while some counties (Carroll, Charles, and 
Kent) report the need for between 2 and 10 additional court security officers at a cost of 
less than $500,000 to meet the minimum security standards, others anticipate more 
significant expenditures. For example, some counties (Allegany, Anne Arundel, Baltimore, 
and Harford) indicate the need for between 3 to 15 deputy sheriffs at an estimated cost of 
between $1.0 million to $3.0 million; Baltimore City and Prince George’s County report 
higher estimated expenditures (for Baltimore City over $4.5 million for 56 additional court 
security officers, and for Prince George’s County approximately $10.0 million for 
47 additional deputy sheriffs). 
 
Local expenditures in some jurisdictions may be partially supported by State funds to the 
extent funding included in the fiscal 2027 budget ($5.6 million) as introduced is made 
available to local jurisdictions to assist in hiring court security officers. However, the funds 
in the fiscal 2027 budget will not fully offset all ongoing costs associated with staffing, 
training, scheduling, and overtime. The overall fiscal impact on local governments will 
vary based on courthouse size, caseload, current security staffing and vacancy levels, and 
the ability to recruit and retain qualified court security officers. For any local law 
enforcement agencies that receive grant funding from the Judiciary to meet the minimum 
security standards, local government grant revenues and expenditures increase 
correspondingly. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the bill refers to a special peace officer as defined in  
§ 3‐301 of the Public Safety Article, the only officer defined in that section is a special 
police officer. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 492/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 621 and HB 789 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 544 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany, Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Charles, Harford, 
Kent, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4