START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 439 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 439 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing and Maryland Advisory Council on Deaf 
and Hard of Hearing - Renaming 
 
 
This bill renames the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (ODHH) to be the  
Office of the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing. The Maryland Advisory Council on 
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing is renamed to be the Maryland Advisory Council on the 
Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing. The bill also makes technical and clarifying changes 
to effectuate the renaming of the office and council. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any costs associated with changing the name of ODHH and the council can 
be absorbed with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 9-2401 of the State Government Article, “deafblind” means those 
residents of Maryland who have concomitant vision and hearing loss. 
 
ODHH was established in 2001 to promote the general welfare of deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals in the State. ODHH must fulfill the following duties and responsibilities:   
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 439/ Page 2 
 
provide, advocate, and coordinate the adoption of public policies, regulations, and 
programs that will benefit deaf and hard of hearing individuals;  
 
improve access to communication and to existing services and programs for deaf 
and hard of hearing individuals;  
 
provide direct services to deaf and hard of hearing individuals, as appropriate;  
 
increase public awareness of the needs and issues affecting deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals;  
 
work with State and local agencies to ensure access for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals to safety and emergency services;  
 
develop a referral service for deaf and hard of hearing individuals; 
 
serve as an information clearinghouse on the needs and issues affecting deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals; 
 
increase access for deaf and hard of hearing individuals to educational, health, and 
social opportunities;  
 
work with private organizations, the federal government, and other units of State 
government to promote economic development for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals;  
 
work to eliminate the underemployment and unemployment of deaf and hard of 
hearing individuals;  
 
provide a network through which services provided by State and federal programs 
serving deaf and hard of hearing individuals can be channeled; and  
 
promote compliance with State, local, and federal laws and policies protecting and 
serving deaf and hard of hearing individuals.  
 
Each year, the Director of ODHH must submit a report to the Governor and  
the General Assembly on (1) the activities of the office; (2) the status of programs and 
services facilitated by the office; (3) the activities of the State Board of Sign Language 
Interpreters; (4) statistics on compliance with State and federal laws related to deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals; and (5) recommendations for improved delivery of services 
for deaf and hard of hearing individuals. 
 
Maryland Advisory Council on the Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
 
The Maryland Advisory Council on the Deaf and Hard of Hearing in ODHH meets at least 
quarterly, advises ODHH on carrying out its duties, and reviews statewide activities that 
involve deaf and hard of hearing individuals. The council also fosters coordination and 
support of programs for deaf and hard of hearing individuals and studies ways to ensure 
that services and facilities are available to deaf and hard of hearing State residents.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 439/ Page 3 
Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind and Hard of Hearing  
 
Chapters 442 and 443 of 2024 established the Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and 
Hard of Hearing to study and make recommendations regarding services, programs, 
advocacy, outreach, and other efforts to improve the quality of life of individuals who are 
deaf, deafblind, or hard of hearing. The workgroup’s May 2025 final report recommended, 
among other things, implementation of a deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing unit within 
ODHH to emphasize services to the deafblind community. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 665 (Senator Harris) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3