START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 443 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 443 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B-SEC (Small Event 
Center) License  
PG 312-26 
 
   
This bill establishes, in Prince George’s County, a Class B-SEC (small event center) 
beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license and authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of 
License Commissioners to issue the license to a small event center, as specified. The 
license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises 
consumption to individuals attending an event at the event center as described in the 
license. The board may issue no more than 24 licenses in a license year or allow 3 licenses 
to apply in each State legislative district in the county at one time. The annual fee for a 
Class B-SEC license is $3,500. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County license fee revenues increase by approximately 
$10,500 annually, beginning in FY 2027. Prince George’s County expenditures are not 
affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potentially meaningful.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “small event center” is defined as a venue that operates on a per event 
basis or on a limited schedule and does not maintain standard daily hours of operation.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 443/ Page 2 
To be eligible for a Class B-SEC license, a small event center must have:  (1) kitchen and 
dining facilities that can accommodate between 75 and 125 people; (2) a minimum capital 
investment, excluding the cost of land, buildings, or leasing, of $500,000 for small event 
center facilities and kitchen equipment; and (3) food available during the hours of operation 
for an event. 
 
A Class B-SEC license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor during the hours and days 
set forth for Class B-BWL license holders in current law. 
 
The board may not issue more than (1) 24 Class B-SEC licenses in a year or (2) 3 licenses 
to apply in each State legislative district in the county at one time.  
 
Current Law:  A Class B-BWL license holder in Prince George’s County is authorized to 
sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption:  (1) Monday through Sunday from 
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day; (2) Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following 
day; and (3) Monday through Saturday from 6 a.m. to midnight for off-premises 
consumption. 
 
Local Revenues:  Prince George’s County estimates that approximately three businesses 
will apply for the new Class B-SEC license. The annual license fee is $3,500. Therefore, 
Prince George’s County license fee revenues are estimated to increase by $10,500 
annually, beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill would have a potentially meaningful impact to the extent 
qualified small businesses apply for, and obtain, a Class B-SEC license created by the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2