START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 459 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 459 
(Delegate Ghrist, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Board of Education and State Superintendent of Schools - Enforcement 
Procedures - Alterations 
 
 
This bill establishes that, when considering an appeal of a local board of education’s policy 
or a controversy or dispute involving local board rules or regulations, the State Board of 
Education must apply a standard of review limited to abuse of discretion or illegality. The 
bill also limits an administrative stay of a local board’s action issued by the 
State Superintendent of Schools to 90 days; however, the stay may be dissolved earlier by 
the State Superintendent or the State Board of Education. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the standard of review and stay procedures for State board 
appeals does not materially affect State revenues or expenditures. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Altering the standard of review and stay procedures for State board 
appeals does not materially affect local revenues or expenditures. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A decision of a local board may be an abuse of discretion if:  (1) no 
reasonable person would take the view adopted by the local board; (2) the local board acts 
without reference to any guiding rule or principle; or (3) the decision is clearly against the 
logic and effect of facts and inferences before the local board. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 459/ Page 2 
Current Law: 
 
State Board of Education – Authority and Final Decision-making 
 
In addition to other powers and duties provided by law, the State Board of Education has 
general authority to enforce education law within its jurisdiction, including bylaws, rules, 
and regulations adopted by the board. The State board may institute legal proceedings to 
enforce these provisions. 
 
With the advice of the Attorney General and without charge, the State board must interpret 
and explain the meaning of education laws within its jurisdiction and its own bylaws, rules, 
and regulations. The State board must decide controversies and disputes arising under these 
provisions, and its decisions are final. 
 
However, controversies and disputes arising under the collective bargaining provisions of 
Title 6, Subtitle 4 or Subtitle 5 of the Education Article must be decided by the 
Public Employee Relations Board, whose decisions are final. 
 
State Superintendent of Schools – Enforcement Authority 
 
In addition to other powers and duties provided by law, the State Superintendent of Schools 
is responsible for enforcing education laws within the Superintendent’s jurisdiction, as well 
as the bylaws, rules, and regulations of the State Board of Education. 
 
If an educational institution, local board of education, or certain nonpublic prekindergarten 
programs or nonpublic schools violate applicable education laws or regulations, the 
State Superintendent may, by written notice, require the State Comptroller to withhold all 
or part of State appropriations or other State payments to the entity. 
 
Authority to Stay Action of Local Boards (Regulation) 
 
According to regulations, the State Superintendent of Schools has the authority, either at 
the request of the President of the State Board of Education or on the State Superintendent’s 
own motion, to order a stay of any action taken by any local board of education, whether 
the local board’s action is taken by way of rule, regulation, resolution, bylaw, or other 
order. The stay must be issued within five days of the date notice of the action is received 
by the State Superintendent or the State board. The stay must not exceed 60 days in 
duration, unless the local board’s action has been appealed to the local board or the 
State board, in which case the stay may remain in place until the State board has issued a 
final decision of the appeal. The stay may be dissolved at any time by the 
State Superintendent or the State board. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 459/ Page 3 
Standard of Review for Appeals (Regulation) 
 
According to regulations, decisions of a local board of education involving a local policy 
or controversy and dispute regarding the rules and regulations of the local board must be 
considered prima facie correct, and the State board may not substitute its judgment for that 
of the local board unless the decision is arbitrary, unreasonable, or illegal. A decision may 
be arbitrary or unreasonable if it is one or more of the following:  (1) it is contrary to sound 
education policy or (2) a reasoning mind could not have reasonably reached the conclusion 
the local board or superintendent reached. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3