START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 497 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 497 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Temporary and Final Protective Orders - Duration 
 
 
This bill generally extends, from 7 to 14 days, the time during which a temporary protective 
order is in effect after service of the order. It similarly extends the time by which a 
final protective order hearing must be held following service of the temporary protective 
order, as otherwise specified in statute.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual meeting specified relationship requirements may seek relief 
from abuse by filing a petition with the court or, if the clerk’s office is closed, with a 
District Court Commissioner. Under limited circumstances, a petition may also be filed 
electronically from specified locations. The petition must be under oath and include 
specified information known to the petitioner, including the nature and extent of the abuse 
for which the relief is sought, any previous or pending action between the parties in any 
court, and the whereabouts of the respondent. 
 
If a judge finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person eligible for relief 
has been abused, the judge may grant a temporary protective order. In general, a temporary 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 497/ Page 2 
protective order is in effect for no more than seven days after service of the order; a final 
protective order hearing must be held no later than seven days after service. A judge may 
extend the temporary protective order as needed, but not to exceed six months, to effectuate 
service of the order where necessary to provide protection or for other good cause. 
 
A judge may grant a final protective order if the judge finds by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged abuse has occurred or if the respondent consents to the entry of 
the order. Among other relief, a final protective order may order the respondent to 
(1) refrain from abusing or threatening to abuse any person eligible for relief; (2) refrain 
from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing any person eligible for relief; 
(3) refrain from entering the residence of any person eligible for relief; (4) award 
emergency family maintenance as necessary to support any person eligible for relief to 
whom the respondent has a duty of support, as specified; or (5) pay filing fees and costs. 
A final protective order may also address issues relating to custody and visitation, use and 
possession of a home or vehicle, counseling, and temporary possession of a pet. A final 
protective order must require the respondent to surrender to law enforcement authorities 
any firearm in the respondent’s possession and to refrain from possession of any firearm 
for the duration of the protective order. All relief granted in a final protective order is 
effective for the period stated in the order, generally up to a maximum of 12 months. A 
final protective order may be issued for up to two years in specified circumstances set forth 
in statute. Statutory provisions also set forth circumstances under which a final protective 
order may be modified, rescinded, or extended. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 433 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2