START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 424 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 424 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Continuing Care in a Retirement Community Providers - Governing Bodies - 
Membership 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of “provider” with respect to the governing body of a 
continuing care in a retirement community (CCRC) to include a person who oversees the 
financial and policy decisions in providing CCRC. If a provider owns or operates 
multiple facilities in the State, the governing body must include (1) as a regular member, 
one of the provider’s subscribers who is a subscriber at the facility with the most 
subscribers and (2) as an alternate member, at least one of the provider’s subscribers for 
every three facilities in the State, if applicable. The bill specifies that the purpose of a 
subscriber member of a governing body is to represent the interests of the provider’s 
subscribers and alters other provisions relating to a governing body of a CCRC. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) 
increase by $85,600 in FY 2027 for staff, as discussed below. Future years reflect 
annualization and ongoing costs. Special fund revenues to the Continuing Care Fund may 
increase by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as FY 2027 (and may be used to 
offset expenditures), as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$85,600 
$100,500 
$105,200 
$110,000 
$114,800 
Net Effect 
($85,600) 
($100,500) 
($105,200) 
($110,000) 
($114,800) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 424/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that a regular or alternate member of the governing body 
of a CCRC must be selected by the resident association of the facility. A regular or alternate 
member selected by the resident association is not required to meet the same general 
written standards and criteria used to select other members of the governing body, 
including any requirement to adhere to a particular religious faith or principle. 
 
The bill removes the requirement that the governing body confer with the resident 
association at each of the provider’s facilities before the subscriber or alternate subscriber 
officially joins the governing body. 
 
Current Law:  In general, a provider must have received a license from MDOA for each 
facility offering continuing care. MDOA currently conducts financial reviews of 
continuing care providers. 
 
“Continuing care in a retirement community” means providing shelter and either medical 
and nursing or other health-related services or making the services readily accessible 
through the provider or an affiliate of the provider, whether or not the services are 
specifically offered in written agreement for shelter (1) to an individual who is at least 
age 60 and not related by blood or marriage to the provider; (2) for the life of the individual 
or for a period exceeding one year; and (3) under one or more written agreements that 
require a transfer of assets or an entrance fee notwithstanding periodic changes. 
 
“Provider” means a person who undertakes to provide continuing care and is (1) the owner 
or operator of a facility or (2) an applicant for or the holder of a preliminary, initial, or 
renewal certificate of registration. 
 
“Governing body" means a board of directors, board of trustees, or similar group that 
ultimately directs the affairs of a provider, but whose members are not required to have an 
equity interest in the provider. A provider must disclose to a subscriber the provider’s form 
of governance and the composition of its governing body. 
 
Governing Body Meetings and Membership  
 
At least quarterly, each provider must hold a meeting open to all the provider’s subscribers. 
The provider must summarize their operations, significant changes from the previous year, 
and goals and objectives for the next year, as well as answer subscribers’ questions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 424/ Page 3 
If a provider has a governing body, at least one of the provider’s subscribers must be a full 
and regular member of the governing body. If a provider owns or operates more than 
three facilities in the State, the governing body must include at least one of the provider’s 
subscribers for every three facilities in the State. 
 
Chapter 331 of 2025 requires the governing body of a continuing care provider that has 
only one subscriber to authorize the appointment of an alternate subscriber to serve as a 
regular member of the governing body if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the 
subscriber’s duties. The alternate subscriber may (1) attend all meetings of the governing 
body and (2) vote only if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the subscriber’s duties 
as a regular member of the governing body. 
 
A regular or alternate member of the governing body must be selected according to the 
same general written standards and criteria used to select other members of the governing 
body. The governing body must confer with the resident association at each of the 
provider’s facilities before the subscriber officially joins the governing body. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, MDOA is responsible for ensuring that providers 
(including a person who oversees the financial and policy decisions in providing CCRC, 
such as a parent company) are following the law with respect to the governing body of a 
CCRC. 
 
MDOA advises that the expanded definition of “provider” requires the department to 
collect and assess additional documentation for each licensed CCRC to determine parent 
corporations, affiliated corporations, and other entities, many of which could be 
non-Maryland entities. MDOA further advises that, over the past two years, it has received 
a significant increase in inquiries about the roles and responsibilities of parent 
organizations and public information requests associated with CCRCs. MDOA notes that 
any additional workload cannot be absorbed by existing staff. 
 
Therefore, MDOA special fund expenditures increase by $85,616 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one financial analyst to evaluate CCRC providers to determine parent corporations 
and other entities to ensure that providers comply with governing body requirements. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$76,475 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$85,616 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 424/ Page 4 
Provider Fees  
 
The Continuing Care Fund is used to defray the costs of administering continuing care 
statutory requirements. The special, nonlapsing fund consists of all continuing care 
provider fees, money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, fund investment 
earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the fund’s benefit. 
 
MDOA advises that counting care provider fee increases may be needed to offset the cost 
of the bill. To the extent that provider fees increase as a result of the bill, special fund 
revenues to the fund increase by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as fiscal 2027 
and may be used to offset expenses under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 488 (Senator Lewis Young) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4