START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 445 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 445 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Coverage for 
Orthoses and Prostheses (So Every Body Can Move Act) 
 
 
This bill alters the current mandated benefit for coverage of orthopedic braces to be 
coverage for orthoses and replacement of orthoses and clarifies mandated coverage for 
prostheses. Beginning January 1, 2027, Medicaid must provide coverage for orthoses, as 
specified. Each insurer, nonprofit health service plan, and health maintenance organization 
(collectively known as carriers) and Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) must 
submit a compliance report by June 30, 2032, which must be aggregated and reported to 
specified committees of the General Assembly by December 31, 2032. The bill takes 
effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans 
issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any 
additional workload for MIA can be handled with existing budgeted resources. As the bill 
essentially codifies current coverage, there is no impact on the Maryland Medicaid 
program, as discussed below. No meaningful impact on the State Employee and Retiree 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent health insurance costs increase as a result of the bill, health 
care expenditures for local governments that purchase fully insured health benefit plans 
may increase. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 445/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Coverage of Orthoses 
 
Definitions:  The term “orthopedic brace” is replaced with “orthosis,” which means a rigid 
or semi-rigid device used to support a weak or misaligned body member or  
restrict or eliminate motion, improve function, or relieve symptoms of a disease,  
injury, or post‑operative condition in a part of the body. “Orthosis” includes a 
custom‑designed, ‑fabricated, -molded, -fitted, or modified device to treat a 
neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, acquired, or congenital condition. 
 
Medical Necessity:  Covered benefits include all orthoses determined by a treating health 
care provider to be medically necessary for completing activities of daily living, essential 
job‑related activities, or performing physical activities to maximize the whole-body health 
and lower or upper limb function of the insured or enrollee. A carrier may not establish 
requirements for medical necessity or appropriateness that are more restrictive than those 
established under the Medicare Coverage Database. 
 
Coverage Requirements:  A carrier must provide – once annually – coverage for orthoses, 
components of orthoses, repairs to orthoses, and replacements of orthoses or orthosis 
components. 
 
Limitations:  Coverage for orthoses may not be subject to a higher copayment or 
coinsurance requirement than for other similar medical and surgical benefits under the 
policy or contract. A carrier may not impose an annual or lifetime dollar maximum on 
coverage separate from any annual or lifetime maximum that applies in aggregate to all 
covered benefits. 
 
Replacement of Orthoses or Orthosis Components:  Coverage for replacements of orthoses 
must be provided without regard to continuous use or useful lifetime restrictions if an 
ordering health care provider determines that the provision of a replacement orthosis (or a 
component) is necessary (1) because of a change in the physiological condition of the 
patient or (2) unless necessitated by misuse, because of an irreparable change in the 
condition of the orthosis or a component. A carrier may require an ordering health care 
provider to confirm that the orthosis or component being replaced meets these requirements 
if the orthosis or component is less than one year old. 
 
Provider Network:  A carrier that uses a provider panel for the provision of benefits for 
orthoses must comply with existing requirements governing provider panels. Specifically, 
a carrier must (1) ensure that all enrollees, including adults and children, have access to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 445/ Page 3 
providers and covered services without unreasonable travel or delay and (2) include 
standards that ensure access to providers, including essential community providers, that 
serve predominantly low-income and medically underserved individuals or include 
alternative standards for addressing the needs of low‑income, medically underserved 
individuals. 
 
Coverage of Prostheses 
 
The bill clarifies that the current mandated benefit for prostheses includes all prostheses 
determined by a treating health care provider to be medically necessary for completing 
activities of daily living, essential job‑related activities, or performing physical activities 
to maximize the whole-body health and lower or upper limb function of the insured or 
enrollee. 
 
Medicaid Coverage of Orthoses 
 
Beginning January 1, 2027, Medicaid must provide coverage for orthoses in accordance 
with the same requirements applicable to carriers. 
 
Uncodified language expresses the intent of the General Assembly that the bill may not be 
construed to require Medicaid MCOs to cover additional Healthcare Common Procedure 
Coding System “L” codes for orthotic procedures and devices than are covered by MCOs 
as of December 31, 2026. 
 
Compliance Reporting Requirement 
 
By June 30, 2032, each carrier and Medicaid MCO must report to MIA and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) on its compliance with the bill for calendar 2027 
through 2030. The report must be in a form jointly prescribed by MIA and MDH and 
include the number of claims and the total amount of claims paid in the State for coverage 
of orthoses. MIA and MDH must aggregate the data by calendar year in a joint report. By 
December 31, 2032, MIA and MDH must submit a joint report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee (now the 
House Health Committee). 
 
Current Law:  The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires 
nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include 
rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices. Under § 31‑116 of the Maryland 
Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State benchmark plan and, not 
withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be the benefits required in 
(1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans offered to small employers 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 445/ Page 4 
(except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in MHBE. 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
certain carriers must provide. Each health insurance contract delivered or issued in the State 
by a nonprofit health service plan must provide benefits for orthopedic braces. 
 
Per Chapters 822 and 823 of 2024, effective January 1, 2025, carriers must provide 
coverage for prostheses determined by a treating health care provider to be medically 
necessary for completing activities of daily living, essential job-related activities, or 
performing physical activities to maximize the whole-body health and lower or upper limb 
function of the insured or enrollee, as well as specified replacement for prostheses. 
Coverage may not be subject to a higher copayment or coinsurance requirement than for 
other similar medical and surgical benefits. A carrier that uses a provider panel for a policy 
or contract and the provision of benefits for prostheses must (1) ensure that all enrollees 
have access to providers and covered services without unreasonable travel or delay and 
(2) include standards that ensure access to providers, including essential community 
providers, that serve predominantly low-income and medically underserved individuals or 
include alternative standards for addressing the needs of low-income, medically 
underserved individuals. Medicaid must provide coverage for prostheses in accordance 
with the same requirements applicable to carriers.  
 
Chapters 822 and 823 also required the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) and 
MDH to review utilization of specified codes, evaluate the cost impact of requiring 
coverage for orthoses, and report to specified committees of the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024. The report estimated that expanding coverage of orthoses for 
whole‑body health would cost at least $2.9 million in total funds annually for Medicaid 
and $3.2 million annually for commercial payers. In January 2026, MHCC revised its 
estimate for commercial payers using a narrower set of “L” codes. The estimate to expand 
orthoses coverage to include whole-body health for the commercial market was reduced to 
$1.45 million annually or $0.11 per member per month (PMPM) – equivalent to a premium 
increase of about 0.07%, or $0.13 PMPM. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Medicaid  
 
Following completion of the report required under Chapters 822 and 823, MDH engaged 
with stakeholders and clinicians to identify a list of 132 “L” codes for custom orthoses used 
in physical activities to maintain whole-body health. Effective January 1, 2026, MDH 
updated its Disposable Medical Supplies/Durable Medical Equipment Prostheses and 
Orthoses Fee Schedule to reflect expanded coverage of both orthotic and prosthetic 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 445/ Page 5 
“L” codes for the purposes of whole-body health and limb function. As the bill essentially 
codifies the coverage now provided by Medicaid, there is no fiscal impact on the program. 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The Department of Budget and Management has previously advised that the  
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program provides coverage for 
orthoses and that the bill would have a negligible impact on the program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care providers that provide orthoses and 
related services may receive additional business under the bill.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to the National So Every BODY Can Move coalition, 
three states currently have activity-specific orthoses coverage requirements (Illinois, 
Minnesota, and New Mexico). The average increased utilization reported in those states as 
a result of those mandates has been approximately 5%. According to annual rate reviews 
submitted by five New Mexico carriers in the individual and small group market, mandated 
coverage for prosthetics and custom orthotics (implemented in January 2024) had 
no impact on health insurance rate increases. 
 
The bill’s insurance provisions do not apply to the nongrandfathered individual and small 
employer markets. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 406 and HB 383 of 2025 and SB 614 and HB 865 of 2024 (which were 
enacted to provide coverage for prostheses). 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 276 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 445/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6