START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 403 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 403 
(Delegates Simpson and Fair) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Information Act - Divorce Records 
 
   
This bill requires the custodian of a public record under the Maryland Public Information 
Act (PIA) to deny inspection of a record pertaining to a divorce proceeding, including  
(1) an application for divorce; (2) a financial record submitted as part of the divorce 
proceeding; (3) a record of a divorce settlement; and (4) a custody order. However, the bill 
does not apply to a final decree in a divorce proceeding and a custodian must release a 
record pertaining to a divorce proceeding to an applicant who (1) is a person in interest;  
(2) is a lawyer representing a person in interest; or (3) has been authorized under a court 
order to inspect the record. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information 
about the affairs of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. 
Each governmental unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom 
a member of the public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney 
General (OAG) must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public 
Information Act Manual published by OAG.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 403/ Page 2 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified.  
 
Denials  
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the Maryland 
Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for specified 
personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, personnel and 
student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial information, and shielded 
criminal and police records. Chapter 62 of 2021 specifies that a record relating to an 
administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police officer is not a protected 
personnel record under PIA and requires a custodian to allow access to such records by 
federal and State prosecutors. Chapters 548 and 549 of 2024 further specify that a record 
of positive community feedback that was not solicited by the police officer who is the 
subject of the feedback is not a protected personnel record under PIA.  
 
Discretionary Denials:  Unless otherwise specified, if a custodian believes that inspection 
of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to the public interest, the 
custodian may deny inspection to the applicant of that part of the record. PIA specifies the 
types of records and information that are eligible for discretionary denials, including 
documents that would not be available through discovery in a lawsuit. 
 
Procedure for Denial:  A custodian who denies inspection of a public record must, within 
10 working days, provide a written statement to the applicant that gives (1) the reason for 
denial; (2) if denying a part of a record on a discretionary basis, a brief explanation of why 
the denial is necessary and why redacting information would not address the reasons for 
the denial; (3) the legal authority for the denial; (4) a brief description of the undisclosed 
record (without disclosing the protected information); and (5) notice of the available 
statutory remedies. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 403/ Page 3 
Fees and Fee Waivers  
 
An official custodian may charge an applicant the actual cost of the search, preparation, 
and reproduction of any public record in a standard format, including the cost of media 
and mechanical processing. If an applicant requests a public record in a customized format, 
an official custodian may charge a reasonable fee for the search, preparation, and 
reproduction of the public record. PIA authorizes fee waivers under specified 
circumstances. 
 
Office of the Public Access Ombudsman 
 
The Office of the Public Access Ombudsman reviews and resolves disputes between 
applicants and custodians over requests for public records. The ombudsman may not 
compel a custodian to disclose public records or redacted information. However, if an 
applicant files a complaint with the office challenging a denial or exemption, the custodian 
must demonstrate that the denial or exemption is clearly applicable to the requested public 
record and, if inspection of part of a public record is denied on a discretionary basis, that 
the harm from disclosure is greater than the public interest in access to the information.   
 
Public Information Act Compliance Board  
 
The Public Information Act Compliance Board (PIACB), a five-member board appointed 
by the Governor, receives, reviews, and resolves complaints from applicants alleging that 
a custodian of a public record charged an unreasonable fee of more than $350. The board 
must issue a written opinion as to whether a violation occurred and, if it finds that a 
custodian charged an unreasonable fee, order the custodian to reduce the fee and refund the 
difference, as specified.  
 
Chapter 658 expands the jurisdiction of the board to include receiving, reviewing, and 
resolving additional types of PIA disputes and institutes an integrated PIA compliant 
resolution process that includes the Public Access Ombudsman. Under the Act, an 
applicant, an applicant’s designee, or a custodian may file a written complaint with PIACB 
if (1) the complainant has attempted to resolve the dispute through the Office of the Public 
Access Ombudsman, and (2) the ombudsman has issued a final determination stating that 
the dispute was not resolved.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 403/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 426 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4