START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 451 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 451 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council - Membership, 
Duties, and Sunset Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the termination date for the Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle 
Infrastructure Council (ZEEVIC), thereby establishing the council as a permanent entity. 
The bill also alters the membership and duties of ZEEVIC and makes permanent an annual 
reporting requirement. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Reporting and staffing requirements related to ZEEVIC can continue to be 
handled with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill replaces ZEEVIC’s current duties by requiring the council to do 
the following: 
 
 
identify barriers and challenges to the integration of zero emission electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure into the State’s transportation network; 
 
identify, develop, and recommend policies and best-practice initiatives for the 
integration of zero emission electric vehicle charging infrastructure into the State’s 
transportation network, including in residential and commercial areas and buildings; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 451/ Page 2 
 
convene State and local agencies and officials and other interested stakeholders to 
assist with the alignment and coordination of policies and best-practice initiatives 
for the integration of zero emission electric vehicle charging infrastructure into the 
State’s transportation network;  
 
establish performance measures for meeting zero emission electric vehicle-related 
use, infrastructure, and regulatory goals; 
 
develop targeted policies to support fleet purchases of zero emission electric 
vehicles; and  
 
develop charging solutions for existing and future multidwelling units. 
 
ZEEVIC must also continue to pursue other goals and objectives that promote the use of 
zero emission electric vehicles in the State. 
 
The bill excludes fuel cell electric vehicles from the definition of “zero emission vehicle” 
and makes a related change to the membership of the council (in addition to other 
membership alterations).  
 
The bill establishes a permanent annual reporting deadline of December 1 for ZEEVIC 
(beginning December 1, 2026).  
 
Current Law:  ZEEVIC was initially established, through uncodified language, by 
Chapters 400 and 401 of 2011 as the Maryland Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council 
(EVIC) with a two-year duration. EVIC was required to develop a plan to expand the 
adoption of electric vehicles and develop an infrastructure charging network. In its (then) 
final report issued in December 2012, the council made several recommendations, 
including (1) extending EVIC through June 2015; (2) increasing the amount of 
zero emission State fleet vehicle purchases to 10% by 2020 and at least 25% by 2025; 
(3) establishing a grant program for electric vehicle support equipment installation and 
procurement of transaction management software for multiunit dwellings; and 
(4) extending the recharging equipment tax credit through December 2016, and the 
qualified electric vehicle excise tax credit to July 1, 2016. Consistent with those 
recommendations, Chapters 64 and 65 of 2013 extended EVIC through June 2015. 
 
Since then, EVIC has been extended multiple times, with more reporting, membership 
changes, and a shift in focus. Specifically, Chapter 378 of 2015 extended EVIC for another 
five years to June 30, 2020, and shifted the reporting deadline to December 1 of each year, 
with a final report due June 30, 2020. Four years later, Chapter 213 of 2019 changed the 
name of the council to be ZEEVIC, expanded membership of the council, altered its 
responsibilities to focus more generally on zero emission vehicles and fuel cell electric 
vehicles, and required an additional interim report (on December 1, 2019). Even so, 
Chapter 213 did not extend the termination date of the council. Nevertheless, ZEEVIC 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 451/ Page 3 
received a six-year extension (from June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2026) by  
Chapter 118 of 2020, which also established six more interim reporting due dates (every 
December 1, from 2020 through 2025). Likewise, the final report was shifted to be 
June 30, 2026, concurrent with ZEEVIC’s new termination date. Chapter 118 also further 
altered membership of ZEEVIC by adding one more member (a second representative of 
the environmental community) and slightly altering affiliations for three existing members, 
including eliminating the representative of the retail electric supplier community and 
adding a third representative of electric companies instead.  
 
Chapter 607 of 2021, which altered the duties of the Office of People’s Counsel, further 
modified membership of ZEEVIC – to include the People’s Counsel or designee – but did 
not change reporting requirements or the duration of the council. However, Chapter 607 
inadvertently omitted the uncodified changes that had been made to membership and 
reporting under Chapter 118. 
 
Chapter 447 of 2024 codified ZEEVIC, added members, and otherwise generally clarified 
membership and reporting dates. ZEEVIC’s most recent report can be found on its website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3