START OF PAGE 1
HB0402/623022/1

BY: Economic Matters Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 402
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 2, strike “Ombudsman Unit” and substitute “Oversight”; in
line 4, strike “Ombudsman Unit” and substitute “Oversight Division”; in line 5, strike
“Division of Consumer Protection in the Office of the Attorney General” and substitute
“Department of Housing and Community Development”; in line 7, strike “of Housing
and Community Development”; strike in their entirety lines 11 through 20, inclusive; in
line 23, strike “11C–114” and substitute “11C–206”; in lines 23 and 24, strike “Local
Commissions on”; and after line 26, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(1) and (2)(i) and (ii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 2 of 19

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On pages 2 through 6, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 3 on
page 2 through line 2 on page 6, inclusive.

On page 6, in line 4, strike “LOCAL COMMISSIONS ON”; after line 4, insert:

“SUBTITLE 1. LOCAL COMMISSIONS ON COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES.”;

and in line 6, strike “TITLE” and substitute “SUBTITLE”.

On page 8, in lines 24 and 26, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and substitute
“SUBTITLE”.

On page 9, in lines 9, 10, and 14, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and substitute
“SUBTITLE”.

On page 11, in line 27, strike “TITLE” and substitute “SUBTITLE”.

On page 12, in line 20, strike “TITLE” and substitute “SUBTITLE”.

On page 14, in lines 15, 23, and 25, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and substitute
“SUBTITLE”.

On page 15, in lines 2, 3, 24, and 32, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and
substitute “SUBTITLE”.

On page 17, in lines 7, 8, and 20, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and substitute
“SUBTITLE”.

On page 18, in lines 13 and 15, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and substitute
“SUBTITLE”.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 3 of 19

On page 19, in lines 2 and 3, strike “A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION”
and substitute “THE APPROPRIATE CIRCUIT COURT”; and in line 4, strike “SHALL”
and substitute “MAY”; in lines 16 and 20, in each instance, strike “TITLE” and substitute
“SUBTITLE”; after line 20, insert:

“SUBTITLE 2. COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT DIVISION.

11C–201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
§ 11C–101 OF THIS TITLE.

(C) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.

(D) “DIVISION” MEANS THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
OVERSIGHT DIVISION IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(E) “GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” HAS
THE MEANING STATED IN § 11C–101 OF THIS TITLE.

(F) “GOVERNING DOCUMENT” MEANS AN OFFERING STATEMENT, A
DECLARATION, BYLAWS, RULES, REGULATIONS, A PROPRIETARY LEASE, OR ANY
OTHER SIMILAR DOCUMENT OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 4 of 19

(G) “LOCAL COMMISSION” MEANS A COMMISSION ON COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES ESTABLISHED BY A COUNTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
11C–103 OF THIS TITLE.

(H) “MEMBER” MEANS:

(1) AN OCCUPANT OR A UNIT OWNER UNDER THE MARYLAND
CONDOMINIUM ACT;

(2) A LOT OWNER UNDER THE MARYLAND HOMEOWNERS
ASSOCIATION ACT; OR

(3) A MEMBER OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION AS
DEFINED IN § 5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE.

11C–202.

(A) THERE IS A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT
DIVISION IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE DIVISION SHALL HAVE STAFF AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE
BUDGET.

(C) THE DIVISION SHALL:

(1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 11C–204 OF THIS SUBTITLE:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 5 of 19

(I) RECEIVE AND INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS BY MEMBERS

REGARDING FINAL ADVERSE DECISIONS BY A GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OR COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MANAGER; AND

(II) CONDUCT HEARINGS ON AND ISSUE BINDING DECISIONS
REGARDING COMPLAINTS DESCRIBED IN ITEM (I) OF THIS ITEM;

(2) IMPOSE FINES AND FEES AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE;

(3) MAINTAIN A REGISTRY OF GOVERNING DOCUMENTS; AND

(4) PROVIDE COMPLIANCE GUIDANCE AND EDUCATIONAL
MATERIALS.

(D) IN RESPONSE TO A COMPLAINT, THE DIVISION SHALL:

(1) REFER THE COMPLAINT TO AN APPROPRIATE LOCAL
COMMISSION FOR FURTHER REVIEW OF WHETHER THE FINAL ADVERSE DECISION
CONFLICTS WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITIES IN THE JURISDICTION; OR

(2) IF THE COUNTY DOES NOT HAVE A LOCAL COMMISSION,
RESOLVE THE COMPLAINT USING THE PROCEDURES DESCRIBED IN § 11C–204 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) (1) IF THE DIVISION DETERMINES THAT A FINAL ADVERSE
DECISION CONFLICTS WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES, THE DIVISION SHALL PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE

(Over)
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 6 of 19

MEMBER, THE GOVERNING BOARD, AND, IF APPLICABLE, THE COMMON

OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MANAGER THAT THE ADVERSE DECISION CONFLICTS
WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES.

(2) IF WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER ISSUING A DETERMINATION THE
DIVISION RECEIVES A SUBSEQUENT COMPLAINT OF A FINAL ADVERSE DECISION
FOR THE SAME VIOLATION, THE DIVISION SHALL REFER THE MATTER TO THE
APPROPRIATE LOCAL COMMISSION, IF ANY.

(F) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2028, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE DIVISION SHALL REPORT, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE
ACTIVITIES OF THE DIVISION DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD.

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY THE
DIVISION;

(II) THE TYPES OF ASSISTANCE REQUESTED;

(III) ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE DIVISION;

(IV) THE NUMBER OF REFERRALS MADE TO LOCAL
COMMISSIONS; AND

(V) DATA ON DISPOSITIONS AND OUTCOMES OF
COMPLAINTS RECEIVED.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 7 of 19

11C–203.

(A) (1) A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY LOCATED IN THE STATE
SHALL FILE WITH THE DIVISION A COPY OF THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS, AND
ANY AMENDMENTS TO THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS, OF THE COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

(2) THE DIVISION SHALL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A DATABASE OF
GOVERNING DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE DIVISION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

(B) UNLESS THE COUNTY HAS A LOCAL COMMISSION, A COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY IN THE STATE SHALL REGISTER THE COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY WITH THE DIVISION AND RENEW THE REGISTRATION
EACH SUBSEQUENT YEAR.

(C) THE SECRETARY MAY ESTABLISH BY REGULATION:

(1) A COMPLAINT FILING FEE, NOT EXCEEDING $100;

(2) AN ANNUAL REGISTRATION FEE THAT IS BASED ON THE
NUMBER OF UNITS OR LOTS IN THE COMMUNITY;

(3) AN INITIAL GOVERNMENT DOCUMENT FILING FEE, NOT
EXCEEDING $100;

(4) A FEE FOR AN AMENDMENT TO A GOVERNMENT DOCUMENT
PREVIOUSLY FILED, NOT EXCEEDING $25; AND

(Over)
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 8 of 19

(5) A FINE FOR A FAILURE TO FILE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS AS
REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, NOT EXCEEDING $500.

(D) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $50,004 TO THE DEPARTMENT TO
BE USED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DATABASE REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION.

11C–204.

(A) (1) THE DIVISION MAY HEAR ANY COMPLAINT FILED UNDER §
11C–202 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) A PARTY MAY NOT FILE A COMPLAINT WITH THE DIVISION
UNTIL:

(I) THE PARTY HAS MADE A GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO
EXHAUST ALL PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES PROVIDED BY THE GOVERNING
DOCUMENTS OF THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

(II) AT LEAST 60 DAYS AFTER ANY PROCEDURE OR REMEDY
HAS BEEN INITIATED WITH THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITY.

(3) (I) IF THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITY DETERMINES THAT A DISPUTE EXISTS, THE GOVERNING BODY OF

THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY SHALL NOTIFY THE OTHER PARTIES OF
THE OPTION TO FILE THE DISPUTE WITH THE DIVISION.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 9 of 19

(II) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP

COMMUNITY MAY NOT TAKE ACTION TO ENFORCE OR IMPLEMENT THE DECISION
OF THE GOVERNING BODY FOR 14 DAYS FOLLOWING NOTIFICATION OF ALL
OTHER PARTIES.

(4) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
ON THE FILING OF A COMPLAINT WITH THE DIVISION, THE DECISION OF THE
GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY SHALL BE STAYED
AND MAY NOT BE ENFORCED OR IMPLEMENTED, OTHER THAN BY FILING A CIVIL
ACTION, UNTIL THE COMPLETION OF THE COMPLAINT PROCESS.

(B) (1) AT ANY TIME AFTER A COMPLAINT IS FILED, THE GOVERNING
BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MAY SUBMIT A REQUEST TO LIFT
AN AUTOMATIC STAY UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) IF A HEARING PANEL HAS NOT BEEN APPOINTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION, THE DIVISION SHALL AUTHORIZE A SPECIAL
STANDING PANEL TO CONSIDER REQUESTS FOR RELIEF FROM STAYS.

(3) THE SPECIAL PANEL SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER WHO IS AN OWNER IN A COMMON
OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

(II) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER WHO REPRESENTS PROFESSIONS
ASSOCIATED WITH COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING
INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT OR REAL ESTATE SALES,
DEVELOPERS, OR ATTORNEYS WHO REPRESENT COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITIES, OR IS A LICENSED COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MANAGER.

(Over)
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 10 of 19

(4) (I) A GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITY THAT REQUESTS RELIEF FROM A STAY SHALL SERVE A COPY OF ITS
REQUEST ON ANY PARTY NAMED IN THE COMPLAINT BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR
PERSONAL SERVICE.

(II) A CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE SHALL ACCOMPANY ANY
REQUEST SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(III) A PARTY SERVED WITH A COPY OF THE REQUEST SHALL
FILE ANY OPPOSITION TO THE REQUEST WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING
SERVICE.

(5) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A REQUEST FOR RELIEF FROM A STAY MAY BE GRANTED ONLY IF
THE ASSIGNED PANEL FINDS THAT:

1. ENFORCING THE STAY WOULD RESULT IN UNDUE
HARM TO THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

2. LIFTING THE STAY WILL NOT RESULT IN UNDUE
HARM TO THE RIGHTS OR INTERESTS OF ANY OPPOSING PARTY.

(II) IF A REQUEST FOR RELIEF FROM A STAY STATING FACTS
SUFFICIENT TO SHOW A NEED FOR IMMEDIATE ACTION IS NOT GRANTED OR
DENIED WITHIN 20 DAYS AFTER THE REQUEST WAS FILED, THE REQUEST SHALL
BE DEEMED GRANTED.
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 11 of 19

(C) (1) FOLLOWING THE FILING OF A COMPLAINT, THE DIVISION

SHALL INVESTIGATE FACTS AND ASSEMBLE DOCUMENTS RELEVANT TO THE
COMPLAINT.

(2) THE DIVISION MAY NOTIFY A PARTY IF THE DESIGNATED
AGENCY OR OFFICE FINDS THAT A COMPLAINT WAS NOT PROPERLY FILED.

(3) THE DIVISION MAY NOTIFY EACH PARTY OF THE COMPLAINT
REGARDING POSSIBLE SANCTIONS UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

(4) AFTER AN INVESTIGATION UNDER THIS SECTION THE
DIVISION MAY:

(I) IF IT FINDS THAT THERE ARE NO REASONABLE GROUNDS
TO CONCLUDE THAT A VIOLATION OF APPLICABLE LAW OR ANY GOVERNING
DOCUMENT HAS OCCURRED, DISMISS THE COMPLAINT;

(II) REQUEST ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATION; OR

(III) SCHEDULE A HEARING ON THE COMPLAINT.

(5) THE DIVISION MAY RECONSIDER THE DISMISSAL OF A
COMPLAINT IF ANY PARTY FILES A MOTION TO RECONSIDER WITHIN 30 DAYS
AFTER THE COMPLAINT IS DISMISSED, DEMONSTRATING THAT:

(I) THE DIVISION ERRONEOUSLY INTERPRETED OR
APPLIED APPLICABLE LAW OR A GOVERNING DOCUMENT; OR

(Over)
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 12 of 19

(II) MATERIAL ISSUES OF FACT THAT ARE NECESSARY TO A
FAIR RESOLUTION OF THE COMPLAINT REMAIN UNRESOLVED.

(D) (1) ANY PARTY IN A COMPLAINT MAY REQUEST MEDIATION.

(2) IF A PARTY REQUESTS MEDIATION, THE DIVISION SHALL
NOTIFY ALL PARTIES OF THE REQUEST AND OF THE MEDIATION SESSION.

(3) THE DIVISION SHALL PROVIDE A QUALIFIED MEDIATOR TO
MEET WITH THE PARTIES WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER A PARTY REQUESTS MEDIATION
TO ATTEMPT TO SETTLE THE COMPLAINT.

(4) IF A PARTY REFUSES TO ATTEND A MEDIATION SESSION, OR IF
MEDIATION DOES NOT SUCCESSFULLY RESOLVE THE COMPLAINT WITHIN 10
DAYS AFTER THE FIRST MEDIATION SESSION IS HELD, THE DIVISION SHALL
PROMPTLY SCHEDULE A HEARING.

(E) (1) (I) IF A HEARING IS SCHEDULED, THE SECRETARY SHALL
CONVENE A PANEL TO HEAR THE COMPLAINT.

(II) THE SECRETARY SHALL SELECT AT LEAST ONE MEMBER
DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(3)(I) OF THIS SECTION AND AT LEAST ONE
MEMBER DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(3)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

(III) THE MEMBERS SELECTED BY THE SECRETARY SHALL
DESIGNATE A THIRD MEMBER OF THE PANEL FROM A LIST OF VOLUNTEER
ARBITRATORS TRAINED OR EXPERIENCED IN COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
ISSUES MAINTAINED BY THE DIVISION.
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 13 of 19

(2) A PANELIST MAY NOT HAVE AN INTEREST IN THE COMPLAINT
TO BE HEARD.

(3) A HEARING PANEL SHALL HOLD A HEARING ON EACH

COMPLAINT THAT IS NOT RESOLVED THROUGH MEDIATION UNDER SUBSECTION
(D) OF THIS SECTION UNLESS THE DIVISION DETERMINES THAT THE COMPLAINT
IS:

(I) IDENTICAL TO ANOTHER COMPLAINT BETWEEN THE
SAME PARTIES ON WHICH A HEARING HAS ALREADY BEEN HELD UNDER THIS
SECTION; OR

(II) CLEARLY NOT WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE
DIVISION.

(4) THE DIVISION SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE OF A HEARING TO ALL
PARTIES NOT LESS THAN 30 DAYS BEFORE THE HEARING, UNLESS THE DIVISION
DETERMINES THAT AN EXPEDITED HEARING IS NECESSARY, IN WHICH CASE
NOTICE SHALL BE PROVIDED TO ALL PARTIES AT LEAST 15 DAYS BEFORE THE
HEARING.

(5) A PARTY OR WITNESS MAY BE ADVISED BY COUNSEL AT A
HEARING.

(6) IF A PARTY, AFTER PROPER NOTICE, DOES NOT APPEAR AT A
SCHEDULED HEARING, THE HEARING PANEL MAY ORDER ANY RELIEF FOR
ANOTHER PARTY THAT THE FACTS ON RECORD WARRANT.

(Over)
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 14 of 19

(7) (I) THE HEARING PANEL SHALL APPLY STATE AND COUNTY
LAWS AND ALL RELEVANT CASE LAW TO THE FACTS OF THE COMPLAINT.

(II) A DECISION OF THE HEARING PANEL IS BINDING ON THE
PARTIES.

(8) (I) THE DIVISION MAY ENFORCE A DECISION OF THE
HEARING PANEL BY APPROPRIATE LEGAL ACTION.

(II) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER ENFORCEMENT ACTION,
THE DIVISION MAY:

1. FILE FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO ENFORCE OR
CORRECT ANY VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

2. FILE TO RECOVER DAMAGES FOR A LOSS
SUSTAINED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(9) A HEARING PANEL MAY AWARD COSTS, INCLUDING
REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES, TO ANY PARTY IF ANY OTHER PARTY:

(I) FILED OR MAINTAINED A FRIVOLOUS COMPLAINT, OR
FILED OR MAINTAINED A COMPLAINT IN BAD FAITH;

(II) REFUSED TO PARTICIPATE IN MEDIATION OF A
COMPLAINT; OR

(III) SUBSTANTIALLY DELAYED OR HINDERED THE
COMPLAINT RESOLUTION PROCESS WITHOUT GOOD CAUSE.
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 15 of 19

(10) A HEARING PANEL MAY REQUIRE A LOSING PARTY IN A
COMPLAINT TO PAY ALL OR PART OF ANY FILING FEE.

(11) THE DIVISION MAY:

(I) ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL HEARING PROCEDURES; AND

(II) ADOPT ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO
WITNESSES AND EVIDENCE FOR A HEARING.

(F) (1) A PARTY MAY APPEAL A DECISION OF A HEARING PANEL TO A
COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION.

(2) AN APPEAL OF A DECISION SHALL BE CONSOLIDATED WITH
ANY CASE THAT ARISES OUT OF THE SAME FACTS.

(3) THE COURT HEARING AN APPEAL SHALL SUSTAIN THE
DECISION OF THE HEARING PANEL UNLESS THE DECISION IS:

(I) INCONSISTENT WITH APPLICABLE LAW;

(II) LACKING SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE; OR

(III) ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS.

(G) (1) A PARTY MAY FILE A CIVIL ACTION ARISING OUT OF A
GOVERNING DOCUMENT OR A LAW REGULATING THE POWERS OF A GOVERNING
BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

(Over)
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 16 of 19

(2) IF THE COURT IS NOTIFIED THAT A COMPLAINT HAS BEEN
FILED WITH THE DIVISION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE, THE COURT
MAY POSTPONE A PROCEEDING FOR AT LEAST 90 DAYS.

(3) THE COURT MAY HEAR THE ACTION DE NOVO IF A HEARING
PANEL ASSIGNED TO THE COMPLAINT HAS NOT ISSUED A DECISION UNDER
SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

11C–205.

(A) (1) THE CREATION OF THE DIVISION DOES NOT OVERRIDE,
PREEMPT, OR DIMINISH THE AUTHORITY OF ANY EXISTING COMMISSION ON
COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES ESTABLISHED BY A COUNTY OR LOCAL
MUNICIPALITY.

(2) A COUNTY OR LOCAL MUNICIPALITY MAY ESTABLISH,
MAINTAIN, OR EXPAND ITS OWN COMMISSION OR OVERSIGHT BODY CONSISTENT
WITH LOCAL LAW AND SUBTITLE 1 OF THIS TITLE.

(B) THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT A LOCAL
JURISDICTION FROM ADOPTING SUPPLEMENTAL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES OR
DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROGRAMS FOR COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES.

11C–206.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT FUND.

(B) THERE IS A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT FUND.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 17 of 19

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING TO THE
COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT DIVISION IN THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.

(D) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7-302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) THE FOLLOWING FEES COLLECTED UNDER § 11C–203 OF THIS
SUBTITLE:

(I) COMPLAINT FILING FEES;

(II) ANNUAL COMMON OWNERSHIP REGISTRATION FEES;
AND

(III) GOVERNMENT DOCUMENT FILING FEES;

(2) FINES ASSESSED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

(3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(Over)
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 18 of 19

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED
TO THE FUND.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (1) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law or by regulation of
the Treasurer, the Treasurer shall credit to the General Fund any interest on or other
income from State money that the Treasurer invests.

(2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through
2028.

(ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with
the terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by
the State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise
entitled to receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue
to the General Fund of the State.

(iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
apply to the following funds:
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HB0402/623022/01 Economic Matters Committee
Amendments to HB 402
Page 19 of 19

212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility
Special Fund; [and]

213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

214. THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
OVERSIGHT FUND.”;

and in line 21, strike “July” and substitute “October”.
END OF PAGE 19