START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 436 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 436 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Anne Arundel County Board of Education - Member Compensation and Student 
Member Scholarship - Increase 
 
 
This bill increases compensation for members of the Anne Arundel County Board of 
Education by $8,000, including the student member scholarship. The bill increases the 
annual compensation of the board president from $17,000 to $25,000, the board vice 
president from $16,000 to $24,000 and other nonstudent member compensation from 
$15,000 to $23,000. The bill also increases the scholarship award for a student member of 
the board who completes a full term from $15,000 to $23,000 for a term beginning on or 
after July 1, 2029. In accordance with Article III of the Maryland Constitution, increases 
in compensation do not apply to board members currently serving in a term of office and 
will only take effect at the start of the term of an individual elected after the effective date 
of the bill.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.     
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by $32,700 in FY 2029 and 
$64,000 annually beginning in FY 2030. County revenues are not affected.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Anne Arundel County Board of Education consists of 
seven nonpartisan elected members and one student member. The school board is  
1 of 20 elected boards in the State, there are also 4 hybrid boards. The student member of 
the Anne Arundel County Board of Education generally has the same voting rights and 
authority to attend executive sessions of the board as a nonstudent member of the board.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 436/ Page 2 
The president of the board is entitled to receive $17,000 annually as compensation, the 
vice president is entitled to receive $16,000 annually, and the other nonstudent members 
of the board are entitled to receive $15,000 annually. In accordance with Chapters 7 and 8 
of 2025, a student member who completes a full term on the county board must be granted 
a scholarship of $15,000, applied toward the student’s higher education costs.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Generally, elected members of the Anne Arundel County Board of 
Education serve a term of four years beginning on the first Monday in December after the 
member’s election. All elected members of the Anne Arundel County Board of Education 
are slated to stand for election in the 2028 presidential election. Therefore, the next term 
of office for which salary increases apply will begin December 4, 2028, slightly less than 
halfway through fiscal 2029. Therefore, all seven elected members (including the president 
and vice president) receive just over half a year of increased compensation in fiscal 2029 
resulting in an approximately $32,700 increase in expenditures in that year. Beginning in 
fiscal 2030, all seven elected members receive a full year of increased salaries representing 
$56,000 in additional county expenditures. 
 
The student member generally serves a term of office beginning July 1 of each year and 
ending June 30 of the following year. Therefore, the student member whose term begins 
on July 1, 2029 (in accordance with the bill) will finish their term in fiscal 2030 on  
June 30, 2030. Student member scholarships are awarded upon the completion of a full 
term. Therefore, the full $8,000 expenditure increase for a student member scholarship is 
realized beginning in fiscal 2030 with the completion of the term of the student member 
whose term begins on July 1, 2029.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 409 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 436/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3