START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 423 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 423 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Prince George's County - Public High Schools - Drug Detection Products  
PG 501-26 
 
 
This bill requires the Prince George’s County Board of Education, beginning in the 
2026-2027 school year, to require each public high school to provide drink spiking 
detection products and drug detection strips at no charge to students. Drink spiking 
detection products, as defined in the bill, allow the user to test a portion of a beverage to 
determine whether it has been contaminated with the drug gamma-hydroxybutyric acid 
(GHB) or ketamine. Drug detection strips are disposable test strips that allow an individual 
to test a drug for the presence of fentanyl. These detection products may be made available 
in school-based health clinics or school libraries. Beginning October 1, 2027, each public 
high school in Prince George’s County must report to Maryland’s Office of Overdose 
Response (MOOR) on the quantity of drug detection products distributed annually. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MOOR can receive reports from Prince George’s County public high schools 
with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) expenditures increase to 
provide drug detection products as specified under the bill. Revenues are not affected. 
This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 423/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Public Schools – Program of Drug Addiction Prevention and Education 
 
Chapters 573 and 574 of 2017, the Heroin and Opioid Education and Community Action 
Act (Start Talking Maryland Act) require the State Board of Education to implement a 
program of drug addiction and prevention education in schools that includes instruction 
related to heroin and opioid addiction and prevention, including information relating to the 
lethal effect of fentanyl. This instruction must be delivered in grade bands as follows:  
(1) third grade through fifth grade; (2) sixth grade through eighth grade; and (3) ninth grade 
through twelfth grade. The instruction must be delivered as a stand-alone unit in the 
program. 
 
Public Schools – Authority to Administer and Possess Overdose-reversing Medication 
 
Under Chapters 573 and 574, each local board of education, in accordance with 
school health guidelines and State laws and regulations, must authorize the school nurse, 
school health services personnel, and other school personnel to administer naloxone or 
another overdose-reversing medication to a student or other person on school property who 
is reasonably believed to be experiencing an opioid overdose. The policy must include 
(1) a provision requiring all public schools to obtain and store naloxone or another 
overdose-reversing medication and (2) a requirement that each public school develop and 
implement a method for notifying parents or guardians of the policy. Current law exempts 
a school nurse, other school health services personnel who are licensed or certified under 
the Health Occupations Article, and other school personnel who respond in good faith to 
an overdose emergency from personal liability for any act or omission in the course of 
responding to the emergency, except for willful or grossly negligent acts. 
 
By October 1 of each year, each public school must submit specified reports to the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) on each incident at the school that 
required the use of naloxone or another overdose-reversing medication on a form 
developed and disseminated by MSDE. 
 
Local Expenditures:  PGCPS enrolls approximately 40,000 high school students in 
grades nine through twelve. Fentanyl detection strips can cost as little as $1 to $3 per test 
and drink spiking detection products that test for the presence of GHB and ketamine can 
cost less than $1 to $5 per test, with single test strips generally costing less than tests with 
multiple test spots. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 423/ Page 3 
Exact costs depend on the number of tests distributed annually and the cost of any 
distribution methods the school system elects to install, but overall costs could be 
meaningful to the school system. For illustrative purposes only, assuming PGCPS 
purchases fentanyl test strips at a cost of $1 per test and drink spiking tests at a cost of 
$2.50 per test in sufficient number for every student in a secondary school in the county to 
receive one of each test per year, costs increase by $140,000 annually. However, total costs 
may be reduced to the extent PGCPS is able to acquire lower-cost tests in bulk and to the 
extent fewer overall students obtain the tests annually. Conversely, costs may be higher if 
PGCPS provides more tests than anticipated or if actual test costs exceed these estimates.  
 
PGCPS can report to MOOR on the distribution of drug detection products with existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 379 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland’s Office of Overdose Response; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3