START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 494 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 494 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Primary Care Investment Targets - Reimbursement and 
Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires an individual, group, or blanket health insurance policy or contract 
delivered or issued for delivery in the State by insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and 
health maintenance organizations (collectively carriers) to provide reimbursement to health 
care providers in a manner that meets the annual primary care investment targets 
established by the State on or after February 1, 2026. When filing a premium rate or 
premium rate change with the Insurance Commissioner, a carrier must submit a description 
of the carrier’s progress in meeting the annual primary care investment targets. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload on the Maryland Insurance Administration can be 
handled with existing budgeted resources. Expenditures may increase by an indeterminate 
but likely minimal amount for the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program (State plan) beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 667 of 2022 requires the Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC) to provide an annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly, which 
must include (1) an analysis of primary care investment over the immediately 
preceding year, including data stratified by zip code and county, in relation to total health 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 494/ Page 2 
care spending over the previous year; (2) ways to improve the quality of and access to 
primary care services, with special attention to increasing health care equity, reducing 
health care disparities, and avoiding increased costs; and (3) any findings and 
recommendations. MHCC must convene a Primary Care Investment Workgroup to 
develop the report, including by interpreting the results of the required analysis and making 
the recommendations. 
 
On December 19, 2025, Governor Wes Moore signed Executive Order 01.01.2025.28 
Establishing All-Payer Total Cost of Care Growth and Primary Care Investment Targets 
in Maryland. The order aims to address primary care investment by establishing an 
all-payer primary care investment target that includes Medicaid, commercial fully insured 
plans, Medicare Advantage, the State plan, and employer-sponsored health insurance. 
 
MHCC’s January 15, 2026 Primary Care Investment Workgroup report recommends, 
among other things, that the State (1) establish a primary care investment target based on 
total medical expense, adjusted for payer-specific variation, that promotes primary care 
investment in underserved areas; (2) annually publish which payers are meeting the target; 
and (3) enact legislation to hold payers accountable to achieving targets. The report also 
recommends legislation to require payers to participate in the Achieving Healthcare 
Efficiency through Accountable Design (better known as AHEAD) Model primary care 
programs, including the Maryland Primary Care Program, and to reimburse providers for 
Advanced Primary Care Management services and integrated behavioral health services 
with no cost sharing, when permitted by law. 
 
State Expenditures:  The State plan is largely self-insured for its medical contracts. 
Except for the one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), this bill 
does not apply to the State plan. The Department of Budget and Management advises that 
the bill likely increases rates for Kaiser by at least 3%, which in turn increases costs for the 
State plan by an indeterminate but likely minimal amount. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business primary care practices benefit from greater carrier 
investment in primary care services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 494/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3