START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 412 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 412 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child Support - Suspension of Driver's Licenses 
 
 
This bill adds additional conditions that must be satisfied before the Child Support 
Administration (CSA) may notify the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) of an 
obligor’s noncompliance with the most recent order of the court in making child support 
payments for purposes of license suspension. Specifically, CSA must also verify that the 
suspension of the obligor’s license (or privilege to drive) is appropriate because the obligor 
has the funds to pay but is making the free and conscious choice to withhold payment and 
other collection and enforcement mechanisms have been unsuccessful. In addition, the bill 
expands the grounds for an obligor’s right to request an investigation to include that (1) the 
minor child is residing primarily with the obligor; (2) CSA reached an agreement with the 
obligor, or the court issued an order for a scheduled payment of the arrearages, and the 
obligor is complying with the agreement or order; or (3) suspension of the license would 
place an undue hardship on the minor child or child support payment recipient. Finally, the 
bill also specifies additional notice requirements to advise obligors of proposed actions and 
results of investigations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in general and federal fund expenditures (and 
corresponding federal fund matching revenues) for the Department of Human Services 
(DHS), as discussed below. It is anticipated that the Judiciary, MVA, and the Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH) can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the workload of the 
circuit courts. The potential impact on local sheriffs’ offices is discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 412/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Calculation of Child Support Obligation  
 
In a proceeding to establish or modify child support, whether pendente lite or permanent, 
the court is required to use the child support guidelines. The basic child support obligation 
is established in accordance with a schedule provided in statute. The current schedule uses 
the combined monthly adjusted actual income of both parents and the number of children 
for whom support is required to determine the basic child support obligation. After 
establishing a child support order, the court must send a copy of the guideline calculation 
and the order to CSA. 
 
Driver’s License Suspensions 
 
Applicable Period of Noncompliance:  Statute establishes procedures by which MVA is 
generally required to suspend an individual’s driver’s license after receiving notice from 
CSA that the individual is at least 120 days out of compliance with the most recent court 
order in making child support payments. 
 
Exemptions:  An obligor whose individual income for the current year is at or below 250% 
of the federal poverty guidelines is exempt from provisions requiring MVA to suspend the 
obligor’s license or privilege to drive in the State if the obligor is out of compliance with a 
child support order and specified conditions are met. However, this exemption does not 
apply if the obligor has been judicially determined to be “voluntarily impoverished” under 
State law. Statute authorizes CSA to consider certain information to determine the income 
of an obligor (e.g., the income of the obligor at the time the most recent child support order 
was entered). 
 
Procedural Requirements Prior to Suspensions:  Before providing any information to 
MVA, CSA must send written notice of the proposed suspension action to an obligor, 
including notice of the obligor’s right to request an investigation on any of the following 
grounds:  (1) the information regarding the reported arrearages is inaccurate; (2) suspension 
of the obligor’s license or privilege to drive would be an impediment to the obligor’s 
current or potential employment; or (3) suspension of the obligor’s license or privilege to 
drive would place an undue hardship on the obligor because of the obligor’s inability to 
comply with the court order or a documented disability resulting in a verified inability to 
work. After an investigation, CSA must notify the obligor of the results of the investigation 
and the obligor’s right to appeal to OAH. If, after an investigation (or appeal), CSA finds 
that one of the circumstances specified above exists, CSA may not send any information 
about the obligor to MVA. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 412/ Page 3 
CSA is also prohibited from sending any information about an obligor to MVA if (1) CSA 
reaches an agreement with the obligor regarding a scheduled payment of child support 
arrearages (or a court issues an order for a scheduled payment) and (2) the obligor is 
complying with the agreement (or court order). 
 
Notification Requirements:  Prior to a suspension, MVA must send written notice of the 
proposed action to the obligor, including notice of the obligor’s right to contest the 
accuracy of the information. However, the challenge must be limited to the issue of 
mistaken identity. Similarly, an obligor may appeal a decision of MVA to suspend the 
license/privilege to drive; the issue at such a hearing must be limited to that of mistaken 
identity. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill makes several changes to the process by which a 
driver’s license may be suspended based on failure to pay child support, with meaningful 
impacts on CSA operations and likely additional costs (perhaps significant). Namely, CSA 
must verify that suspension of the obligor’s license or privilege to drive is appropriate, as 
specified, before supplying information to MVA. Despite repeated requests to submit 
information on the fiscal and operation impact of the bill, DHS did not respond in a timely 
manner; therefore, there was not sufficient time to analyze the information DHS eventually 
provided before the publication of this fiscal and policy note. Accordingly, the information 
below only reflects what was provided by DHS, without further analysis by the Department 
of Legislative Services. 
 
DHS estimates that State expenditures increase by $5.9 million in 2027, which reflects the 
bill’s October 1, 2026 start date, to account for (1) the need to hire 35 full-time staff  
(30 child support specialists and five assistant Attorneys General) as well as six contractual 
staff in the Baltimore City office (5 child support specialists and one attorney), at an 
estimated cost of $3.9 million in 2027 and (2) $2.0 million in fiscal 2027 only for one-time 
programming costs. Future year staffing expenditures – as estimated by DHS – are 
approximately $3.8 million on an annual basis. Federal fund matching revenues are also 
estimated to increase accordingly. 
 
In addition, DHS advises that because obligors may not always comply with requests to 
access financial and employment records (purported to be necessary to determine whether 
the obligor has the funds to pay), it anticipates the need to issue more administrative 
subpoenas (served through local sheriff’s offices) to compel the requested information in 
some instances. Specifically, DHS estimates associated federal fund expenditures of 
$2.6 million on an annual basis; the department also advises that these expenditures are 
subject to 100% federal reimbursements. Sheriffs’ offices may therefore experience 
increased workloads associated with the service of administrative subpoenas, with a 
corresponding increase in service fee revenues. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 412/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 110 and SB 106 of 2025 and HB 311 and SB 174 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 347 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4