START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 437 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 437 
(Delegate Edelson, et al.) 
Appropriations and Environment and 
Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Transportation - Major Highway Capacity Expansion Projects and Impact 
Assessments (Transportation and Climate Alignment Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) to take various 
actions, including conducting impact assessments and/or evaluations of the greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions and vehicle miles traveled (VMT) associated with major highway 
expansion capacity projects and major capital projects, implementing multimodal 
transportation programs to offset GHG emissions associated with major highway 
expansion capacity projects, and undertaking other offsetting activities for major capital 
projects. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $1.5 million in 
FY 2027; TTF and nonbudgeted expenditures each increase by an estimated  
$50,000 annually thereafter. TTF and nonbudgeted expenditures and revenues may 
otherwise be significantly affected depending on how projects are affected by the bill, as 
discussed below; any such impact is not shown in the table below.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
1,500,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
NonBud Exp. 
0 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
Net Effect 
($1,500,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 437/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Applicability 
 
“Major highway capacity expansion project” means a major capital project that (1) through 
all phases increases highway capacity through new highway lanes, grade separations 
including interchanges, or extended highway lanes and (2) has a total cost that exceeds 
$100.0 million.  
 
The bill’s requirements do not apply to a major highway capacity expansion project that, 
on or before June 30, 2026, (1) was a part of the Statewide Transportation Improvement 
Program (STIP) that received funding for construction; (2) was funded for construction in 
the Consolidated Transportation Program (CTP); or (3) completed the environmental 
review process under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).  
 
Additionally, the bill’s requirements do not apply to a major highway capacity expansion 
project that includes the construction or reconstruction of the William Preston Lane, Jr. 
Memorial Chesapeake Bay Bridge and parallel Chesapeake Bay Bridge including any 
related construction or reconstruction of U.S. Route 50 between Interstate 97 and Maryland 
Route 404.  
 
Major Highway Capacity Expansion Projects – Impact Assessments and Multimodal 
Transportation Programs Required 
 
As part of the planning and implementation of a major highway capacity expansion project, 
MDOT must perform an impact assessment of the project and develop and implement a 
corresponding multimodal transportation program. During project development, the 
corresponding program must identify investments in transit, transit-oriented development, 
transportation demand management, pedestrian and bicycle facilities, land use changes, 
and other specified activities to offset the increase in GHG emissions associated with the 
project. The multimodal transportation program must focus on areas in the following order 
of priority:   
 
 
overburdened communities and underserved communities impacted by the project;  
 
areas within or associated with at least one of the communities impacted by the 
project;  
 
overburdened communities and underserved communities across the State;  
 
the region in which the major highway capacity expansion project is located; and 
 
the State at large.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 437/ Page 3 
The multimodal transportation program must offset the GHG emissions associated with the 
major highway capacity expansion project; the net GHG emissions from the project and its 
associated multimodal transportation program must be zero or a negative number.  
 
MDOT must consider both the major highway capacity expansion project and the 
corresponding multimodal transportation program when it evaluates the project for 
inclusion in the CTP using its project-based scoring system. MDOT must (1) fund elements 
of the multimodal transportation program concurrently with funding for the construction 
of the major highway capacity expansion project or (2) defer the major highway expansion 
capacity project until the project meets the offsetting requirements for a multimodal 
transportation program.  
 
Major Capital Projects – Evaluations and Offsetting Activities 
 
Beginning with the CTP for fiscal 2028 through 2033, and in each annual release thereafter, 
MDOT must evaluate major capital projects included in the CTP for their impact on 
GHG emissions and VMT per capita. The evaluation must be published for the draft CTP 
by October 1 each year and with the final CTP each year.  
 
Additionally, beginning with the CTP for fiscal 2028 through 2033, and in each  
annual release thereafter, MDOT must achieve, to the maximum extent practicable and 
subject to State appropriations, a program whose impact on GHG emissions and progress 
toward achieving GHG reduction targets are, over the CTP period, consistent with the 
projected GHG emission reductions modeled for roads in Maryland’s Climate Pollution 
Reduction Plan:  Modeling Appendix. MDOT must fund offsetting activities to make the 
CTP more consistent with GHG emission reduction goals under MDOT’s 2023 Climate 
Pollution Reduction Plan and the targets established by the bill.  
 
The offsetting activities required are activities that (1) demonstrably create consistent, 
long-term reduction in GHG emissions or VMT; (2) prioritize overburdened and 
underserved communities; (3) are eligible for funding under the provisions described above 
regarding the CTP for fiscal 2028 through 2033; and (4) include specified activities, 
initiatives, and strategies.  
 
To achieve these requirements, MDOT must set (1) annual statewide declining 
GHG emission reduction targets that incorporate assumptions about the use of electric 
vehicles in the State and (2) annual regional declining GHG emission reduction targets that 
meet specified requirements.  
 
In evaluating the CTP’s impact on GHG emissions and VMT, MDOT must (1) establish 
the baseline total GHG emissions attributable to surface transportation in the State for the 
CTP period; (2) consider the direct and induced demand impacts of major capital projects 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 437/ Page 4 
on VMT per capita and GHG emissions; (3) consider the direct climate benefits of specified 
investments; and (4) compare the projected GHG emissions to the target emissions 
established pursuant to the bill to determine whether the CTP achieves the emissions 
targets. In evaluating whether the CTP meets GHG emission goals, MDOT may not 
consider state of good repair activities and activities that are solely system preservation 
activities.  
 
Establishment of Processes and Other Requirements 
 
The Secretary of Transportation must (1) establish a process to perform capacity expansion 
impact assessments; (2) establish a process for considering progress made toward meeting 
the annual statewide and regional GHG emission targets specified by the bill; (3) establish 
a process for developing a multimodal transportation program under the bill, including a 
method for considering the direct and induced demand impacts of a major highway 
capacity expansion project; and (4) publish on MDOT’s website the processes established 
pursuant to these provisions, as specified, and any multimodal transportation program 
developed under the bill. 
 
In fiscal 2028, MDOT must allocate funding for the implementation and development of 
statewide and regional travel demand modeling related to the required impact assessments, 
including induced demand and land use effects from transportation investments.  
 
MDOT and the State Highway Administration (SHA) must issue a report prior to 
proceeding to the final project planning phase for a highway project that documents (1) the 
evaluation of the alternatives identified when MDOT and SHA have determined that the 
objective of the proposed project cannot be reasonably achieved through other specified 
projects or improvements or (2) a determination through other required planning 
documents.  
 
Current Law:  “Major capital project” means any new, expanded, or significantly 
improved facility or service that involves planning, environmental studies, design,  
right-of-way, construction, or purchase of essential equipment related to the facility or 
service.  
 
Consolidated Transportation Program and Maryland Transportation Plan 
 
Long-term transportation planning in the State is a collaborative process designed to 
consider input from the public, local jurisdictions, Metropolitan Planning Organizations 
(MPOs), and elected officials. Among the numerous reports, meetings, and discussions that 
take place, two important documents are developed to guide transportation planning in the 
State:  the CTP and the Maryland Transportation Plan (MTP).  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 437/ Page 5 
The CTP, which is issued annually to the General Assembly, local elected officials, and 
interested citizens, provides a description of projects proposed by MDOT for development 
and evaluation or construction over the next 6-year period. The MTP is a 20-year forecast 
of State transportation needs based on MDOT’s anticipated financial resources during that 
20-year period. It must be revised every 5 years through an inclusive public participation 
process. Furthermore, it must be expressed in terms of goals and measures specified in 
State law and must include a summary of the types of projects and programs that are 
proposed to accomplish the goals and measures, using a multimodal approach when 
feasible.  
 
Statewide Transportation Improvement Program 
 
Federal regulations require each state to develop an STIP for all areas of the state that 
covers a period of at least four years. The STIP must be updated at least every four years, 
be developed in cooperation with the State’s MPOs, and include Transportation 
Improvement Programs (TIPs) from each of the urbanized areas represented by those 
MPOs. The STIP must include capital and noncapital surface transportation projects (or 
phases of projects) within boundaries of the state proposed for federal funding and may 
include other specified projects, such as safety projects and emergency relief projects. 
Specified information about each project, such as the estimated total project cost and 
amount of federal funds proposed to be obligated for the project, must also be included.  
 
The State’s current STIP covers fiscal 2025 through 2028 and includes TIPs from each of 
the State’s six MPOs, which are listed below:   
 
 
Baltimore Regional Transportation Board;  
 
Calvert – St. Mary’s Metropolitan Planning Organization;  
 
Hagerstown-Eastern Panhandle Metropolitan Planning Organization;  
 
National Capital Region Transportation Planning Board;  
 
Salisbury/Wicomico Area Metropolitan Planning Organization; and 
 
Wilmington Metropolitan Planning and Coordinating Council.  
 
A visualization of the urbanized areas covered by these MPOs can be found here.  
 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets 
 
Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) made broad changes to the State’s 
approach to reducing statewide GHG emissions and addressing climate change. Among 
other things, the Act accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets 
originally established under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the 
State to develop plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to (1) reduce 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 437/ Page 6 
GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero statewide 
GHG emissions by 2045.  
 
In December 2023, the Maryland Department of the Environment published Maryland’s 
Climate Pollution Reduction Plan, which was developed to implement Chapter 38. The 
2023 MDOT Climate Pollution Reduction Plan presents MDOT’s approach to support the 
requirements of Chapter 38; MDOT’s most recent Climate Action Status Report was 
released in December 2025.  
 
National Environmental Policy Act 
 
For major transportation projects, NEPA requires a range of alternatives to be considered 
and the environmental impacts of each alternative to be analyzed. This environmental 
impact statement is required prior to the commitment of federal funds to any major project 
or prior to any action taken by a federal agency that might cause a significant impact on 
the environment. Some of the basic steps in this process include a public scoping process, 
data collection, analysis of policy alternatives, and preparation of draft and final 
documents. The process involves numerous federal, state, and local partners. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that the bill requires impact assessments for 
and/or evaluations of projects undertaken by both MDOT and the Maryland Transportation 
Authority (MDTA), when applicable.  
 
As discussed in more detail below, TTF expenditures increase by a total of $1.5 million in 
fiscal 2027 for MDOT to develop an assessment tool to be used for the required impact 
assessments and evaluations; TTF expenditures increase by an estimated $50,000 annually 
thereafter to conduct impact assessments/evaluations. Nonbudgeted expenditures for 
MDTA increase by $50,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2028 to conduct impact 
assessments/evaluations. MDOT and SHA can issue the required report using existing 
resources.  
 
Assessment Tool Development 
 
TTF expenditures increase by $1.5 million in fiscal 2027 for MDOT to engage its expert 
consultants to develop an impact assessment tool capable of measuring a project’s impact 
on GHG emissions and VMT. This estimate is based on information provided by MDOT 
regarding recent estimates provided by its consultants. This analysis assumes that the tool, 
once complete, can be used to evaluate both MDOT’s and MDTA’s projects. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 437/ Page 7 
Impact Assessments/Evaluations 
 
The number of impact assessments/evaluations required under the bill depends on the type 
and scope of future projects that require such assessments/evaluations, which are unknown 
at this time. For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that, on average, MDOT and MDTA 
will each be required to conduct one impact assessment or evaluation for new projects each 
year.  
 
MDOT plans to continue to engage the consultant that develops the impact assessment tool 
to complete any future assessments/evaluations, and each assessment/evaluation is 
estimated to cost between $50,000 and $80,000. For purposes of this analysis, beginning 
in fiscal 2028, TTF expenditures are assumed to increase by $50,000 annually to perform 
impact assessments/evaluations for affected MDOT projects, and nonbudgeted 
expenditures are assumed to increase by $50,000 annually to perform impact 
assessments/evaluations for affected MDTA projects. Actual costs will vary depending on 
the number of impact assessments/evaluations ultimately performed.  
 
Effects on Projects and Associated Fiscal Effects 
 
Depending on the structure and implementation of any future highway capacity expansion 
projects and major capital projects undertaken by MDOT or MDTA, State revenues and 
expenditures are likely to be significantly affected.  
 
Total project costs for major highway expansion projects and major capital projects may 
increase significantly as multimodal transportation programs are implemented and other 
required offset activities are undertaken. For illustrative purposes, for similar legislation 
introduced during the 2025 session, MDOT advised that, utilizing the State Highway 
Induced Frequency of Travel Calculator developed by the Rocky Mountain Institute, if a 
highway expansion project were to add 20 lane miles in the Baltimore Statistical Area, the 
expected VMT growth would be 116 million to 173 million VMT annually. Mitigation 
efforts to counteract such an increase in VMT could total hundreds of millions or even 
billions of dollars depending on the strategies employed.  
 
The bill requires MDOT to (1) fund elements of the multimodal transportation program 
concurrently with funding for the construction of the major highway capacity expansion 
project or (2) defer the project until it meets the offsetting requirements for a multimodal 
transportation program under the bill. To the extent that any projects are deferred, TTF 
and/or nonbudgeted finances may be affected, but any such impact cannot be predicted in 
advance. Such a deferral could also affect federal fund revenues (and associated 
expenditures). 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 437/ Page 8 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that work in the State’s transportation industry 
could be significantly affected by the bill. For example, small businesses involved in road 
construction could be affected to the extent the bill results in the deferral of any highway 
projects. In addition, small businesses could benefit from the development and 
implementation of the various offsetting activities required by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 395 and HB 84 of 2025 and SB 681 and HB 836 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 59 (Senator Hettleman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Department 
of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland Energy Administration; 
Baltimore City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; cities of Annapolis and Takoma 
Park; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8