START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 470 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 470 
(Delegate Boafo, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Digital Asset and Blockchain Technology Task Force - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Digital Asset and Blockchain Technology Task Force, staffed by 
the Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) in the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor). The task force must conduct an analysis of – and make recommendations 
regarding – the expansion of blockchain technology and cryptocurrency in the State.  
Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
travel expenses. By October 1, 2027, the task force must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $49,400 in FY 2027 and $53,500 in 
FY 2028 for contractual staffing costs. Any expense reimbursements for task force 
members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
No effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
49,400 
53,500 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($49,400) 
($53,500) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 470/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force’s analysis of the expansion of blockchain technology and 
cryptocurrency in the State must include: 
 
 
a discussion of the overall concepts of blockchain technology and cryptocurrency; 
 
an examination of the risks, including privacy risks, and the benefits of using 
blockchain technology and cryptocurrency in State and local government and 
private business in the State; 
 
an assessment of the impact of the cryptocurrency industry on the State, including 
its effect on State revenues and energy consumption; and 
 
any other related topic, as determined by the task force. 
 
Current Law:  The financial services industry in Maryland is regulated by OFR within 
MD Labor and the Securities Division of the Office of the Attorney General. Under the 
direction and authority of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation, OFR regulates  
State-chartered and State-licensed financial institutions operating in Maryland. These 
include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, trust companies, bank 
holding companies, and credit unions, as well as nondepository entities such as money 
transmitters, check cashers, consumer lenders, sales finance companies, installment 
lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan originators, credit services businesses, debt 
management services providers, debt settlement services providers, consumer reporting 
agencies, and collection agencies. OFR’s activities are funded primarily through  
two special funds for depository and nondepository institutions, respectively. 
 
State Expenditures:  OFR lacks the capacity or expertise to staff the task force with 
existing personnel. Therefore, special fund expenditures for MD Labor increase by  
$49,438 in fiscal 2027, which assumes a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s  
July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time contractual 
administrative specialist to staff the task force, as required. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$40,297 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$49,438 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of the bill 
(and the staffing) on June 30, 2028. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 470/ Page 3 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 454 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 376 (Senator Watson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3