START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 499 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 499 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Registered Voter List and Petitions (Ballot Petition 
Modernization Act) 
 
 
This bill makes various changes to State election law provisions relating to (1) the secure 
storage and use of voter data; (2) the signing of petitions and validation and counting of 
petition signatures; (3) the use of electronic signatures for petitions; (4) a deficiency in a 
petition; and (5) the time within which judicial review of a petition determination must be 
sought. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by up to $10,000 in FY 2027 only. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Secure Storage and Use of Voter Data 
 
Under provisions that allow for a Maryland registered voter to request a copy of a list of 
registered voters, if not intended to be used for commercial solicitation or any other purpose 
not related to the electoral process, the bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE) to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 499/ Page 2 
include requirements for secure storage and use of voter data in the regulations that govern 
that process. 
 
Signing of Petitions and Validation and Counting of Petition Signatures 
 
The bill eliminates a specific requirement that an individual sign their name on a petition 
as it appears on the statewide voter registration list or the individual’s surname of 
registration and at least one full given name and the initials of any other names. Instead, 
the bill only requires that an individual sign their name. The bill establishes that any 
information requested from an individual signing a petition that is not required under 
State law must be clearly marked as optional on any signature page. The bill applies to any 
petition (other than a municipal petition) authorized by law to place the name of an 
individual or a question on the ballot, to create a new political party, or to appoint a charter 
board. 
 
The bill requires the signature of an individual to be validated and counted if, along with 
meeting other requirements, the identity of the individual reasonably can be determined 
using the information required to be included by the individual on the petition. 
 
The election authority (SBE or the local board of elections) may not invalidate an 
individual’s signature because the individual signed the petition using a derivative of the 
individual’s given name if the election authority reasonably can confirm the identity of the 
individual. However, if an individual’s surname on a petition does not exactly match the 
individual’s surname as it appears in the individual’s voter registration record, the election 
authority must invalidate the individual’s signature. 
 
The bill authorizes an individual signer to execute as circulator an affidavit that covers the 
individual’s own signature and attest in the affidavit to the validity of the individual’s own 
signature. 
 
The bill repeals and replaces a provision that prohibits a person from willfully and 
knowingly obtaining, or attempting to obtain, any signature to a petition by fraud, duress, 
or force, with a provision that instead prohibits a person from willfully and knowingly 
inducing, or attempting to induce, another person to sign or not to sign any petition through 
the use of force, threat, menace, intimidation, or fraud. 
 
The bill also repeals a prohibition against willfully and knowingly signing a petition more 
than once and establishes that if an individual signs the same petition more than once, the 
first signature of that individual to be validated must be counted and any subsequent 
signature of that individual on the same petition must be invalidated. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 499/ Page 3 
Use of Electronic Signatures for Petitions 
 
The bill establishes that a petition may contain the electronic signatures of (1) individuals 
signing the petition or (2) circulators circulating any of the signature pages filed with the 
petition. 
 
An electronic signature must (1) be electronically signed, typed, or affixed onto a form 
prescribed by SBE and (2) reflect the affirmative action of the signer to electronically sign, 
type, or affix the signer’s name onto the signature page of a petition. The circulator who 
attests to an electronic signature on a petition must (1) personally observe the signer of the 
electronic signature while the signer is providing the signature and (2) may not attest to the 
personal observation of an electronic signature if the circulator witnessed the signing 
remotely. 
 
The bill also requires that procedures in SBE regulations for the circulation of petitions for 
signatures include procedures for the collection of electronic signatures. In addition, 
SBE regulations must specify requirements for (1) the verification of electronic signatures 
on any electronic signature page and (2) accessibility of electronic signature pages for 
people with disabilities. 
 
Deficiency in a Petition 
 
After the chief election official of an election authority notifies a sponsor of a deficiency 
in a petition after the verification and counting of signatures, the chief election official must 
make available to the sponsor, not later than the earlier of 85 days before the date of the 
election to which the petition relates or any other applicable deadline, a physical or 
electronic copy of the petition that indicates the particular deficiencies for each invalidated 
signature. The chief election official may charge a reasonable fee that does not exceed the 
cost of producing the copy of the petition. The chief election official must make the copy 
of the petition available to the sponsor within one business day after payment of any fee 
required or, if a fee is not required, within one business day after the chief election official 
notifies the sponsor of a deficiency in the petition. 
 
An eligible registered voter who signed a petition but whose signature was invalidated may 
correct, not later than the earlier of 85 days before the date of the election to which the 
petition relates or any other applicable deadline, technical deficiencies, including missing, 
partial, or misspelled names, addresses, or dates, by submitting a new signature page to the 
election authority using any authorized method of submission. However, new signatures 
are not allowed to be added to a petition after the deadline for submission of the petition. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 499/ Page 4 
Time within Which Judicial Review of a Determination Must Be Sought 
 
The bill also establishes that the time period under existing statute within which 
judicial review of a determination on a petition must be sought (as well as time periods 
under specified exceptions) begins on the date the sponsor of the petition is notified of the 
determination instead of on the date of the determination. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Availability of Voter Registration Data to Registered Voters 
 
A copy of a list of registered voters must be provided to a Maryland registered voter who 
submits a written application and a statement, signed under oath, that the list is not intended 
to be used for commercial solicitation or any other purpose not related to the electoral 
process. SBE must adopt regulations, in consultation with the local boards of elections, 
which establish specified procedures and requirements to govern the process of providing 
a copy of a list of registered voters to a Maryland registered voter. 
 
Petition Requirements 
 
Under State law provisions that apply to any petition (other than a municipal petition) 
authorized by law to place the name of an individual or a question on the ballot, to create 
a new political party, or to appoint a charter board, a petition must contain an information 
page (containing, among other things, a description of the subject and purpose of the 
petition and identification of the sponsor) and signature pages containing not less than the 
total number of signatures required by law to be filed. 
 
Each signature page must contain, among other information, (1) a description of the subject 
and purpose of the petition; (2) if the petition seeks to place a question on the ballot, either 
a fair and accurate summary of the substantive provisions of the proposal or the full text of 
the proposal; (3) a statement, to which each signer subscribes, that the signer supports the 
purpose of that petition process and, based on the signer’s information and belief, the signer 
is a registered voter in the county specified on the page and is eligible to have his or her 
signature counted; and (4) a space for the required affidavit made and executed by the 
circulator. “Circulator” is defined as an individual who attests to one or more signatures 
affixed to a petition. Each signature page must contain an affidavit made and executed by 
the individual in whose presence all of the signatures on that page were affixed and who 
observed each of those signatures being affixed. The affidavit must contain the statements, 
required by regulation, designed to assure the validity of the signatures and the fairness of 
the petition process. The circulator must be at least 18 years old at the time any of the 
signatures covered by the affidavit are affixed. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 499/ Page 5 
SBE must adopt regulations that, among other things, specify procedures for the circulation 
of petitions for signatures. 
 
To sign a petition, an individual must sign the individual’s name as it appears on the 
statewide voter registration list, or the individual’s surname of registration and at least 
one full given name and the initials of any other names. The individual must also include, 
printed or typed, the signer’s name as it was signed, the signer’s address, the date of 
signing, and other information required by SBE regulations. 
 
The signature of an individual is validated and counted if the above-mentioned 
requirements have been satisfied and, among other requirements, the individual has not 
previously signed the same petition. A person who willfully and knowingly signs a petition 
more than once is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to (1) a fine of at least $10 but not 
more than $250 and/or imprisonment for at least 30 days but not more than six months and 
(2) disqualification, permanently, from serving as an election judge, board member, or 
employee of a board. 
 
Electronic Signatures 
 
Under State election law, “electronic signature” is defined as an electronic sound, symbol, 
or process attached to, or logically associated with, a record and executed or adopted by a 
person with the intent to sign the record. Campaign finance provisions of State election law 
authorize SBE to accept an electronic signature for any form, document, report, or affidavit 
required by the board under those provisions, and electronic signatures are required for 
certain campaign finance and voter registration submissions. 
 
The Maryland Uniform Electronic Transactions Act gives governmental agencies of the 
State discretion to determine whether, and the extent to which, they will send and accept 
electronic records and electronic signatures to and from other persons and otherwise create, 
generate, communicate, store, process, use, and rely upon electronic records and electronic 
signatures. The act does not require a government agency to use or permit the use of 
electronic records or electronic signatures. 
 
Determination of Petition Sufficiency 
 
At the conclusion of the process of verifying signatures and counting validated signatures 
contained in a petition, the chief election official of the election authority must 
(1) determine whether the validated signatures contained in the petition are sufficient to 
satisfy all requirements relating to the number and geographical distribution of signatures 
and (2) if it has not done so previously, determine whether the petition has satisfied all 
other requirements for the petition and immediately notify the sponsor of that 
determination, including any deficiencies found. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 499/ Page 6 
Time within Which Judicial Review of a Determination Must Be Sought 
 
Subject to specified exceptions, judicial review of a petition determination must be sought 
by the tenth day following the determination to which the judicial review relates. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by up to $10,000 in fiscal 2027 
only, for SBE to hire a consultant with expertise in electronic signatures to assist with the 
development of standards relating to electronic signatures included on petitions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 642 of 2025; SB 1029 and HB 1109 of 2024; and HB 1112 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6