START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 413 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 413 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission - Membership and Termination - Altered 
and Extended 
 
 
This bill maintains the Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission within the Department of 
Commerce for two more years by extending its termination date to September 30, 2028. 
The bill also modifies the composition of the commission by reducing representation from 
the Senate of Maryland and the House of Delegates (from two members each to 
one member each) and adding two members of the private sector in their stead (to be 
appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate). The commission 
must continue to report its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly and the 
Governor, with annual reports due in December 2026 and 2027. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Commerce can continue to support the commission with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 413/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission – Responsibilities  
 
Chapter 409 of 2024 established the Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission within 
Commerce to study and promote trade between Maryland and Ireland. More specifically, 
the commission must study and make recommendations regarding (1) advancing bilateral 
trade and investment between Maryland and Ireland; (2) initiating joint action on policy 
issues of mutual interest to Maryland and Ireland; (3) promoting business and academic 
exchanges between Maryland and Ireland; (4) encouraging mutual economic support 
between Maryland and Ireland; (5) encouraging mutual investment in the infrastructure of 
Maryland and Ireland; and (6) other issues as determined by the commission. The 
commission must report its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly and 
the Governor by December 1, 2025. The commission terminates September 30, 2026. 
 
Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission – Membership  
 
The commission consists of 10 members with specified affiliations:   
 
 
the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of State or their designees;  
 
two members of the Senate of Maryland and two members of the House of 
Delegates, appointed by the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, 
respectively – all of whom must either have knowledge of (or involvement in) 
organizations that promote Irish affairs or have an interest in the well-being of trade 
relations between Maryland and Ireland; and 
 
four members appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate 
– more specifically, one representative of a public institution of higher education, 
one representative of the Maryland Chamber of Commerce or its successor 
organization, and two representatives of the Irish-American community (who may 
not be of the same political party).  
 
The Governor may remove an appointed member for incompetence, misconduct, or failure 
to perform the duties of the position.  
 
The chair and vice chair of the commission must be elected from among the members of 
the commission. A member of the commission may not receive compensation as a member 
of the commission but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses, as specified. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 413/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 363 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3