START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 485 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 485 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
State Board of Professional Landscape Architects - Revisions 
 
 
This bill renames the State Board of Examiners of Landscape Architects to be the 
State Board of Professional Landscape Architects. The bill also (1) substitutes the term 
“professional landscape architect” for “licensed landscape architect” throughout the 
statute; (2) alters qualifications for membership on the board as well as related duties; 
(3) repeals a requirement related to payment of an examination fee directly to the board; 
(4) alters and expands provisions related to the use of a testing service to administer the 
required examination; (5) authorizes the board to issue an emeritus status license to certain 
individuals; and (6) alters a permit requirement for certain businesses. The bill makes 
numerous other conforming, technical, and clarifying changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Examiners of Landscape Architects can implement the 
bill’s changes with existing resources. Revenues are likely not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Board of Examiners of Landscape Architects  
 
The State Board of Examiners of Landscape Architects (the Board of Professional 
Landscape Architects under the bill) qualifies and licenses individuals seeking licensure 
and issues permits to business entities through which landscape architecture is practiced. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 485/ Page 2 
Under current law, the board consists of five members; three must be licensees, while 
two must be consumer members. The licensee members must have practiced landscape 
architecture in the State for at least 5 years. The bill requires two members to be 
professional landscape architects who have practiced landscape architecture for at least 
10 years, with 5 years of experience as responsible charge, while the third must be a 
professional landscape architect who has practiced in the State for at least 5 years. 
 
 
Miscellaneous Powers and Duties 
 
Under current law, with the advice of the established landscape architect associations, the 
board must adopt, by regulation, a code of ethics for practicing landscape architecture. 
The bill repeals the requirement to consult with established associations in the development 
of the code of ethics. 
 
 
List of Certificate Holders 
 
Under current law, the board must (1) keep a list of the names and mailing addresses of all 
licensees and (2) provide each code official (i.e., a public official responsible for the review 
of building permit documents or the issuance of building permits) with a copy of the list 
annually. The bill adds that access to the list must be provided to code officials upon 
request. 
 
Licensing Requirements 
 
Under current law, before an applicant takes the examination required for licensure, the 
applicant must qualify by meeting one of four categories of educational and experiential 
requirements. Under two options, an applicant qualifies by completing a degree from an 
institution accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools. The bill 
repeals this requirement and instead requires accreditation by the Council for Higher 
Education Accreditation. 
 
Applications for Licenses 
 
Under current law, an applicant for a license must (1) submit to the board an application 
on the appropriate form and (2) pay to the board (or the board’s designee) a nonrefundable 
application fee set by the board and an examination fee set by the board (in an amount that 
must not exceed the cost of the examination). The bill repeals the requirement to pay the 
examination fee to the board; however, an applicant must continue to pay a nonrefundable 
application fee. The board advises that examination fees are paid directly to a 
third-party testing service. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 485/ Page 3 
Testing Requirements and Use of Testing Service 
 
The bill generally recodifies and reorganizes provisions related to the use of a testing 
service to administer the required examination. However, certain provisions are modified. 
Notably, the bill repeals requirements that specify how the exam must be structured. If 
necessary to determine the competency of applicants, the board may use a testing service 
to administer supplemental examinations with additional subjects. 
 
Continuing Professional Competency Requirement 
 
The bill repeals certain provisions regarding the timing and fulfillment of continuing 
professional competency requirements. However, the board must continue to adopt 
regulations to require a licensee to demonstrate continuing professional competency by 
completing at least 24 hours of professional development activities as a condition of 
renewal of a license. 
 
Emeritus Status 
 
The bill authorizes the board to issue an emeritus status license to an individual who 
submits an application on the required form. The board may issue an emeritus status license 
if the individual: 
 
 
is currently licensed by the board to practice landscape architecture or was 
previously licensed by the board to practice landscape architecture and allowed the 
license to expire but is otherwise entitled to renewal at the time of expiration; 
 
has been a professional landscape architect for at least 25 years, of which at least 
5 years have been in the State; 
 
is not the subject of any pending disciplinary action related to the practice of 
landscape architecture in the State or another state; and 
 
pays to the board a fee set by the board. 
 
The holder of an emeritus status license may use the designation of “landscape architect 
emeritus” but may not engage in the practice of landscape architecture. 
 
The board may reinstate the license to practice landscape architecture of the holder of an 
emeritus status license if the individual: 
 
 
submits to the board an application for reinstatement on the appropriate form; 
 
meets the continuing professional competency requirements for renewal of a 
license; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 485/ Page 4 
 
is not the subject of any pending disciplinary action related to the practice of 
landscape architecture in the State or another state; and 
 
pays to the board a reinstatement fee set by the board. 
 
Permit Required for Certain Businesses 
 
Under current law, a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company must hold a 
permit issued by the board before it operates a business through which landscape 
architecture is practiced. However, a permit holder may provide landscape architectural 
services for itself or for an affiliated corporation, partnership, or limited liability company 
without a permit issued by the board. The bill repeals this exception. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 256 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4