START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 415 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 415 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters and Government, 
Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class A Beer and Class A Beer 
and Wine Licenses - Retail Grocery Establishments PG 304-26 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to issue, 
inside the Capital Beltway, a Class A beer or a Class A beer and wine license to an applicant 
for use in conjunction with or on the premises of a self-service retail establishment that is 
independently owned or part of a corporation operating a chain of retail establishments that 
offer specified food products. By September 1 each year, the board must report to the 
Governor and General Assembly (1) the number of licenses issued and license applications 
pending approval and (2) the average monthly percentage of gross receipts derived from 
the sale of food products for each license holder in the previous fiscal year. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2031. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County annual license fee revenues increase by $2,000, 
beginning in FY 2027. Prince George’s County can likely handle any additional 
enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potentially meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 415/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board may issue a Class A beer or Class A beer and wine license to 
an applicant for use in conjunction with or on the premises of a self-service retail 
establishment that:   
 
 
is independently owned or part of a corporation operating a chain of retail 
establishments under the same trade name; 
 
offers food products in at least six of the following categories:  (1) fresh fruits and 
vegetables; (2) fresh and uncooked meat, poultry, and seafood; (3) dairy products; 
(4) canned foods; (5) frozen foods; (6) dry groceries and baked goods; or 
(7) nonalcoholic beverages; 
 
has a minimum of 50% of the square footage of the public area of the retail 
establishment dedicated to the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages; and  
 
derives at least 50% of the average monthly gross receipts from the sale of food 
products.  
 
Existing requirements that generally limit a person to only being able to obtain 
one alcoholic beverages license do not apply to licenses issued under the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, in Prince George’s County and throughout the State, except by 
way of renewal, or as otherwise provided, alcoholic beverages licenses may not be granted, 
transferred, or issued to, or for use in conjunction with, or upon the premises of any chain 
store, supermarket, or discount house. 
 
In Prince George’s County, a Class A beer license generally authorizes a license holder to 
sell beer at retail in a sealed package or container, which may not be opened, and its 
contents may not be consumed on the premises where the beer is sold. The annual license 
fee is $500. 
 
In Prince George’s County, a Class A beer and light wine license generally authorizes a 
license holder to sell beer and wine at retail in a sealed package or container, which may 
not be opened, and its contents may not be consumed on the premises where the beer or 
wine is sold. The annual license fee is $500. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase by $500 for each 
additional Class A beer and Class A beer and wine license issued inside the Capital Beltway 
under the bill. The county estimates that four supermarkets may apply for a Class A beer 
and Class A beer and wine license in fiscal 2027. If all four supermarkets are issued licenses 
under the bill, county annual license revenues increase by $2,000 annually, beginning in 
fiscal 2027. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 415/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Small business grocery stores and convenience stores in 
Prince George’s County are likely to benefit meaningfully from the authority to sell 
alcoholic beverages under the bill. Conversely, small businesses in Prince George’s County 
that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under current law are likely to lose business as 
grocery stores and convenience stores begin to sell alcoholic beverages as well. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3