START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 564 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 564 
(Delegate Allen, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Pet Cremation and Burial Services - Requirements (Pet Cremation and Burial 
Services Consumer Protection Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes numerous consumer protection and disclosure requirements for 
registered cemeterians, registered cemetery operators, and certain permit holders and 
licensees that sell (or offer for sale) pet cremation services of pet remains. The bill also 
establishes duties of persons responsible for returning pet cremains to pet owners after 
cremation. The bill includes provisions establishing the same requirements for crematories 
owned and operated by individuals regulated by the State Board of Morticians and Funeral 
Directors. In addition, the bill includes a contingency provision to account for the potential 
passage of separate legislation that transfers certain regulatory powers from the Office of 
Cemetery Oversight (OCO) to the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors. In 
addition to other penalties, violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade 
practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil 
and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on OCO, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), Consumer 
Protection Division, and the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors is assumed 
to be absorbable within existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. The bill’s penalty 
provisions are not anticipated to have a material impact on incarceration costs or the 
workloads of the Office of the Public Defender or the Judiciary. Revenues are likely not 
materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing MCPA penalty provisions (and additional 
penalty provisions) does not have a material impact on local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 564/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “pet” means a domesticated or tamed animal kept as a companion or 
for pleasure. “Pet cremains” means the body fragments of a pet after having been cremated. 
 
Applicability 
 
The bill applies only to a registered cemeterian, registered cemetery operator, permit 
holder, or licensee that engages in the operation of a cemetery, crematory, or burial goods 
business that sells (or offers to sell) to the public cremation services for pet remains or a 
burial lot or a burial right in a cemetery for pet remains. 
 
Required Disclosure of Services 
 
Each registrant, permit holder, or licensee must distribute a written description of available 
pet cremation services to the following persons: 
 
 
each owner (or the owner’s agent) of a deceased pet who arranges for pet cremation 
services; 
 
each veterinarian, pet shop, funeral director, or other person who refers pet owners 
or delivers deceased pets to the registrant permit holder, or licensee more than 
five times in a calendar year; 
 
the Department of Agriculture; and 
 
on request, any other person. 
 
Each registrant, permit holder, or licensee must make written copies of the above 
information (1) available in sufficient quantities to allow for the distribution to pet owners 
who may be referred to or served by the registrant, permit holder, or licensee and 
(2) available at no cost. A veterinarian, pet shop, registrant, permit holder, or any other 
person who refers pet owners or accepts deceased pets for cremation more than five times 
in a calendar year must provide a copy of the description of pet cremation services noted 
above to the pet owner at the time of referral or acceptance of the deceased pet. 
 
The description must include a detailed and clear explanation of each pet cremation service 
offered by the registrant, permit holder, or licensee including specified descriptions of the 
following: 
 
 
private cremation; 
 
individual-partitioned cremation; and 
 
communal cremation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 564/ Page 3 
A registrant, permit holder, or licensee may not (1) fail to include a complete and accurate 
explanation of each pet cremation service; (2) omit a required disclosure; or (3) include 
text, illustrations, a layout, or formatting that causes confusion about the nature of the pet 
cremation service (or obstructs accurate disclosure). 
 
Additional Disclosures for the Return of Pet Cremains 
 
If pet cremation services provided by a registrant, permit holder, or licensee include the 
return of pet cremains, the registrant, permit holder, or licensee must provide a written 
certificate with the returned pet cremains that includes specified information (e.g., the date 
the cremation was completed, a statement that the service was performed in accordance 
with the written description of services unless otherwise indicated on the certificate, etc.). 
 
A veterinarian, pet shop, or other person responsible for returning pet cremains to a pet 
owner must provide to the pet owner certain information, including a copy of the certificate 
described above and an additional certificate stating that the returned pet cremains are those 
of the pet owner’s deceased pet and have been returned in accordance with the registrant’s, 
permit holder’s, or licensee’s representations. 
 
The bill specifies that a veterinarian, pet shop, or other person responsible for returning pet 
cremains to a pet owner is not required to observe the cremation process and may rely in 
good faith on the certificate provided (and representations made) by a registrant, permit 
holder, or licensee providing the pet cremation services. 
 
Other Procedural and Recordkeeping Requirements 
 
Each registrant, permit holder, or licensee providing pet cremation services must post (in a 
conspicuous place in the place of business) a copy of the bill’s provisions and a written 
description of the pet cremation services being offered. Further, each registrant, permit 
holder, or licensee that provides pet cremation services must ensure that a holding facility 
used to retain pet remains before cremation meets specified requirements, including 
preserving the dignity of the pet remains. 
 
Each registrant, permit holder, or licensee that provides pet cremation services must also 
maintain complete and accurate records and retain specified records for a period of at least 
five years. Finally, each registrant, permit holder, or licensee must also establish and 
maintain reasonable procedures to ensure the confidentiality and security of all records, 
including personally identifying information related to a pet owner or cremated pet. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 564/ Page 4 
Enforcement Provisions 
 
A person who violates the bill is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to (1) for a  
first offense, maximum imprisonment of up to one year and/or a fine of up to $5,000; (2) for 
a second offense, maximum imprisonment of two years and/or a fine of up to $10,000; and 
(3) for a third or subsequent offense, maximum imprisonment of three years and/or a fine 
of up to $15,000. 
 
If the director of OCO finds that a person has violated the bill or a regulation adopted 
pursuant to the bill, the director may refer the matter to (1) the Attorney General for civil 
enforcement or (2) the appropriate State’s Attorney for criminal prosecution. Further, the 
Attorney General may sue for (and a court may grant) injunctive or other equitable relief 
and/or imposition of a civil penalty of up to $5,000. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 591 of 2023 establishes that a registered cemeterian, registered 
crematory operator, or permit holder who sells (or offers to sell) to the public certain 
services for pet remains (i.e., cremation services, a burial lot, or a burial right) owes a duty 
of perpetual care for the cemetery in which the pet remains are interred. OCO must adopt 
regulations, as specified, to enforce the Act’s requirements. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Pet remains” means the body of a deceased animal that was kept as a pet, including the 
body of a pet (or a part of a pet’s body) in any state of decomposition or the body of a pet 
after having been cremated. 
 
“Perpetual care” means the maintenance, including the cutting of grass abutting memorials 
or monuments, as well as the administration, supervision, and embellishment of a cemetery 
and its grounds, roads, and paths. Additionally, it includes the repair and renewal of 
buildings, including columbaria and mausoleums, and the property of the cemetery. 
 
“Cemetery” is defined as land used or to be used for interment. “Interment” means all final 
disposition of human remains or pet remains. “Cremation” means the disposition of a dead 
human body by means of incineration. 
 
“Preneed burial contract” means a written instrument under which preneed goods or 
preneed services (i.e., services sold before the buyer’s death in connection with burial or 
cremation) are to be sold and delivered or performed. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 564/ Page 5 
Preneed Burial Contracts 
 
A preneed burial contract must contain (1) the name the buyer; (2) the name of the seller; 
(3) the name of each individual (other than the buyer) as to whom the preneed goods or 
services are to be furnished; (4) the name of the pet, if applicable; (5) a description of the 
preneed goods or services; and (6) the amount of the buyer’s financial obligation. 
 
Office of Cemetery Oversight 
 
The primary objective of OCO is to register and monitor individuals and businesses 
engaged in the operation of cemeteries and burial goods businesses in Maryland. This 
includes individuals and companies that sell funerary monuments and memorials on a retail 
basis. OCO also regulates and provides registration for crematories under its jurisdiction 
in the State. 
 
Responsibilities of OCO include the investigation and mediation of consumer complaints 
involving registrants and permit holders. To protect Maryland citizens from unfair and 
unscrupulous practices, OCO determines and enforces the ethical standards related to the 
operation of cemeteries and those related to the provision of burial goods and services 
within the State. OCO also regulates and monitors the funds held in perpetual care and 
preneed trusts by its licensees. 
 
State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors  
 
The primary purpose of the board is the protection of the public’s health and welfare 
through proper credentialing; examination; licensure; and discipline of morticians, funeral 
directors, corporations, crematory operators, reduction facility operators, apprentices, 
surviving spouses, mortuary transport services, transporters, courtesy card holders, and 
holders of an executor license in Maryland. The board also licenses, permits, and inspects 
funeral establishments and specified crematories for compliance with all applicable federal, 
State, and local laws and takes disciplinary action against such establishments where 
warranted. The board has jurisdiction over crematories (and other facilities) that are 
majority-owned by its licensees.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 564/ Page 6 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although neither OCO nor the Maryland Department of Health 
responded to requests for comment on the impact of the bill, the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) assumes that the bill’s requirements can generally be enforced with 
existing staff, as many of the bill’s provisions are disclosure requirements for registrants, 
permit holders, or licensees. However, as noted above, the bill also establishes certain 
procedural and recordkeeping requirements. To the extent OCO receives a significant 
number of complaints that require investigations and/or enforcement actions, additional 
resources can be requested through the annual budget process. Likewise, if certain 
regulatory powers are transferred from OCO to the State Board of Morticians and Funeral 
Directors, it is assumed the board can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources.  
 
OAG advises that one assistant Attorney General and one investigator is necessary to 
enforce the bill, at an average annual cost of nearly $300,000. DLS disagrees with this 
assessment and notes that OAG may, in its discretion, choose to bring enforcement actions 
as a result of any referrals from OCO. However, as noted above, it is unclear whether the 
bill will result in a significant increase in complaints and/or investigations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Although the bill’s disclosure requirements are not assumed to 
have a significant impact on small business entities that are subject to the bill, certain 
provisions – including the bill’s procedural and recordkeeping requirements – likely 
meaningfully affect small businesses and result in additional staff time to ensure 
compliance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 564/ Page 7 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7