START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 558 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 558 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Wine Festival Licenses  
PG 316-26 
 
 
This bill renames the Prince George’s County Wine Festival license to be the wine festival 
license and makes conforming changes. The bill authorizes the Prince George’s County 
Board of License Commissioners to issue multiple wine festival licenses annually by 
repealing the previous limit of one license the board was authorized to issue each year. The 
bill also repeals a provision that prohibited the board from issuing a wine festival license 
in the 24th legislative district. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County operations or 
finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board may issue one Prince George’s County Wine Festival license 
each year to the holder of a retail alcoholic beverages license, a Class 3 winery license, or 
a Class 4 limited winery license. Each year, the board must choose the location and 
weekend for the wine festival; however, the wine festival must not be located in the 
24th legislative district. The license holder is authorized to display and sell wine that is 
manufactured and processed in any state and distributed in Maryland when the license 
application is filed.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 558/ Page 2 
Local Revenues:  Prince George’s County advises they anticipate issuing up to 
three additional wine festival licenses annually under the bill. The current license fee 
is $75.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2