START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 503 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 503 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore City Sheriff's Office - Collective Bargaining - Compensation 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions that govern collective bargaining rights for certain 
employees of the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office. The bill specifies that full‐time sworn 
law enforcement officers and court security officers may seek recognition by the sheriff 
(or designee) in order to organize and bargain collectively in good faith with the sheriff 
(or designee) and the city concerning the following matters:  (1) compensation, including 
salary, wages, merit step increases, and those benefits determined, offered, administered, 
controlled, or managed by the city; (2) leave, holidays, and vacations; and (3) hours, 
working conditions, and job security. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City did not respond to repeated requests for information on 
the fiscal and operational impact of the bill. Baltimore City expenditures may increase 
due to the collective bargaining rights established in the bill, as discussed below. 
Baltimore City revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Full-time sworn law enforcement officers at or below the rank of lieutenant 
and court security officers in the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office are authorized to seek 
recognition by the sheriff (or designee) to organize and bargain collectively in good faith 
concerning the following matters:  (1) compensation, excluding salary, wages, and those 
benefits determined, offered, administered, controlled, or managed by the city; (2) leave, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 503/ Page 2 
holidays, and vacations; and (3) hours, working conditions, and job security. Sworn 
law enforcement officers and court security officers may seek recognition in order to 
organize and bargain collectively in good faith with the city concerning merit step increases 
and those benefits determined, offered, administered, controlled, or managed by the mayor 
and city council. 
 
Numerous other counties in Maryland, including Allegany, Anne Arundel,  
Baltimore, Calvert, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties have collective bargaining for deputy sheriffs. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Generally, Baltimore City expenditures may further increase if, and 
to the extent that, personnel costs under any negotiated agreement are higher than they 
would have otherwise been. Any potential expenditures cannot be reliably estimated in 
advance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1091 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2