START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 534 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 534 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Nonpublic Schools - Transcripts - Prohibition on Punitive Measures Related to 
Student Debt 
 
 
This bill prohibits nonpublic schools that participate in State-funded education programs 
from (1) refusing a transcript to a student or parent of a student because the student owes a 
debt; (2) conditioning the issuance of a transcript on the payment of a debt; (3) charging a 
higher fee for obtaining a transcript because a student owes a debt; (4) providing less 
favorable treatment of a transcript request because a student owes a debt; or (5) using 
transcript issuance as a tool of debt collection. These prohibitions apply to current and 
former students of the applicable nonpublic school. “Debt” means any money, obligation, 
claim, or sum due or owed by a student or former student to a nonpublic school. “Debt” 
does not include the fee, if any, charged to a student for the actual costs of providing a 
transcript. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State operations and finances are not materially affected. The bill is directed 
at nonpublic schools. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 748 and 749 of 2023 prohibit an institution of higher education 
from refusing to provide a current or former student with a transcript or taking other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 534/ Page 2 
punitive measures regarding a student’s transcript request because the student owes a debt 
to the institution.  
 
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) operates four ongoing programs 
that provide funding to nonpublic schools:  the Nonpublic Textbook Program; Nonpublic 
School Health and Security Program, Nonpublic Aging Schools Program; and the 
Broadening Options and Opportunities for Students Today Scholarship Program. 
 
Additional Comments:  MSDE advises that 374 nonpublic schools in Maryland currently 
participate in at least one of the four programs that provide funding to nonpublic schools. 
MSDE further advises that it receives, on average, 25 complaints yearly regarding 
nonpublic schools not issuing transcripts due to lack of payment of debt. Accordingly, 
nonpublic school revenue may decrease due to the prohibition against using transcript 
issuance as a tool of debt collection. Nonpublic schools may need to find other ways to 
collect debt from students or shift unpaid balances onto future students. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 184 of 2025 and HB 1164 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
 
me/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2