START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 554 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 554 
(The Speaker) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
General Assembly - Legislative Committees - Renaming and Legislative Policy 
Committee Membership 
 
 
This bill alters terminology throughout the Maryland Annotated Code to reflect (1) the 
renaming of the House Health and Government Operations Committee to be the  
House Health Committee, and (2) the renaming of the Senate Education, Health, and 
Environmental Affairs (EHE) Committee to be the Senate Committee on Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. The bill also (1) adds the chair of the new 
House Government, Labor, and Elections (GLE) Committee to the Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC); (2) alters the membership of LPC to include three additional members 
of the House of Delegates, rather than four; and (3) makes other conforming changes, 
including reflecting changes in subject matter jurisdiction for affected committees. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is technical in nature and has no effect on governmental operations 
or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Standing Committees of the General Assembly 
 
Both the House of Delegates and the Senate of the Maryland General Assembly may 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 554/ Page 2 
establish standing committees under the rules of their respective chambers. Generally, each 
standing committee oversees potential legislation and issue areas based on specified subject 
matter. In addition, each chamber may reorganize their respective standing committees and 
the issue areas each standing committee oversees. 
 
In December 2022, EHE was reorganized and renamed as the Senate Committee on 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. As part of this reorganization, all health matters 
previously overseen by EHE were transferred to the Senate Finance Committee. 
 
During the 2025 Special Session, the House of Delegates created GLE and reconstituted 
the House Health and Government Operations Committee as the House Health Committee. 
As part of that reorganization, all labor and election matters previously overseen by the 
House Health Committee, labor matters previously overseen by the House Economic 
Matters Committee, and all election matters from the House Ways and Means Committee 
were transferred to the House Government, Labor, and Elections Committee. 
 
Legislative Policy Committee 
 
LPC was created by legislation enacted in 1976. It replaced the Maryland Legislative 
Council, which had guided the interim activities of the General Assembly since 1939. LPC 
consists of 28 members, with the Senate and House equally represented and the 
Presiding Officers serving as co-chairs. Among other responsibilities, LPC reviews the 
work of the standing committees of the General Assembly, collects information about the 
government and general welfare of the State, and coordinates and supervises the work of 
the General Assembly when it is not in session. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2