START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 543 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 543 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Landlord and Tenant - Family Child Care Homes 
 
 
This bill prohibits, with specified exceptions, certain actions by a landlord of a 
single‑family dwelling that prohibit a tenant or prospective tenant from operating a family 
child care home on the leased premises. The bill includes related provisions, including 
notice requirements for tenants and authorization for a landlord to impose an increased 
security deposit (equivalent to up to two months’ rent) on a tenant that operates or plans to 
operate a family child care home on the leased premises. The bill’s provisions (1) do not 
limit or preempt the local zoning authority of a county or municipality and (2) apply only 
prospectively, without application to (or any effect on) any lease entered into before the 
bill’s effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s provisions are generally applicable only to the lease of a 
single‑family dwelling to a tenant or prospective tenant for use of the leased premises as a 
family child care home. The bill requires a tenant to notify a landlord in writing at least 
60 days prior to operating a family child care home on the leased premises. A landlord is 
not liable for any act or omission of a tenant relating to the operation of a family child care 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 543/ Page 2 
home. Prior to commencing the operation of a family child care home, a tenant must 
provide the landlord with: 
 
 
the tenant’s registration to operate a family child care home issued under Title 9.5, 
Subtitle 3 of the Education Article; and  
 
a certificate of insurance naming the landlord and each entity with a direct or indirect 
ownership or membership interest in the property as additional insureds on policies 
relating to the operation of the family child care home.  
 
A landlord may require a tenant to purchase a liability insurance policy with coverage 
limits of up to $1.0 million in connection with the tenant’s operation of a family child care 
home. If there is a lapse in coverage on a policy, the tenant must cease operation of the 
family child care home for the duration of the lapse. 
 
If the tenant ceases operation of the family child care home, the tenant must notify the 
landlord immediately. 
 
A landlord of a single‐family dwelling may not prohibit a tenant or prospective tenant from 
operating a family child care home on the leased premises by (1) refusing to offer the 
premises for lease, negotiate the lease of the premises, or lease the premises; (2) imposing 
unreasonable limitations or conditions on the use of the leased premises as a family child 
care home; or (3) otherwise acting in bad faith to prevent the use of the leased premises as 
a family child care home. These provisions do not apply to: 
 
 
the lease of an owner‑occupied single‐family dwelling; or 
 
prohibitions against or restrictions on family child care homes imposed by 
age‑related restrictions of a homeowners association, or the governing documents 
or bylaws of a condominium or cooperative housing corporation. 
 
Current Law:  Statute does not generally prohibit a landlord from restricting the operation 
of a family child care home on the leased premises. 
 
Generally, a landlord may not impose a security deposit in excess of the equivalent of 
one month’s rent per dwelling unit, regardless of the number of tenants. However, a 
landlord may impose a security deposit in an amount equivalent to up to two months’ rent 
under specified circumstances related to the provision of utility services and the 
qualification of a tenant for utility assistance through the Department of Human Services. 
 
A family child care home may generally not operate in the State unless it is registered with 
the Maryland State Department of Education. A family child care home is a residence in 
which family child care is provided for up to eight children.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 543/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may increase opportunities for the operation of family 
child care homes on leased premises. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 911 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General 
(Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3