START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 597 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 597 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County - Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program - 
Alterations  
MC 17-26 
 
 
This bill alters the Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program in Montgomery County. 
Specifically, the bill (1) alters provisions governing the pilot program’s beginning date 
such that it must begin on the earlier of the date the county gives specified notice to the 
Public Service Commission (PSC) or April 1, 2026 (instead of April 1, 2024); (2) extends 
the duration of the pilot program from seven years to nine years; (3) requires PSC to submit 
its interim report on the status and effectiveness of the pilot program to the 
General Assembly in the seventh year of the program, rather than the sixth; and (4) extends 
the deadline for PSC’s final report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
program from December 31, 2031, to December 31, 2035. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC and the Office of People’s Counsel can implement the bill’s changes 
using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to significantly affect 
Montgomery County finances during the five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy 
note. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal during the five-year period covered by this fiscal and 
policy note. The pilot program itself, however, may have a meaningful impact on small 
businesses in Montgomery County, as discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 597/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Aggregators, Generally 
 
Except as provided under provisions governing the Community Choice Aggregation Pilot 
Program described below, a county or municipality may only act as an aggregator if PSC 
determines that there is not sufficient competition within the boundaries of the local 
jurisdiction. “Aggregator” means an entity or an individual that acts on behalf of a customer 
to purchase electricity or gas. It does not include (1) an entity or individual that purchases 
electricity or gas for its own use or for the use of its subsidiaries or affiliates; (2) a municipal 
electric utility or a municipal gas utility serving only in its distribution territory; or (3) a 
combination of governmental units that purchases electricity or gas for use by the 
governmental unit. 
 
Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program – Administrative Deadlines 
 
Chapter 449 of 2021 established the Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program and 
authorized Montgomery County to form a “community choice aggregator” beginning 
December 31, 2023. The Act required the pilot program to (1) begin on the earlier of 
April 1, 2024, or the date Montgomery County gives notice to PSC of its intention to 
initiate a process to form a community choice aggregator and (2) end seven years after the 
beginning date, but not sooner than April 1, 2031. 
 
Further, by April 1 of the sixth year after the beginning of the pilot program, PSC must 
report to the General Assembly on the status and effectiveness of the pilot program. At the 
conclusion of the pilot program, PSC must study (1) the overall costs and benefits of the 
pilot program; (2) whether there were any incremental costs borne by standard offer service 
(SOS) customers resulting from the migration of customers between the community choice 
aggregator and SOS; and (3) what mechanisms could be implemented to hold SOS 
customers harmless from any incremental costs borne by SOS customers. PSC is required 
to report the findings of the study to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
December 31, 2031. 
 
Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program – Generally 
 
Chapter 449 established the full regulatory framework for implementing a community 
choice aggregator in Montgomery County. “Community choice aggregator” means a 
county that serves as an electric aggregator for the purpose of negotiating the purchase of 
electric generation services from an electricity supplier licensed by PSC or from an electric 
generating or storage facility, or providing electricity from an electric generating facility 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 597/ Page 3 
owned by the aggregator for residential electric customers, which include master-metered 
multiple occupancy residences and small commercial electric customers, that (1) are 
located within the county, including customers located within municipalities located in the 
county; (2) have not selected an electricity supplier other than the SOS supplier or refused 
to participate in the aggregation activities of the county; and (3) are not located in the 
service territory of a municipal electric utility or an electric cooperative. Among the 
requirements in Chapter 449: 
 
 
the county must first initiate a formal process by filing a notice of intent and a 
comprehensive aggregation plan for PSC approval, which must include a detailed 
transition schedule and evidence of a local law designating the county as an 
aggregator; 
 
the community choice aggregator may request essential pre-enrollment data from 
local electric companies, such as customer names, service addresses, and utility rate 
classes, to facilitate the transition; 
 
the community choice aggregator is required to mail an opt-out notice to all eligible 
customers comparing the rates, terms, and conditions of the community choice 
aggregator against the utility’s SOS, and informing customers that they will be 
automatically enrolled unless they affirmatively decline; 
 
the community choice aggregator may purchase electric generation services from a 
PSC-licensed supplier or from its own electric generating or storage facilities, 
provided those facilities are designed primarily for the use of program participants; 
 
the community choice aggregator may promote and provide specific energy 
efficiency programs; and 
 
the county must pay for any costs associated with any stranded costs for contracts 
entered into by the community choice aggregator for electric supply or generation 
owned by a community choice aggregator. 
 
Montgomery County Council Expedited Bill 27-25 
 
On October 21, 2025, the Montgomery County Council approved Expedited Bill 27-25, 
establishing a community choice aggregator within the county’s Department of 
Environmental Protection. The legislation mandates that the aggregator provide a 
percentage of renewable energy that exceeds Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard, while prioritizing sustainability, cost-efficiency, and price stability. 
Additionally, the legislation exempts electricity supply purchases from the county’s 
standard procurement laws and requires the aggregator to submit its aggregation plan to 
the county council before filing it with PSC. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill merely modifies the potential beginning date of the pilot 
program in statute and extends the duration of the pilot program by two years; accordingly, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 597/ Page 4 
any meaningful impact likely occurs outside the five-year period covered by this fiscal and 
policy note. However, the pilot program itself likely decreases electric utility rates 
in Montgomery County. The Montogomery County Council staff report for Expedited 
Bill 27-25 projects that the pilot program likely results in monthly residential electricity 
bill reductions for BGE, Pepco, and Potomac Edison ranging from $7.04 to $17.60, 
resulting in annual household savings between $84.48 to $211.20. Small businesses also 
benefit from a decrease in their monthly utility bills. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the potential beginning date of the pilot 
program of April 1, 2026 (as modified by the bill), occurs prior to the bill’s October 1, 2026 
effective date. Also, the bill specifies that the pilot program must end nine years after the 
beginning date, but does not alter existing statutory language that specifies that the pilot 
program must not end sooner than April 1, 2031. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4