START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 593 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 593 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Interference With Critical Infrastructure or a Public Safety 
Answering Point 
 
  
This bill alters an existing offense to prohibit a person from intentionally, willfully, and 
without authorization committing a violation of § 7-302 of the Criminal Law Article 
(unauthorized access to computers and related material) with the intent to interrupt or 
impair the functioning of “critical infrastructure” or a “public safety answering point” 
(PSAP). Violators are guilty of a felony and subject to the existing penalty of imprisonment 
for up to five years and/or a $25,000 maximum fine. The bill also establishes a new offense 
by prohibiting a person from intentionally, willfully, and without authorization committing 
a violation of § 7-302 that denies access to an authorized user of or interrupts or impairs 
the functioning of critical infrastructure or a PSAP. The new offense is a felony, punishable 
by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a $50,000 maximum fine.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines “critical infrastructure” as systems and assets, whether 
physical or virtual, that are so vital to the State, a county, or a municipality that the 
incapacity or destruction of one or more components would have a debilitating impact on 
public or economic security, public health, public safety, public transportation, or public 
utilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 593/ Page 2 
Current Law:  The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through PSAPs. A PSAP is a 
communications facility that (1) is operated on a 24-hour basis; (2) first receives 9-1-1 
requests for emergency services in a 9-1-1 service area; and (3) as appropriate, dispatches 
public safety services directly, transfers 9-1-1 requests for emergency services, or transmits 
incident data.  
 
Computer-related Offenses  
 
Under § 7-302 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not intentionally, willfully, and 
without authorization, access or attempt to access, cause to be accessed, or exceed the 
person’s authorized access to all or part of a computer, computer network, computer control 
language, computer software, computer system, computer service, or computer database. 
A person may not intentionally, willfully, and without authorization, copy, attempt to copy, 
possess, or attempt to possess the contents of all or part of a computer database that was 
unlawfully accessed. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and are subject to 
imprisonment for up to three years and/or a maximum fine of $1,000.  
 
A person may not commit the prohibited acts described above with the intent to (1) cause 
the malfunction or interruption of all or any part of a computer, computer network, 
computer control language, computer software, computer system, computer service, or 
computer data or (2) alter, damage, or destroy all or any part of data or a computer program 
stored, maintained, or produced by a computer, computer network, computer software, 
computer system, computer service, or computer database. A person is also prohibited from 
intentionally, willfully, and without authorization (1) possessing, identifying, or attempting 
to identify a valid access code or (2) publicizing or distributing a valid access code to an 
unauthorized person. If the aggregate amount of the loss is $10,000 or more, a violator is 
guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a maximum fine 
of $10,000. If the aggregate amount of the loss is less than $10,000, a violator is guilty of 
a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or a maximum fine of 
$5,000. 
 
A person may not commit any of these computer-related offenses with the intent to 
interrupt or impair the functioning of (1) the State government; (2) a natural gas or electric 
service, device, or system owned, operated, or controlled in the State by a person other than 
a public service company; (3) a service provided in the State by a public service company; 
(4) a health care facility; or (5) a public school. If the aggregate amount of the loss 
associated with a violation of this prohibition is $10,000 or more, a violator is guilty of a 
felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a maximum fine of $100,000. 
If the aggregate amount of the loss is less than $10,000, a violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or a maximum fine of 
$25,000.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 593/ Page 3 
Except for a person who has a bona fide scientific, educational, governmental, testing, 
news, or other similar justification for possessing ransomware, a person may not knowingly 
possess ransomware with the intent to use the ransomware for the purpose of introduction 
into the computer, computer network, or computer system of another person without the 
authorization of the other person. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to two years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000.  
 
In addition, a person may not commit any of these computer-related offenses with the intent 
to interrupt or impair the functioning of a PSAP. Violators are guilty of a felony and are 
subject to imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of $25,000.  
 
Prohibited access under a single scheme or a continuing course of conduct may be 
considered one violation. A defendant may be tried in any county in Maryland where the 
act was performed, or the accessed computer was located. 
 
A person who has suffered a specific and direct injury as a result of any prohibited act may 
bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction, and maintaining a civil action is 
not dependent upon a criminal conviction against the defendant. A court may award actual 
damages and reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, 29 cases involving a charge under  
§ 7-302 of the Criminal Law Article were filed in fiscal 2025. The most common charge  
(28 out of the 29 cases) was illegal access to a computer.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 444 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 482 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3