START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 557 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 557 
(Delegate Harrison, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Occupational Licensing and Certification - Criminal History - Predetermination 
Review Process 
 
 
This bill amends § 1-209 of the Criminal Procedure Article to establish a predetermination 
review process under which an individual can request specified departments of State 
government to review the individual’s criminal history to determine whether that criminal 
history would disqualify the individual from obtaining the occupational license or 
certificate being sought. The bill requires a department to use existing resources to conduct 
a criminal history review but also authorizes a department to charge a fee of up to $100 per 
criminal history review; the fee must be waived if the individual’s income is at or below 
300% of the federal poverty level, as determined by the District Court. The bill imposes a 
reporting requirement on affected agencies. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and 
terminates on June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor) and the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) increase by $50,800 in 
FY 2027, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization, inflation, and termination 
of the bill. Additional special fund expenditures (not shown in table) may be incurred by 
affected agencies, as discussed below. The bill has an indeterminate, but overall minimal, 
effect on special fund revenues, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
(‐)/‐ 
(‐)/‐ 
(‐)/‐ 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
50,800 
22,500 
23,500 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($50,800) 
($22,500) 
($23,500) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 557/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Definitions and Exceptions to Application of § 1-209 of the Criminal Procedure Article 
 
Under current law, for purposes of § 1-209, “department” means MDA, the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE), the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), the 
Department of Human Services (DHS), MD Labor, or the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS). “Department” includes any unit of these departments. The 
bill removes DPSCS from the definition of “department.”  
 
Under current law, § 1-209 in its entirety does not apply to a person who was previously 
convicted of a crime of violence, as defined in § 14‐101 of the Criminal Law Article. The 
bill establishes that § 1-209 also does not apply to a person who is applying for licensure 
or license renewal under Title 11, Subtitle 6 of the Financial Institutions Article (mortgage 
loan originators). 
 
Predetermination Review Process 
 
Under current law and the bill, with the exception of a crime for which registration on the 
sex offender registry is required, if at least seven years have passed since an applicant 
completed serving the sentence for a crime, including all imprisonment, mandatory 
supervision, probation, and parole, and the applicant has not been charged with another 
crime other than a minor traffic violation during that time, a department may not deny an 
occupational license or certificate to the applicant solely on the basis that the applicant was 
previously convicted of the crime. 
 
The bill authorizes an individual to file a request with a department for review of the 
individual’s criminal history to determine whether that criminal history would disqualify 
the individual from obtaining the occupational license or certificate being sought. This 
predetermination must be binding on the department unless there is a subsequent direct and 
material adverse change to the individual’s criminal history. 
 
If, during this predetermination process, a department determines that an occupational 
license or certificate would be denied to the individual, the department must provide an 
explanation to the individual, as specified. An individual may submit a revised request for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 557/ Page 3 
a predetermination to the department if one year has passed since the individual received 
the initial predetermination or there is a material change to the individual’s criminal 
history. 
 
Policy of the State and Other Provisions 
 
The remaining provisions of § 1-209 remain unchanged by the bill. Those provisions 
express the policy of the State to encourage the employment of nonviolent ex-offenders 
and remove barriers to their ability to demonstrate fitness for occupational licenses or 
certifications required by the State. A department may not deny an occupational license or 
certificate to an applicant solely on the basis that the applicant has previously been 
convicted of a crime, unless the department determines that (1) there is a direct relationship 
between the applicant’s previous conviction and the specific occupational license or 
certificate sought or (2) the issuance of the license or certificate would involve an 
unreasonable risk to property or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the 
general public. 
 
In making this determination, the department must consider (1) the aforementioned State 
policy; (2) the specific duties and responsibilities required of a licensee or certificate 
holder; (3) whether the applicant’s previous conviction has any impact on the applicant’s 
fitness or ability to perform the duties and responsibilities authorized by the license or 
certificate; (4) the age of the applicant at the time of the conviction and the amount of time 
that has elapsed since the conviction; (5) the seriousness of the offense for which the 
applicant was convicted; (6) other information provided by the applicant or on the 
applicant’s behalf with regard to the applicant’s rehabilitation and good conduct; and 
(7) the legitimate interest of the department in protecting property and the safety and 
welfare of specific individuals or the general public. 
 
Disclaimer 
 
Under the bill, nothing in § 1-209 may be construed to (1) override, supersede, or invalidate 
any compact or agreement already in place with regard to the regulation of any profession 
or occupation by a department or (2) supersede the authority of a department to require an 
applicant or a licensee to submit to a criminal history records review in accordance with 
the bill’s provisions. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
On or before October 1, 2028, MDA, MDE, MDH, DHS, and MD Labor must each report 
to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Economic Matters Committee on 
implementation of the bill, including the number of predetermination requests conducted 
and the costs associated with implementation. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 557/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill includes a requirement for departments to use existing 
resources to conduct criminal history (predetermination) reviews. However, certain 
agencies, particularly those with a higher volume of licensees, may not be able to 
appropriately implement the bill (i.e., provide predetermination reviews in a timely manner 
without negatively affecting other operations) unless additional resources are provided. 
Thus, this analysis reflects increases in State expenditures to implement the bill, as 
discussed below. 
 
It is unclear which and how many individuals will seek predetermination reviews. The 
process appears to be aimed at individuals who are interested in pursuing a career path but 
would like to know if their criminal history prevents them from obtaining professional 
licensure or certification prior to investing in education or training. The overall effect of 
predetermination reviews on State special fund revenues is unclear at this time and depends 
on revenues from background check fees and the bill’s effect on applications for licensing 
and certification. Should reviews and advice from licensing entities result in otherwise 
reluctant applicants filing applications, revenues increase; if predetermination reviews 
discourage individuals from applying for licensing or certification, application fee 
revenues decrease. This analysis assumes that the implementation costs for affected 
agencies is likely not fully offset from background check fee revenues. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
Despite the significant number of occupational boards under the purview of MDH, the 
department does not anticipate a material fiscal or operational impact from the bill. 
 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
MD Labor special fund personnel expenditures increase by $30,814 in fiscal 2027. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part‐time contractual employee to manage 
administrative functions for the predetermination process (including salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses associated with the employee). 
This estimate does not include potential computer programming costs and legal fees, as 
have been indicated in prior estimates for similar legislation. Should MD Labor incur those 
costs during implementation of the bill, special fund expenditures further increase. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$22,367 
Other Operating Expenses 
    8,447 
MD Labor – FY 2027 SF Personnel Expenditures 
$30,814 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 557/ Page 5 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases, employee turnover, 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and termination of the contractual position 
on June 30, 2029. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture 
 
Special fund expenditures for the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners increase 
by $20,000 in fiscal 2027 only for one-time computer programming costs to allow for an 
online application and fee collection process. MDA does not expect a significant number 
of review requests. 
 
Other Impacts 
 
DHS, MDE, and DPSCS do not anticipate a fiscal impact from the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 482 of 2025 and HB 175 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5