START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 533 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 533 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund - Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to report to the Senate 
Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and the House Environment and 
Transportation Committee, by September 30 of each year, on (1) the amount of proceeds 
distributed to the Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund (MNWIFF) 
during the immediately preceding year from the agricultural land transfer tax imposed on 
instruments of writing that transfer title to parcels of land that are entirely woodland and 
(2) if DNR is uncertain about the total amount of such proceeds that are required to be 
distributed to the fund, the uncertainties and the actions required to resolve them. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund 
 
MNWIFF, administered by DNR, is used for various purposes, including the (1) the 
Woodland Incentives Program, and the cost-share assistance under the program and  
(2) the Mel Noland Fellowship Program. The Woodland Incentives Program assists eligible 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 533/ Page 2 
landowners in conducting woodland management and the Mel Noland Fellowship program 
supports students seeking a career in fields relating to natural resources. 
 
The fund consists of (1) up to $200,000 annually of the proceeds of the agricultural land 
transfer tax that are attributable to the taxation of instruments of writing that transfer title 
to parcels of land that are entirely woodland; (2) revenues collected by DNR from the 
payment of charges imposed for its assistance in implementation of an approved practice; 
(3) money distributed from the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund; 
(4) a portion of the revenues derived from the forestry practices on designated lands owned 
and managed by DNR; and (5) specified mandated appropriations to the Fund. 
 
By September 30 of each year, DNR must report to the Senate Committee on Education, 
Energy, and the Environment and the House Environment and Transportation Committee 
on the use of funds credited to MNWIFF including an identification of and the reasons for 
those revenues derived from forestry practices on designated lands owned and managed by 
DNR that were not credited to the fund. 
 
Agricultural Land Transfer Tax 
 
Subject to specified exemptions, an agricultural land transfer tax is imposed on an 
instrument of writing that transfers title to agricultural land. A portion of the tax is retained 
by the county in which it was collected and a portion is remitted to the Comptroller. 
Included among the revenue remitted to the State is all of the agricultural land transfer tax 
revenue generated from land that is entirely woodland. Up to $200,000 of the revenue from 
woodland transfers and from a separate surcharge imposed on an instrument of writing that 
transfers title to agricultural land is deposited in MNWIFF each year. 
 
 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 257 (Senator Simonaire) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 533/ Page 3 
sj/sdk 
Third Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3