START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 572 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 572 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Attorney General Actions and Climate Crimes Accountability Fund (Climate 
Crimes Accountability Act) 
 
 
This bill expresses that, for the protection of the health and safety of the State’s citizens 
and environment, it is the General Assembly’s intent that a publicly traded entity, including 
its subsidiaries, with a cumulative market capitalization greater than $1.0 billion that is or 
was involved in extracting, refining, or processing coal, oil, or gas be held accountable for 
any tortious or otherwise unlawful conduct on the part of the entity or subsidiary that has 
contributed to climate change, as specified. To that end, the bill explicitly authorizes the 
Attorney General to investigate, commence, and prosecute or defend any civil or criminal 
suit or action that holds these entities accountable, and to hire outside counsel for 
assistance. Specified procedural requirements and options for the State in obtaining relief 
in certain actions involving multiple parties brought or asserted by the State apply to 
actions brought under the bill. The bill also establishes the Climate Crimes Accountability 
Fund (CCAF) to pay for programs that prevent, mitigate, or repair harms caused by climate 
change. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No assumed effect in FY 2026. To the extent significant investigation and 
litigation are undertaken pursuant to the bill’s authority, State expenditures increase, 
potentially significantly, perhaps beginning as early as FY 2027. Special fund revenues for 
the new fund may increase, likely no earlier than FY 2028; special fund expenditures 
increase correspondingly. Special fund revenues and expenditures for multiple State 
agencies may increase, likely no earlier than FY 2028, to the extent they are the recipients 
of any funding. General fund revenues may increase from interest earnings in 
FY 2028 only, to the extent any special fund revenues are attained. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 572/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  To the extent that local governments are the recipients of funding under the 
bill, local revenues and expenditures increase, likely no earlier than FY 2028. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill explicitly authorizes the Attorney General to investigate, 
commence, and prosecute or defend any civil or criminal suit or action that holds 
accountable a publicly traded entity, including its subsidiaries, with a cumulative market 
capitalization greater than $1.0 billion at the time a suit or an action is filed that is or was 
involved in extracting, refining, or processing coal, oil, or gas for any tortious or otherwise 
unlawful conduct on the part of the entity or subsidiary that has contributed to climate 
change through fraud, deception, or any other mechanism, action, inaction, or practice. The 
Attorney General is authorized to hire outside counsel to assist with an action brought 
under the bill if the Attorney General determines that it would be in the State’s best interest. 
 
The bill also extends the provisions of § 6‐106.2 of the State Government Article – which 
currently apply only to certain actions related to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key 
Bridge – to actions brought under the bill. 
 
Climate Crimes Accountability Fund 
 
The bill establishes CCAF, a special fund administered by the Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management (MDEM). The stated purpose of the fund is to pay for programs 
that prevent, mitigate, or repair harms caused by climate change. The fund consists of  
(1) all revenues received by the State resulting either directly or indirectly from any 
judgment against or settlement with an entity in an action brought under the authorizations 
under the bill; (2) interest earnings; and (3) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
The fund may only be used to (1) pay for programs that prevent, mitigate, or repair harms 
caused by climate change, as specified; (2) pay expenses related any to action brought by 
the Attorney General under the bill, including investigation, litigation, and trial preparation 
expenses; and (3) pay for administrative expenses related to the distribution of funds to 
related programs. Money expended from the fund for programs to prevent, mitigate, or 
repair harms caused by climate change is supplemental to and is not intended to take the 
place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for the programs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 572/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland’s Attorney General and Enforcement of the Environment Article 
 
The Attorney General is an elected official who serves a four-year term of office. Pursuant 
to the State Constitution, the Attorney General has enumerated responsibilities, including 
investigating, commencing, and prosecuting or defending any civil or criminal suit or 
action, as specified, which the General Assembly, by law or joint resolution, or the 
Governor, directs to be investigated, commenced, and prosecuted or defended. The 
Attorney General does not, however, have general authority to prosecute crimes in the 
absence of specific statutory authority or an executive order. The Attorney General also 
has and must perform any other duties and possess any other powers as the 
General Assembly prescribes by law. For example, the Attorney General is specifically 
authorized under § 6-106.1 of the State Government Article to investigate, commence, and 
prosecute or defend any civil or criminal suit or action that is based on the federal 
government’s action or inaction that threatens the public interest and welfare of the 
residents of the State with respect to protecting the natural resources and environment of 
the State. 
 
The Secretary of the Environment must carry out and enforce the provisions of the 
Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (to which the bill’s provisions 
regarding the authority of the Attorney General are added). The Attorney General is the 
legal adviser of and must represent and otherwise perform all of the legal work for each 
officer and unit of the State government, unless a law expressly provides for a general 
counsel as the legal adviser and representative of the officer or unit. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
MDEM is responsible for coordinating the State response in any major emergency or 
disaster. This includes supporting local governments as needed or requested and 
coordinating assistance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other 
federal partners. MDEM manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad range of 
initiatives leading to enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of natural 
and man-made disasters that could threaten the State’s citizens. 
 
Section 6-106.2 of the State Government Article 
 
In general, under the doctrine of joint and several liability, if two or more defendants are 
found liable for a single and indivisible harm to the plaintiff, each defendant is liable to the 
plaintiff for the entire harm. The plaintiff has the choice of collecting the entire judgment 
from one defendant or portions of the judgment from various defendants, so long as the 
plaintiff does not recover more than the amount of the judgment. Liability among joint 
tort-feasors is governed by the Maryland Uniform Contribution Among Joint Tort‐Feasors 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 572/ Page 4 
Act (MUCATA), which is contained in Title 3, Subtitle 14 of the Courts and Judicial 
Proceedings Article. “Joint tort-feasors” means two or more persons jointly or severally 
liable in tort for the same injury to person or property whether or not judgment has been 
recovered against all or some of them. Liability among joint-tort-feasors under MUCATA 
is determined on a pro rata basis, which is “equal shares that are determined by dividing 
the common liability by the number of joint tort-feasors.” Mercy Med. Ctr. v. Julian, 
429 Md. 348, 357 (2012) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Chapter 137 of 2024 established § 6‐106.2 of the State Government Article, which set forth 
specific procedural requirements and options for the State in obtaining relief in actions 
involving multiple parties brought or asserted by the State based on the collapse of the 
Francis Scott Key Bridge. 
 
In such actions, the judge or jury must (1) make a determination of the total liability, 
including damages, costs, and any other available relief; (2) assign comparative 
responsibility to each party joined in the action, including all defendants, 
third-party defendants, intervenors, and any other named party, based on the party’s 
relative degree of fault or responsibility for the total liability; and (3) if equity requires, 
determine the liability of a group of related persons on a collective basis. 
 
If the State has not obtained complete relief from a responsible person who has resolved 
the person’s liability to the State in a settlement of an action governed by § 6‐106.2, the 
State may (1) continue to pursue an action against any other responsible person who has 
not resolved the person’s liability to the State or (2) bring a new action against any other 
responsible person who has not resolved the person’s liability to the State. 
 
MUCATA is not applicable under § 6‐106.2 actions. Instead, if a responsible person 
resolves the person’s liability to the State in a settlement of an action governed by its 
provisions, the person may not be liable for claims for noncontractual contribution or 
indemnity regarding any action or claim resolved in the settlement. A settlement of an 
action governed by § 6‐106.2 that resolves the liability of a responsible person does not 
release from liability any other responsible person except as specifically provided in the 
terms of the settlement. However, it does reduce the potential liability of all other 
responsible persons liable in whole or in part by the larger of the settling person’s 
proportionate share of liability or the amount the settling person pays to settle the action. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The various potential fiscal impacts are generally dependent 
on (1) the extent to which the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) uses its authority 
under the bill to pursue actions related to climate change; (2) the timing of any actions; and 
(3) whether any actions result in judgments or settlement awards for the State (and the 
corresponding amounts). Although a reliable estimate of the fiscal impact of the bill cannot 
be made beforehand, additional information regarding various impacts is included below. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 572/ Page 5 
Administrative Costs 
 
Office of the Attorney General:  OAG advises that administrative costs to implement the 
bill are approximately $560,800 in fiscal 2027, and at least $626,900 annually thereafter, 
which reflects the need to hire two assistant Attorneys General, one investigator, and a 
financial analyst to handle the increased workload under the bill. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) generally concurs that to the extent that 
OAG robustly pursues accountability for tortious and otherwise unlawful conduct that has 
contributed to climate change, as authorized under the bill, OAG incurs potentially 
significant expenditures. However, without actual experience under the bill and additional 
information regarding how OAG derived its assessment – including if OAG’s anticipation 
of hiring permanent staff mitigates any additional need to hire outside counsel, as 
authorized by the bill – a reliable estimate of the increase in staffing costs and a timeline 
under which staff may be needed cannot be determined at this time. Even so, DLS 
anticipates that OAG expenditures may increase significantly, potentially beginning as 
early as fiscal 2027, as any investigations and legal proceedings are initiated and pursued. 
 
While general funds are assumed to be needed to support any OAG costs, at least initially, 
if any judgements or settlement awards are eventually realized, because OAG’s 
investigation, litigation, and trial preparation expenses are an authorized use of CCAF, the 
need for general fund expenditures may be mitigated in future years. 
 
Based on the assumption that OAG incurs expenditures, as referenced above, there is no 
anticipated material impact on the workload of legal staff within the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management:  MDEM notes the department lacks the 
resources to administer CCAF and that it needs to hire, at a minimum, a program manager 
and an administrator to administer the fund. However, MDEM also acknowledges that the 
timing and magnitude of the availability of any funding is unknown. MDEM estimates 
minimum costs to administer the fund are approximately $196,400 in fiscal 2027 and at 
least $232,500 annually thereafter. 
 
DLS advises that since this analysis assumes that CCAF’s primary source of revenues is 
derived from any settlements/awards, the magnitude of any funding requiring distribution 
(and associated administrative costs) is likely to vary considerably in any given year. 
Accordingly, a reliable estimate of MDEM’s overall staffing needs (and associated costs) 
cannot be made at this time. However, it is assumed that MDEM does not incur 
fund-related costs until such point that any judgements or settlement awards are eventually 
realized (likely not until fiscal 2028 at the earliest) and that at that point, because 
administrative expenses are an authorized purpose of the fund, CCAF funding is used to 
cover MDEM’s staffing costs. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 572/ Page 6 
Climate Change Accountability Fund 
 
In General:  Special fund revenues to CCAF increase to the extent that revenues are 
collected from judgments or settlements reached as a result of the explicit authorization for 
OAG to initiate investigations and litigation that would not have otherwise been undertaken 
absent the bill. Although the magnitude and timing of any increase cannot be reliably 
estimated in advance, DLS anticipates that given the complexity of litigation potentially 
initiated under the bill, any potential revenues are likely not realized until fiscal 2028 at 
the earliest. Special fund expenditures from the fund are assumed to increase 
correspondingly in any year that funding is available. 
 
State Agencies and Local Governments as Funding Recipients:  To the extent that State 
agencies and local governments are eligible and receive funding for programs that prevent, 
mitigate, or repair harms caused by climate change, State and local revenues and 
corresponding expenditures may increase. However, as discussed above, any potential 
funding is likely not available until fiscal 2028 at the earliest, and the magnitude of any 
such funding cannot be reliably estimated in advance. 
 
Additional Impacts 
 
Interest Earnings:  Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the new special fund 
remain in the fund, the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024) which requires, notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds (with certain exceptions) accrue 
to the general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, to the extent that any special fund 
revenues are attained through judgments/settlements, general fund revenues increase from 
interest earnings of the new special fund (likely only in fiscal 2028, if at all). The fund is 
exempted from a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 
Judiciary:  Although the bill may result in additional case filings, it is not anticipated to 
materially impact the Judiciary. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may be affected to the extent that they are 
eligible and receive funding from CCAF, should any revenues be attained. If the 
Attorney General hires a law firm that qualifies as a small business to provide outside 
counsel (as authorized by the bill), the bill may have a meaningful effect. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDE’s Climate Change Program has numerous reports available 
on its website that address the impacts of climate change in Maryland and contain the 
State’s plan to address those impacts. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 572/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 340 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 432 (Senator Love) - Judicial Proceedings and Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Somerset 
counties; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; City of Havre de Grace; 
Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7