START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 504 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 504 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech–
Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists – Physician Members – Repeal 
 
 
This bill removes the two physician members of the State Board of Examiners for 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music 
Therapists. The terms of the two physician members currently serving on the board must 
terminate on June 30, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect board revenues or expenditures, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by the State Board of Examiners 
for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music 
Therapists to provide hearing aid services, practice audiology, practice speech-language 
pathology, or practice music therapy in Maryland. 
 
The board comprises 15 members:  (1) three licensed audiologists; (2) three licensed 
speech-language pathologists; (3) two physicians; (4) two consumer members; 
(5) three licensed hearing aid dispensers; and (6) two music therapists. The physician 
members must be voting members of the board, except on proposals that expand or restrict 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 504/ Page 2 
the practice of audiology or speech-language pathology. A physician member must be 
licensed in Maryland, hold a certificate of qualification from the American Board of 
Otolaryngology, and currently practice in the State. The physician members are appointed 
by the Governor, with the advice of the Secretary of Health, from a list of at least 
three names submitted by the Maryland Society of Otolaryngology. 
 
In accordance with the budget of the board, each board member is entitled to compensation 
and reimbursement for expenses at a rate determined by the board. 
 
State Expenditures:  The board’s current per diem is $75, and the board meets 10 times 
each year. Therefore, the board could be expending up to $1,500 annually on per diem for 
the two physician members. However, the board advises that the physician members have 
not recently requested per diem reimbursement. Therefore, the bill has no material impact 
on board revenues or expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2