START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 547 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 547 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - Enhanced Agricultural Management 
Equipment 
 
 
This bill expands the existing Maryland income tax subtraction modification for purchase 
and installation costs of enhanced agricultural management equipment to include purchase 
and installation costs of equipment (other than eligible equipment specified under existing 
law) that the Secretary of Agriculture determines by regulation to qualify as enhanced 
agricultural management equipment. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to 
tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease beginning as early as FY 2027 due to 
additional subtraction modifications claimed against the income tax. To the extent 
additional subtraction modifications are claimed against the corporate income tax, 
Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
revenues and expenditures also decrease. Expenditures are not otherwise affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues may decrease beginning as early as FY 2027. 
Local highway user revenues also decrease to the extent subtraction modifications are 
claimed against the corporate income tax. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland income tax, an individual or corporation may subtract 
from income 100% of the expenses that a taxpayer incurs to buy and install enhanced 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 547/ Page 2 
agricultural management equipment (50% in the case of certain vertical tillage equipment) 
if the equipment has a useful life of at least four years, subject to additional specified 
requirements. 
 
“Enhanced agricultural management equipment” means: 
 
 
a planter or drill that is commonly known as a “no-till” planter or drill and is 
designed to minimize the disturbance of the soil in planting crops; 
 
liquid manure soil injection equipment that is designed to inject manure into the soil 
to reduce nutrient runoff; 
 
a deep no-till ripper that does not invert the soil profile and is used to address 
compaction in high residue cropping systems; 
 
subject to certain requirements, poultry or livestock manure spreading equipment 
used by a farm owner or tenant on farmland in accordance with a specified nutrient 
management plan; 
 
vertical tillage equipment used to incorporate livestock manure or poultry litter into 
the soil; 
 
a global positioning system device used for management of agricultural nutrient 
applications; and 
 
a specified integrated optical sensing and nutrient application system. 
 
To qualify for the subtraction, a taxpayer must file a statement with the Department of 
Agriculture (MDA) certifying compliance with the applicable requirements. 
 
A taxpayer may carry forward any unused amount of the subtraction modification for up 
to five years. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the Secretary of Agriculture establishes by regulation 
additional types of equipment that qualify as enhanced agricultural management 
equipment, State general fund and local income tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate 
amount – potentially as early as fiscal 2027 – due to additional subtraction modifications 
claimed against Maryland income tax. Any such impact cannot be reliably predicted and 
depends on the regulatory decisions of MDA. To the extent subtraction modifications are 
claimed against the corporate income tax, HEIF and TTF revenues also decrease, as do 
TTF expenditures for capital transportation grants to local governments (local highway 
user revenues). 
 
Local Revenues:  Local income tax revenues may decrease beginning as early as 
fiscal 2027 due to additional subtraction modifications claimed against the personal 
income tax. Any such effect cannot be reliably predicted, as discussed above. To the extent 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 547/ Page 3 
subtraction modifications are claimed against the corporate income tax, local highway user 
revenues also decrease. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 278 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3