START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 536 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 536 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Employment Discrimination - Reasonable Accommodations - Disabilities Due to 
Childbirth, Menopause, and Related Medical Conditions 
 
 
This bill expands certain protections against employment discrimination based on an 
individual’s disability to include those temporary disabilities caused or contributed to by 
childbirth, menopause, or a related medical condition. The bill generally incorporates 
childbirth, menopause, or “related medical condition” into statutory provisions that govern 
reasonable accommodations that are required based on disabilities caused or contributed to 
by pregnancy. “Related medical condition” includes (1) lactation or the need to express 
breast milk for a nursing child and (2) the need to manage the effects of vasomotor 
symptoms related to menopause. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is assumed that the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR), 
Judiciary, and the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) can handle any additional 
complaints arising under the bill using existing resources. The bill is otherwise not 
anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is generally not anticipated to materially affect local government 
operations or finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: In general, statute provides protections for an individual experiencing 
disabilities due to pregnancy and childbirth. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 536/ Page 2 
Employers are required to include disabilities due to pregnancy or childbirth on the same 
terms and conditions as they are applied to other temporary disabilities regarding written 
and unwritten policies and practices involving formal or informal matters (e.g., the 
commencement and duration of leave, the availability of extensions of leave, the accrual 
of seniority and other benefits and privileges, reinstatement, and payment). 
 
Accommodations:  If an employee requests a reasonable accommodation, the employer 
must explore with the employee all possible means of providing the reasonable 
accommodation, including (1) changing the employee’s job duties; (2) changing the 
employee’s work hours; (3) relocating the employee’s work area; (4) providing mechanical 
or electrical aids; (5) transferring the employee to a less strenuous or less hazardous 
position; or (6) providing leave. If an employee requests transfer to a less strenuous or less 
hazardous position as a reasonable accommodation, the employer must transfer the 
employee for a period of time up to the duration of the employee’s pregnancy, as specified. 
 
Certification of Medical Advisability:  An employer may require an employee to provide a 
certification from the employee’s health care provider concerning the medical advisability 
of a reasonable accommodation to the same extent a certification is required for other 
temporary disabilities. A certification must include the date the reasonable accommodation 
became medically advisable, the probable duration of the reasonable accommodation, and 
an explanatory statement as to the medical advisability of the reasonable accommodation. 
 
Notice of Employee’s Rights:  An employer must post in a conspicuous location, and 
include in any employee handbook, information concerning an employee’s rights to 
reasonable accommodations and leave for a disability caused or contributed to by 
pregnancy. 
 
Miscellaneous:  An employer may not interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or 
the attempt to exercise, any right described above. Statute may not be construed to affect 
any other provision of law relating to discrimination on the basis of sex or pregnancy or 
diminish in any way the coverage of pregnancy, childbirth, or a medical condition related 
to pregnancy or childbirth. 
 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 
 
Initial Process:  MCCR is the independent State agency charged with the enforcement of 
laws prohibiting discrimination in employment. An individual alleging employment 
discrimination may file an inquiry with MCCR, which initiates the intake process. Once a 
complaint has been properly filed, the case is assigned to an MCCR investigator to 
determine whether there is probable cause that discrimination has occurred. If at the 
conclusion of the investigatory stage, MCCR believes there is probable cause that 
discrimination occurred, MCCR issues a finding and attempts to resolve the matter through 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 536/ Page 3 
conciliation. If an agreement to remedy and eliminate the discrimination cannot be reached, 
the matter is certified for litigation and may proceed in a number of ways, including being 
heard before an administrative law judge. 
 
A complaint alleging an unlawful employment practice other than harassment must be filed 
within 300 days after the alleged act (a complaint alleging harassment must be filed within 
two years). However, complaints filed with a federal human relations commission or a 
local human relations commission within specified timeframes are deemed to be in 
compliance with these requirements. 
 
Administrative Proceedings:  At an administrative hearing, MCCR’s Office of the General 
Counsel presents the case on behalf of the complainant. Remedies available on a finding 
by an administrative law judge that the respondent (employer) is engaging or has engaged 
in an unlawful employment practice include (1) enjoining the respondent from engaging in 
the discriminatory act; (2) ordering appropriate affirmative relief (including the 
reinstatement or hiring of employees, with or without back pay); (3) awarding 
compensatory damages; and (4) ordering any other equitable relief that the judge considers 
appropriate. 
 
Compensatory damages that are awarded (for future pecuniary losses, emotional pain, 
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, or nonpecuniary 
losses) are in addition to back pay, interest on back pay, and any other equitable relief that 
the complainant may recover under any other provision of law. The maximum amounts of 
compensatory damages that may be awarded are as follows: 
 
 
$50,000 for respondents with 15 to 100 employees; 
 
$100,000 for respondents with 101 to 200 employees; 
 
$200,000 for respondents with 201 to 500 employees; and 
 
$300,000 for respondents with 501 or more employees. 
 
If back pay is awarded, the award must be reduced by any interim earnings or amounts 
earnable with reasonable diligence by the person discriminated against. In addition to any 
other authorized relief, a complainant may recover back pay for up to two years preceding 
the filing of the complaint if the unlawful employment practice that has occurred during 
the complaint filing period is similar or related to an unlawful employment practice with 
regard to discrimination in compensation that occurred outside the time for filing a 
complaint. 
 
Civil Actions:  A complainant or a respondent may elect to have the claims asserted in a 
complaint alleging an unlawful employment practice determined in a civil action brought 
by MCCR on the complainant’s behalf if (1) MCCR has found probable cause to believe 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 536/ Page 4 
the respondent has engaged or is engaging in an unlawful employment practice and  
(2) there is a failure to reach an agreement to remedy and eliminate the practice. MCCR 
may also elect to have the claims asserted within the complaint determined in a civil action 
brought on its own behalf under the same conditions. On a finding that discrimination 
occurred, the circuit court may provide the same remedies that an administrative law judge 
is authorized to provide (described above). 
 
A complainant may also file a private civil action in circuit court against the respondent if 
(1) the complainant initially filed a timely administrative charge or a complaint under 
federal, State, or local law alleging an unlawful employment practice by the respondent 
and (2) at least 180 days have elapsed since the filing of the administrative charge or 
complaint. In addition, the civil action must be filed within two years after the alleged 
employment practice occurred (or within three years for a harassment allegation), however, 
these time limitations are tolled while an administrative charge or complaint is pending. 
The filing of a civil action automatically terminates any proceeding before MCCR based 
on the underlying administrative complaint. 
 
In addition to the remedies described above, a circuit court may also award punitive 
damages in a private civil action if the respondent is not a governmental unit or political 
subdivision, and the court finds that the respondent is engaging or has engaged in an 
unlawful employment practice with actual malice. If the court awards punitive damages, 
the sum of the amount of compensatory damages and punitive damages may not exceed 
the applicable limitations on compensatory damages (as shown above). If a complainant 
seeks compensatory or punitive damages in a circuit court action, any party may demand a 
jury trial, and the court may not inform the jury of the statutory limitations on compensatory 
and punitive damages. 
 
Pursuant to § 20-1015 of the State Government Article, a court may award the prevailing 
party reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, and costs. 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Amendments Act of 2008 
 
Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12102, “disability” means, with respect to an individual (1) a 
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of 
such individual; (2) a record of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such 
an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment whether or not the impairment limits 
or is perceived to limit a major life activity. The ADA was amended in 2008, requiring the 
definition of “disability” be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals to the 
maximum extent permitted. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Generally, State and local expenditures are not anticipated to 
be materially impacted by reasonable accommodation requests under the bill. The 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 536/ Page 5 
Department of Legislative Services notes that employers may already provide 
accommodations for recognized medical needs arising from childbirth and menopause in 
accordance with the ADA; further, while there may be an increase in requests, requests 
will still have to meet the threshold of being reasonable. 
 
For example, Charles County advises that any disability caused by a medical need would 
be accommodated under current practice. Similarly, Howard and Baltimore counties 
anticipate, despite a potential increase in requests for accommodations, implementing the 
bill with existing resources. However, Garrett County advises that, should additional 
accommodations result in short-staffing, an additional personnel may be required to cover 
the duties of a transferred employee receiving accommodation, at an estimated cost of 
$60,000 on an annual basis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, Garrett, and Howard counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5