START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 583 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 583 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Notice of Issuance of Class C 
Per Diem Beer, Wine, and Liquor License PG 319–26 
 
 
This bill clarifies the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners must 
provide notice to the director of the Department of Permitting, Inspections, and 
Enforcement, rather than the director of the County Department of Environmental 
Resources, when the board issues a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, when the Prince George’s County Board 
of License Commissioners issues a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license, the 
board must provide notice of the event to (1) the police chief; (2) the fire chief; (3) the 
director of the County Department of Environmental Resources; and (4) if applicable, the 
chief administrative officer of the municipality in which the event is held. The notice must 
include the time, place, and expected size of the event. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 583/ Page 2 
The bill updates the above notification requirement by replacing the County Department 
of Environmental Resources with the Department of Permitting, Inspections, and 
Enforcement to reflect county restructuring that occurred in 2013. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2