START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 574 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 574 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support Program and Fee in Child 
Support Cases – Established PG 504–26 
 
 
This bill establishes the Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support Program to assist 
students who are expecting to become, or have become, a parent to a child while attending 
a public high school by providing students with specified support. The Prince George’s 
County Board of Education must establish procedures for providing support required under 
the program. The bill also requires the Prince George’s County Circuit Court to collect a 
fee in certain cases pertaining to child support; the revenues must be remitted to the 
Prince George’s County Public School System to support the program. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase by approximately $200,000 
annually beginning in FY 2027 for the Child Support Administration (CSA) to pay fees in 
specified child support cases. General fund expenditures further increase by approximately 
$8,600 in FY 2027 for the Judiciary to make programming changes.     
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
208,600 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
Net Effect 
($208,600) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase by up to $1.1 million annually 
beginning in FY 2027 due to the establishment of a fee required to be collected by the 
Prince George’s County Circuit Court (to be used for the Prince George’s County Teen 
Pregnancy Support Program). This analysis assumes a viable program can operate in such 
a way that expenditures match available fee revenues. However, if meaningful fee revenues 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 574/ Page 2 
do not materialize under the bill, significant additional expenditures may be required in 
FY 2027 and beyond to sustain program expenses not covered by the additional fee. This 
bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support Program 
 
The Prince George’s County Board of Education must assist students who are expecting to 
become, or have become, a parent to a child while attending a public high school by 
providing students with (1) cash vouchers to assist in paying for child care expenses; 
(2) parenting education; and (3) other resources that support first-time parents. 
 
Circuit Court Fees 
 
The Prince George’s County Circuit Court must collect a fee of $100 in any case in which 
an individual (1) applies for a decree or modification of a decree of child support or (2) files 
any form of proceeding to recover arrearages of or to enforce a decree of child support. 
The revenue generated from the fees must be remitted quarterly to the county’s public 
school system and used to support the Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support 
Program. The fee imposed is in addition to any other fees or costs imposed under law, 
regulation, or rule. 
 
Current Law:        
 
Pregnant and Parenting Students – Policies  
 
Under current law, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must develop a 
model policy, with specified elements, to support the educational and parenting goals and 
improve the educational outcomes of pregnant and parenting students. Each local board of 
education must establish a local policy based on the model policy. MSDE must provide 
technical assistance to a local board to establish the policies.  
 
Each local policy must: 
 
 
require each high school to designate a private lactation space in the school that 
meets specified requirements; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 574/ Page 3 
 
provide lactating students with access to a refrigerator located reasonably close to 
the private lactation space; 
 
require schools to designate at least one staff member to connect, to the extent 
practicable, pregnant and parenting students with resources to find safe, affordable, 
and reliable child care, early education services, and transportation services to and 
from school; 
 
incorporate the attendance policy for pregnant and parenting students as specified; 
 
provide for training of school personnel on policy objectives and requirements; and 
 
be published in the school system’s student handbook. 
 
Pregnant and Parenting Students – Attendance  
 
A student’s absence due to a student’s pregnancy or parenting needs is a lawful absence, 
as specified.  
 
Each local board of education must develop a written attendance policy for pregnant and 
parenting students that meets minimum requirements. At a minimum, the policy must: 
 
 
excuse all absences due to pregnancy- or parenting-related conditions, including 
absences for labor, delivery, recovery, and prenatal and postnatal medical 
appointments; 
 
provide at least ten days of excused absences for a parenting student after the birth 
of the student’s child; 
 
excuse any parenting-related absences due to an illness or a medical appointment of 
the student’s child, including up to four days of absences per school year for which 
the school may not require a note from a physician;  
 
excuse any absence due to a legal appointment involving the pregnant or parenting 
student that is related to family law proceedings, including adoption, custody, and 
visitation; and 
 
excuse any parenting‐related absence from a class due to use of a lactation space to 
nurse or express breast milk.  
 
A mother may breastfeed her child in any public or private location in which the mother 
and child are authorized to be. A person may not restrict or limit the right of a mother to 
breastfeed her child. 
 
Maryland Health Education Standards 
 
With the assistance of local health departments (LHDs), each local board of education must 
provide adequate school health services, instruction in health education, and a healthful 
school environment. MSDE and the Maryland Department of Health must jointly develop 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 574/ Page 4 
public standards and guidelines for school health programs and offer assistance to the local 
boards of education and LHDs in their implementation. 
 
Health education standards were last adopted by the State Board of Education in 
December 2019; and the Maryland Comprehensive Health Education Framework was 
revised based on those standards. There are Family Life and Human Sexuality standards 
for prekindergarten through grade 8 and for two semesters of high school. MSDE’s 
Comprehensive Health Education Standards and Frameworks Validation Committee is 
currently in the process of proposing updated regulations and framework to the State Board 
of Education for consideration. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The Judiciary advises that there were approximately 
10,500 filings in Prince George’s County Circuit Court that could have been subject to the 
filing fee requirement proposed under the bill during fiscal 2025. Given the $100 fee 
specified in the bill, available revenues for the program may total $1.1 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027. However, certain factors (e.g., fee waivers) likely limit the total 
amount of fee revenues collected and distributed.  
 
A meaningful number of cases potentially subject to the fee pertain to matters filed by the 
State’s CSA. The Department of Human Services (DHS) advises that CSA is generally 
exempt from prepaying court costs under Family Law Article §5-1011. To the extent the 
bill supersedes that exemption and requires CSA to pay fees in child support cases, 
general fund expenditures increase by approximately $200,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027. This estimate is based on the approximately 2,000 filings in fiscal 2025 that 
could be subject to the fee. DHS advises that costs for the fee cannot be passed on to CSA’s 
customers as federal laws and regulations (1) set a cap on user fees dedicated to child 
support payment and (2) prohibit CSA from charging application or annual fees on current 
or former recipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. Therefore, general funds 
are needed to cover the fee. 
 
The Judiciary advises that one-time reprogramming changes totaling $8,630 in fiscal 2027 
are necessary to implement the bill’s fee collection provision. 
 
Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) advises that establishing a program to 
provide teen parents with essential resources such as childcare, cash assistance, diapers, 
and infant formula carries a significant fiscal impact. That fiscal impact may not be entirely 
offset by available revenues from the new child support filing fee. PGCPS further 
anticipates additional operational impact arising from administrative responsibilities 
needed to receive, distribute, and track fee revenues in accordance with the bill.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, PGCPS estimates that, based on an average 150 student 
participation in the system’s Adolescent Single Parent Program, total cost to provide $900 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 574/ Page 5 
in child care per month for the 11 months of the school year (assuming all students attend 
summer school) plus the cost to provide diapers and baby formula could total $2.1 million 
in fiscal 2027 alone. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the bill 
does not require PGCPS to cover the full cost of child care for program participants, and 
the bill specifies neither the level of additional resources nor the type of parenting 
education that must be provided to first time parents. Therefore, PGCPS can likely provide 
a level of cash assistance, parenting education, and other resources that scale with available 
funding from court fees.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 359 of 2025 and HB 395 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; Prince George’s County;  
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5