START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 522 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 522 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Class C Per Diem License 
Fees 
 
   
This bill modifies the fees for Class C per diem alcoholic beverages licenses in 
Anne Arundel County based on the estimated attendance of the events. For events with an 
estimated attendance of 500 or more individuals, the fee for a Class C per diem beer and 
wine license or beer license is $25 per point of sale location that serves alcohol at the event 
per day, and the fee for a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license is $50 per point 
of sale location that serves alcohol at the event per day. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues increase by up to $7,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2027. Anne Arundel County expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Anne Arundel County, a Class C per diem beer, Class C per diem beer 
and wine, or Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license entitles the license holder to 
exercise any of the privileges conferred by the respective class of license (1) for the use of 
a person holding an entertainment event that is conducted by a club; (2) at the place 
described in the license; and (3) for a period not exceeding seven consecutive days.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 522/ Page 2 
The fee for a Class C per diem beer license and a Class C per diem beer and wine license 
is $25 per day. The fee for a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license is $50 per day. 
 
Local Revenues:  Anne Arundel County advises the bill would affect approximately 
11 applicants for Class C per diem alcoholic beverages licenses annually. While some 
applicants will see no change under the bill, events with an estimated attendance of 500 or 
more individuals would be required to pay a fee for each point of sale location rather than 
a flat per diem fee for the event. Thus, Anne Arundel County revenues will increase up to 
$7,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027 due to increased license fees per point of sale 
location from events with an estimated attendance of 500 or more individuals. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 399 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2