START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 519 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 519 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - Entertainment Permits 
 
   
This bill revises and renames various alcoholic beverages entertainment permits in 
Anne Arundel County as follows:  (1) a music permit is renamed a background 
entertainment permit; (2) an entertainment permit is renamed a general entertainment 
permit; and (3) a dancing permit is renamed a full entertainment permit. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Anne Arundel County finances 
or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, in Anne Arundel County, except for 
piped-in background music or one television screen, the holder of an alcoholic beverages 
license generally may not play music (including live music or music by a disc jockey), 
operate a karaoke machine, or allow dancing, floor shows, or any other similar type of 
entertainment on the licensed premises or on an adjacent property in which the licensee has 
ownership or control, unless the license holder is issued the appropriate entertainment 
permit authorizing the activity. The bill removes the prohibition on dancing for license 
holders without an entertainment permit. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 519/ Page 2 
Music Permit Becomes Background Entertainment Permit 
 
Under current law, a music permit may be issued to the holder of a Class B, Class BLX, 
Class D, or Class H alcoholic beverages license. The music permit authorizes the playing 
of (1) more than one television and (2) recorded music or live music with no more than 
two musicians. The permit does not authorize floor shows, dancing, or similar live 
entertainment. The annual permit fee is $100. 
 
Under the bill, a music permit is renamed a background entertainment permit, which the 
board may continue to issue to the same classes of license holders. A background 
entertainment permit authorizes the playing of more than one television and recorded music 
or piped-in background music. The permit does not authorize floor shows or similar live 
entertainment. The annual permit fee is $100. 
 
Entertainment Permit Becomes General Entertainment Permit 
 
Under current law, an entertainment permit may be issued to the holder of a Class B, 
Class BLX, Class D, or Class H alcoholic beverages license. The entertainment permit 
authorizes (1) live music with up to four musicians; (2) playing more than one television; 
(3) a karaoke machine; and (4) music by a disc jockey. The permit does not authorize floor 
shows, dancing, or similar live entertainment. The annual fee for an entertainment permit 
is $200 for the holder of a beer and wine license and $300 for the holder of a beer, wine, 
and liquor license.  
 
Under the bill, an entertainment permit is renamed a general entertainment permit, which 
the board may continue to issue to the same classes of license holders. A general 
entertainment permit authorizes (1) any entertainment authorized by a background 
entertainment permit; (2) live music with up to four musicians; and (3) the playing of trivia 
games, a karaoke machine, and music by a disc jockey. If the entertainment under the 
permit occurs outside, the area must be at least 100 feet away from any residentially zoned 
property. The annual fee for a general entertainment permit is $200 for the holder of a beer 
and wine license and $300 for the holder of a beer, wine, and liquor license. 
 
Dancing Permit Becomes Full Entertainment Permit 
 
Under current law, a dancing permit may generally be issued to the holder of a Class B, 
Class BLX, Class C, Class D, or Class H alcoholic beverages license. A dancing permit 
authorizes music, dancing, and other legal forms of entertainment. The annual fee for a 
dancing permit is $200 for the holder of a beer and wine license, $400 for the holder of a 
beer, wine, and liquor license, or free for the holder of a Class C license. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 519/ Page 3 
Under the bill, a dancing permit is renamed a full entertainment permit, which the board 
may continue to issue to the same classes of license holders. A full entertainment permit 
authorizes (1) any entertainment authorized by a general entertainment permit and  
(2) music, a permanent dance floor, a stage area, floor shows, and other legal forms of 
entertainment. If the entertainment under the permit occurs outside, the area must be at 
least 100 feet away from any residentially zoned property. The annual fee for a full 
entertainment permit is $200 for the holder of a beer and wine license, $400 for the holder 
of a beer, wine, and liquor license, or free for the holder of a Class C license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 400 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3