START OF PAGE 1
SB 325/ Page 1 
  HB 548 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 548 
(Delegate Behler, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Land Use - Permitting - Development Rights (Maryland Housing Certainty Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes that (1) a housing development project application approval or denial 
is governed only by laws and regulations in effect when a substantially complete 
application was submitted, and (2) after approval, the proponent of the project has a vested 
right to the authorized use and development for the longer of five years or a period 
determined by the local jurisdiction or the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning 
Commission (M-NCPPC). The bill also prohibits a county or municipality from collecting 
development impact fees or excise taxes imposed on a residential real estate project until 
after construction is complete and all requirements for a certificate of occupancy, 
occupancy permit, or other equivalent have been met. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are expected to be affected, as discussed below. 
This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Applicable Laws/Regulations – and – Vested Right to Use and Development 
 
Housing Development Project Application 
 
The bill establishes that the approval, conditional approval, or denial of a housing 
development project application by a local jurisdiction or M-NCPPC must be governed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 548/ Page 2 
only by the laws and regulations in effect (1) at the time of submission of a substantially 
complete application or (2) when a local jurisdiction or M-NCPPC provides for the 
approval of a housing development project in multiple stages, the date of the first complete 
or substantially complete application submission for any process that may culminate in the 
final approval of the application. A zoning text amendment, application for rezoning, or 
other local equivalent may not be considered as a process that may culminate in the final 
approval of an application. 
 
Determination and Notification of Substantially Complete Application 
 
A local jurisdiction or M‑NCPPC must, within 15 days after receipt of a housing 
development project application, make a determination whether the application is 
substantially complete and notify the applicant of the determination and the date of the 
determination, and provide a list of deficiencies and a reasonable time frame for curing 
them if the application is determined to not be a substantially complete application. If the 
local jurisdiction or M‑NCPPC fails to notify the applicant of its determination within 
20 days after receipt of the application, it is deemed to be a substantially complete 
application for purposes of the bill’s provisions. 
 
Housing Development Project 
 
After a housing development project has received all required approvals, the proponent of 
the project has a vested right to that authorized use and development for the longer of 
(1) five years or (2) a period determined by the local jurisdiction or M‑NCPPC. Each 
discrete phase of a housing development project subject to a phased development plan must 
be considered a discrete housing development project. 
 
Definitions  
 
“Housing development project” means the new construction or substantial renovation of a 
residential real estate project. 
 
“Housing development project application” means an application for a building permit, 
certification, authorization, site plan approval, subdivision approval, conceptual plan, or 
any other determination by a local jurisdiction or M‑NCPPC relating to a housing 
development project that has been submitted to a local jurisdiction or M‑NCPPC in 
compliance with applicable requirements. 
 
“Substantially complete application” means a housing development project application that 
satisfies a substantial majority of the application requirements, but may contain 
nonsubstantive errors, omissions, or similar inconsequential deficiencies. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 548/ Page 3 
Application and Effect of Provisions 
 
These requirements of the bill relating to housing development project applications and 
housing development projects apply to a local jurisdiction and M‑NCPPC only to the extent 
that they do not conflict with other State or federal laws or regulations. The bill’s provisions 
may not be construed to prevent the expiration of an approval of a housing development 
project application in accordance with the laws or regulations governing a local jurisdiction 
or M-NCPPC. The bill’s provisions also may not be construed to limit the ability of a local 
jurisdiction or M-NCPPC to: 
 
 
require approvals or permits for each phase of a housing development project 
subject to a phased development plan in accordance with the laws and regulations 
in effect at the time of submission of a substantially complete application for each 
respective phrase; 
 
enforce health and safety laws or regulations that are necessary to address 
immediate threats to public safety; 
 
execute a development rights and responsibilities agreement under Title 7, Subtitle 3 
of the Land Use Article; or 
 
approve a zoning text amendment, application for rezoning, or other local equivalent 
to increase the density of a housing development project beyond the maximum 
allowable amount at the time of complete or substantially complete application 
submission. 
 
Development Impact Fee and Excise Taxes 
 
The bill prohibits a county or municipality from collecting development impact fees or 
excise taxes imposed on a residential real estate project (including a mixed‑use 
development that includes residential units) until after construction is complete and all 
requirements for a certificate of occupancy, occupancy permit, or other equivalent have 
been met. The bill authorizes denial, withholding, or revocation of a certificate, permit, or 
equivalent if the fee/tax is not paid within a reasonable time period. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Development Rights 
 
Vested Rights 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland, in Prince George’s County v. Sunrise Development 
Limited Partnership, addressed the question of when a landowner has a vested right to an 
authorized use or development of their property, regardless of a subsequent change in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 548/ Page 4 
zoning or other law or regulations that affects that authorized use or development.  
330 Md. 297, 306-314 (1993). In the case, the court: 
 
 
discussed its prior cases, that generally establish, as a whole, that a landowner’s 
right to a use or development of their property vests when there is publicly visible 
(or substantial) commencement of construction consistent with that authorized use 
or development, in good faith, under a valid permit, prior to a change in the law 
(or regulations); and 
 
clarified, in its holding, the standard for when there is sufficient commencement of 
construction, by establishing that “in order for rights to be vested before a change 
in the law, work done must be recognizable, on inspection of the property by a 
reasonable member of the public, as the commencement of construction of a 
building for a use permitted under the then current zoning.” 
 
Development Rights and Responsibilities Agreements 
 
Title 7, Subtitle 3 of the Land Use Article authorizes local jurisdictions (with the exception 
of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties) to, by local law, allow for development 
rights and responsibilities agreements to be entered into, by the jurisdiction, with persons 
having a legal or equitable interest in real property in the jurisdiction. An agreement must 
contain, among other things, the duration of the agreement, permissible uses of the 
property, density or intensity of the use of the property, other terms or conditions applicable 
to the development, and, if applicable, public benefits to be provided by the property owner 
(e.g., construction or financing of public facilities, dedication of a portion of the property 
for public use). Real property subject to an agreement is subject to the local laws and 
regulations governing the use, density, or intensity of the property in effect at the time of 
the agreement, unless compliance with subsequent laws or regulations is determined to be 
essential to ensure public health, safety, or welfare. Title 24, Subtitle 3, and  
Title 25, Subtitle 5, of the Land Use Article establish separate, specified authorizations  
for development rights and responsibilities agreements in Montgomery and  
Prince George’s counties, respectively. 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland, in a 2004 opinion, characterized Chapter 562 of 1995 – 
which first enacted Title 7, Subtitle 3 – as seeming to balance developers’ and property 
owners’ desires for more certainty and less monetary risk as they proceed with 
development, against local governments’ desire to “receive greater public benefits on a 
more predictable schedule than might otherwise be attainable[.]” Queen Anne’s 
Conservation, Inc. v. County Comm’rs, 382 Md. 306, 308-309 (2004). 
 
Development Impact Fees and Excise Taxes 
 
Development impact fees and excise taxes enable local governments to collect revenue for 
new or expanded public facilities or services necessitated by new residential or commercial 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 548/ Page 5 
development, shifting the costs of financing the new or expanded facilities/services from 
existing taxpayers to those responsible for the development. See the attached  
Appendix – Development Impact Fees and Excise Taxes for information on the amount 
of fees and taxes (for single‑family detached homes) and overall revenues collected by 
counties that impose the fees/taxes. And see this 2025 Department of Legislative Services 
report for citations/links to State enabling law and county implementing laws for 
development impact fees and excise taxes, as well as full fiscal 2025 fee/rate schedules, in 
the appendices, which include multifamily residential fee and tax amounts. 
 
Land Use – Generally 
 
The regulation of land use in the State, through planning and zoning, is implemented by 
local governments, subject to applicable State law. Planning and zoning authority is 
delegated by the State to local governments primarily under the Land Use Article and, for 
certain counties, the Express Powers Act (Title 10 of the Local Government Article). 
 
Both the Land Use Article and Express Powers Act contain the State’s policy statement 
that (1) the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive 
regulation through implementation of planning and zoning controls and (2) planning and 
zoning controls must be implemented by local government. State law includes various 
provisions authorizing local governments to regulate the location, size, and use of 
structures through zoning regulations. 
 
Division II of the Land Use Article establishes M‑NCPPC (made up of the 
Montgomery County and Prince George’s County planning boards) and governs planning 
and zoning within the Maryland‑Washington Regional District (§ 20-101), which consists 
of (1) the entire area of Montgomery County, subject to certain limitations (relating to 
certain municipalities not subject to the planning and zoning authority of the county, unless 
by agreement, and other municipalities that have certain, limited planning and zoning 
authority), and (2) the entire area of Prince George’s County, except for the City of Laurel 
as it existed on July 1, 2013. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local government expenditures may increase in some jurisdictions 
to implement the bill’s provisions governing the submission of housing development 
project applications, laws and regulations applicable to pending applications, and vested 
rights of proponents of approved projects, based on information received from a 
small number of jurisdictions. The jurisdictions’ responses vary, with some expecting to 
need additional personnel and/or programming to implement changes under the bill and 
others expecting to implement the changes with existing resources. Those that indicate a 
need for additional resources cite, among other things, (1) the short time frame after an 
application is submitted within which a planning office must make a determination of 
whether the application is substantially complete and (2) the need to track the correct laws 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 548/ Page 6 
and regulations applicable to pending applications and the vesting periods of approved 
projects. Guidance and technical assistance available from the Maryland Department of 
Planning, to manage implementation of the changes, may help jurisdictions to an extent. 
 
Because the bill largely does not affect a local jurisdiction’s existing control over the 
developments it approves (albeit subject to the bill’s requirement that laws and regulations 
in effect at the time an application is determined to be substantially complete apply to the 
approval or denial) – and does not prevent the expiration of an approval of a project, or 
limit a jurisdiction’s ability to require separate approvals or permits for each phase of a 
phased development plan – jurisdictions should retain the ability, under the bill, to ensure 
that development does not outpace existing or planned infrastructure capacity, through a 
jurisdiction’s adequate public facilities ordinance (APFO) (if the jurisdiction has an APFO) 
or other growth management policies. However, the bill does affect the timing of collection 
of development impact fees and excise taxes imposed by local jurisdictions to pay for new 
or expanded public facilities or services necessitated by housing development, as discussed 
below. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local government revenues from development impact fees and 
excise taxes are delayed to the extent the bill’s prohibition against a county or municipality 
collecting development impact fees or excise taxes imposed on a residential real estate 
project causes fees/taxes collected from such development to be collected later than they 
would be in the absence of the bill. Based on information received from a small number of 
local jurisdictions, by delaying the time when development impact fees and taxes may be 
collected, local jurisdictions may need to increase capital borrowing and debt to pay for 
required infrastructure and/or delay necessary infrastructure spending. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Developers and/or housing construction small businesses may 
meaningfully benefit from the bill’s provisions relating to (1) housing development project 
applications and a vested right to an authorized use and development of a residential 
housing project for at least five years and (2) delayed payment of development impact fees 
and excise taxes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 503 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 325 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 548/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, Frederick, and 
Garrett counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland‑National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission; City of Laurel; Maryland Municipal League; Town of La Plata; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Planning; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 548/ Page 8 
Appendix – Development Impact Fees and Excise Taxes 
 
 
This appendix compiles information on (1) the development impact fees and excise taxes 
imposed by Maryland counties and (2) the revenues generated by the fees/taxes. 
Development impact fees and excise taxes enable local governments to collect revenue for 
new or expanded public facilities or services necessitated by new residential or commercial 
development, shifting the costs of financing the new or expanded facilities/services from 
existing taxpayers to those responsible for the development. 
 
The county development impact fees and excise taxes included in this appendix are those 
charges generally identified as development impact fees or excise taxes, or a variation of 
those terms (in some cases “surcharge” or “impact tax” is used). However, this appendix 
does not include all charges imposed on new development to generate revenue to cover 
costs of new or expanded public facilities/services. Some jurisdictions also impose water- 
and sewer-related charges (such as capital connection charges or system development 
charges), and/or mitigation payments based in the county’s adequate public facilities 
ordinance, that generate revenue for new or expanded public facilities/services. While not 
focused on in this report, a number of Maryland’s municipalities also impose impact fees 
or similar charges on new development to generate revenue for public facilities or services 
they provide. 
 
The first table below shows the counties’ fee amount or tax rate for a single-family 
detached home in each of fiscal 2024, 2025, and 2026. 
 
The second table shows actual or projected/estimated revenues from counties’ 
development impact fees and excise taxes for fiscal 2024, 2025, and 2026. This table is 
based primarily on information provided by the counties in response to the Department of 
Legislative Services’ (DLS) and the Maryland Association of Counties’ FY 2026 Local 
Government Budget and Tax Rate Survey conducted during summer 2025, supplemented 
by DLS follow up with certain counties. The extent to which the revenue amounts are 
actual vs. projected/estimated varies. The fiscal 2024 amounts are actual revenue amounts, 
and the fiscal 2025 and 2026 amounts are projected/estimated revenues in most cases; in 
limited cases, some counties were able to provide actual fiscal 2025 revenue amounts. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 548/ Page 9 
 
County Development Impact Fees and Excise Tax Rates1 
Fiscal 2024-2026 
 
County 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Anne Arundel2 
$16,217 
$16,636 
$16,903 
Baltimore3 
1.5% of gross sales 
$6.00/sq. ft. 
$6.00/sq. ft. 
Calvert 
12,950 
12,950 
12,950 
Caroline 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
Carroll4 
3,533 
3,533 
3,533 
Charles 
20,330 
21,351 
21,972 
Dorchester5 
0 
0 
5,000 
Frederick6 
17,961 
18,851 
19,408 
Harford7 
6,000 
10,000 
10,000 
Howard8 
$9.77/sq. ft. 
$10.05/sq. ft. 
$10.27/sq. ft. 
Montgomery9 
56,274 
56,274 
59,854 
Prince George’s10 
29,188 
30,180 
30,875 
Queen Anne’s 
$5.85/sq. ft. 
$5.85/sq. ft. 
$5.99/sq. ft. 
St. Mary’s 
6,697 
6,697 
6,697 
Talbot11 
9,091 
9,091 
9,356 
Washington 
$1.00/sq. ft. 
$1.00/sq. ft. 
$1.00/sq. ft. 
 
sq. ft.:  square foot 
 
1 Fees/rates listed are those applicable to single-family detached dwellings and are per dwelling unless otherwise 
indicated. 
2 Rates are for a 2,000 to 2,499 sq. ft. residential unit. Residential rates vary by the square footage of a unit. 
3 Baltimore County Bill 45-24 established a $6.00 per square foot development impact fee for residential development 
effective August 25, 2024. 
4 The schools portion of the impact fee was increased from $0 to $3,000, increasing the total impact fee from $533 to 
$3,533, effective September 1, 2023. 
5 The county development excise tax had been suspended since 2014, but the suspension ended in fiscal 2026. 
6 The rates shown reflect the public school and library impact fee total. 
7 The impact fee was increased from $6,000 to $10,000 – effective March 1, 2025 – pursuant to Bill No. 24-033. 
8 The fiscal 2024, 2025, and 2026 amounts represent the total of the roads tax amount ($1.90/sq. ft., $1.90/sq. ft., and 
$1.92/sq. ft., respectively) and the school surcharge amount ($7.87/sq. ft., $8.15/sq. ft., and $8.35/sq. ft., respectively). 
9 Amounts shown in the table represent the highest rates, that only apply in certain areas. The fiscal 2026 amount 
represents $31,301 for schools in turnover impact areas and $28,553 for transportation in yellow and green policy 
areas. (In fiscal 2026, the other transportation rates are $22,841 in orange policy areas and $9,139 in red policy areas, 
and the other schools rate, in infill impact areas, is $30,005.) 
10 Amounts shown in the table represent the total of the school facilities and public safety/behavioral health amounts. 
The fiscal 2026 amount represents $20,972 for school facilities and $9,903 for public safety/behavioral health. A 
lower school facilities rate ($12,220 in fiscal 2026) applies inside the beltway and to certain development near mass 
transit, and a lower public safety/behavioral health rate ($3,303 in fiscal 2026) applies inside Transportation Service 
Area 1 as defined in the Prince George’s County Approved General Plan and to certain development near mass transit. 
11 A lower rate ($8,080 in fiscal 2026) applies to development inside municipalities. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
 
HB 548/ Page 10 
 
County Development Impact Fee and Excise Tax Revenues 
Fiscal 2024-2026 
 
FY 2024-2025 
FY 2025-2026 
County 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Difference 
% Difference 
Difference 
% Difference 
Anne Arundel 
$26,733,231 
$15,890,000 
$18,144,000 
-$10,843,231 
-40.6% 
$2,254,000 
14.2% 
Baltimore1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Calvert 
729,097 
2,650,094 
634,314 
1,920,997 
263.5% 
-2,015,780 
-76.1% 
Caroline 
100,284 
100,575 
100,000 
291 
0.3% 
-575 
-0.6% 
Carroll 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Charles 
13,399,715 
14,385,288 
15,574,000 
985,573 
7.4% 
1,188,712 
8.3% 
Dorchester2 
0 
0 
75,000 
0 
0.0% 
75,000 
- 
Frederick 
21,569,252 
18,167,170 
20,106,910 
-3,402,082 
-15.8% 
1,939,740 
10.7% 
Harford 
2,805,000 
4,241,956 
6,000,000 
1,436,956 
51.2% 
1,758,044 
41.4% 
Howard 
16,269,060 
19,400,000 
20,000,000 
3,130,940 
19.2% 
600,000 
3.1% 
Montgomery 
15,574,734 
29,464,000 
13,832,000 
13,889,266 
89.2% 
-15,632,000 
-53.1% 
Prince George’s 
52,116,000 
67,780,660 
48,000,000 
15,664,661 
30.1% 
-19,780,660 
-29.2% 
Queen Anne’s 
2,863,257 
2,606,546 
2,629,939 
-256,711 
-9.0% 
23,393 
0.9% 
St. Mary’s 
1,342,508  
1,500,000  
1,500,000  
157,492 
11.7% 
0 
0.0% 
Talbot 
769,787 
993,000 
1,602,272 
223,213 
29.0% 
609,272 
61.4% 
Washington 
1,143,263 
2,038,226 
600,000 
894,963 
78.3% 
-1,438,226 
-70.6% 
Total 
$155,415,187 
$179,217,515 
$148,798,435  
$23,802,328 
15.3% 
-$30,419,080 
-17.0% 
 
n/a:  not available at the time of publication 
 
1 The county imposes a development impact surcharge on new nonresidential construction and a development impact fee on new residential 
construction; however, minimal revenues have been collected from the surcharge and fee to date and substantial revenues are not expected in 
fiscal 2026. 
2 The county development excise tax had been suspended since 2014, but the suspension ended in fiscal 2026. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 10