START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 512 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 512 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Board of License Commissioners and Part-Time 
Inspectors - Compensation 
 
   
This bill increases the annual salary of the chair of the Anne Arundel County Board of 
License Commissioners from a maximum of $18,000 to at least $21,240, increases the 
annual salary of other board members from a maximum of $15,000 to at least $17,700, and 
increases the salary of part-time inspectors from $7,000 to at least $8,260. The bill requires 
salaries to include any cost-of-living increase available to similar county employees, and 
specifies the salary of the deputy chief inspector must be at least $18,000. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County salary expenditures increase by at least 
$33,716 annually beginning in FY 2027. Anne Arundel County revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 512/ Page 2 
The Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners has three members, appointed 
by the Governor. If the Senate is in session, they are appointed with the advice and consent 
of the Senate as well. Each member of the board must be (1) a resident and voter of the 
county and (2) an individual of high character, integrity, and recognized business capacity. 
No more than two members of the board may be of the same political party. The Governor 
also designates a chair from among the members of the board.  
 
The chair of the board must receive an annual salary up to $18,000, and all other board 
members must receive an annual salary up to $15,000. All members also receive 
reimbursement for reasonably incurred expenses. 
 
The board is authorized to employ a part-time deputy chief inspector at an annual salary of 
$18,000, and 18 part-time inspectors at salaries of $7,000 each. Inspectors also receive a 
monthly $300 expense allowance. In enforcing alcoholic beverages laws in  
Anne Arundel County, an inspector has all the powers of a peace officer or sheriff and may 
serve a summons and issue a civil citation for a license violation, as specified.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Anne Arundel County advises expenditures increase by at least 
$33,716 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. This estimate reflects salary increases for the 
board chair ($3,240 increase), two board members ($2,700 increase per member), and 
18 part-time inspectors ($1,260 increase per inspector). This estimate does not include a 
cost‑of-living adjustment (COLA), as the county advises that the COLA for fiscal 2027 
will be established through the county budget process. County expenditures increase 
further to at least $34,390 in fiscal 2028 and $36,495 in fiscal 2031, assuming a 2% COLA 
each year.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 401 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2