START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 529 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 529 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Department of Legislative 
Services - Code Revision) 
Health 
 
 
Code Revision - Health - Maryland Medical Assistance Program 
 
   
This bill revises, restates, and recodifies the laws of the State related to the Maryland 
Medicaid program. The bill clarifies language and makes technical and stylistic changes.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s provisions are intended as nonsubstantive revisions, 
restatements, and recodifications; there is no fiscal impact. 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill repeals, recodifies, and reorganizes Medicaid 
provisions, including correcting cross‑references and making stylistic changes. The terms 
“alcohol and drug abuse,” “substance abuse,” and “substance abusing” are replaced with 
“substance use disorder” and “with substance use disorders” to reflect terminology 
currently used in the behavioral health community. The bill also repeals and repeats 
specified provisions as they relate to the Maryland Children’s Health Program to reflect 
the reorganization of the title. 
 
The bill states the intent of the General Assembly that, except as expressly provided, the 
bill must be construed as a nonsubstantive revision and may not otherwise be construed to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 529/ Page 2 
make any substantive change in the law. Any revisor’s notes in the bill are not law and may 
not be considered to have been enacted as part of the bill.  
 
The bill authorizes the publisher of the Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with 
and subject to the approval of the Department of Legislative Services (DLS), to correct 
cross-references and terminology rendered incorrect by the bill or by any other Act of the 
General Assembly of 2026 that affects provisions enacted by the bill with no further action 
required by the General Assembly. The publisher must adequately describe any correction 
in an editor’s note following the section affected. 
 
Additional Comments:  While not part of the DLS formal code revision project, which 
was completed in 2016 with the reenactment of the Alcoholic Beverages Article, this 
revision was initiated by DLS under its statutory responsibility to maintain the clarity, 
simplicity, and consistency of style of statutory law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 244 (The President)(By Request - Department of Legislative 
Services - Code Revision) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2