START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 599 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 599 
(Delegates Hill and Smith) 
Health 
 
 
Health - Licensure of Hospitals - Ownership Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a hospital, in order to be licensed on or after October 1, 2026, to 
(1) qualify as a nonprofit organization under federal law and (2) be registered as a nonprofit 
organization with the State. A hospital licensed on or after October 1, 2026, must maintain 
status as a nonprofit organization as a condition of licensure. Ownership of a licensed 
hospital may be transferred only to a nonprofit organization. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Hospital Licensure 
 
A person desiring to open a hospital, to continue the operation of an existing hospital, or 
to change the classification of an existing hospital must obtain a certificate of need (CON) 
or an exemption from the Maryland Health Care Commission. After obtaining a CON or 
an exemption, an application must be filed with the Office of Health Care Quality in the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), which licenses and oversees qualified hospitals. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 599/ Page 2 
State Oversight of Nonprofit Organizations 
 
The Secretary of State (SOS) registers and oversees charitable organizations in the State 
and maintains an online database of registered entities. 
 
A charitable organization is a person that: 
 
 
is or holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, eleemosynary, humane, 
patriotic, philanthropic, or religious organization; and 
 
either (1) solicits or receives charitable contributions from the public; or (2) is an 
ambulance, firefighting, fraternal, rescue, or police or other law enforcement 
organization when it solicits charitable contributions from the public. 
 
A charitable organization must register and receive a registration letter from SOS before it 
(1) solicits charitable contributions in the State; (2) has charitable contributions solicited 
on its behalf in the State; or (3) solicits charitable contributions outside the State if the 
organization is in the State. A registered charitable organization must submit an annual 
report to SOS, as specified. 
 
Federal Oversight of Nonprofit Organizations  
 
To qualify as a nonprofit under federal law, a hospital must meet general requirements for 
tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as well as completing a 
specified community health needs assessment, adopting specified financial assistance and 
emergency medical care policies, and meeting other requirements regarding limitations on 
charges and billing and collections. Charitable hospitals must meet both an organizational 
test and an operational test to qualify for exemption. 
 
The Internal Revenue Service uses the community benefit standard test to determine if a 
hospital is organized and operated for the charitable purpose of promoting health. To 
qualify as a nonprofit, a hospital must (1) demonstrate that it provides benefits to a class of 
people that is broad enough to benefit the community, and (2) operate to serve a public 
rather than a private interest. The following factors can demonstrate a community benefit:  
an emergency room open to all (regardless of the ability to pay), maintaining a board of 
directors drawn from the community, maintaining an open medical staff policy, and 
providing hospital care through public programs like Medicaid and Medicare. 
 
Community Health Needs Assessment 
 
Under Maryland law, “community health needs assessment” means the process required 
by the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act by which unmet community 
health care needs and priorities are identified by a nonprofit hospital in accordance with 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 599/ Page 3 
federal law. Each nonprofit hospital must solicit and consider input received from 
individuals who represent the broad interests of that community, including individuals with 
special knowledge of or expertise in public and behavioral health. 
 
In Maryland, each nonprofit hospital must conduct an annual community health needs 
assessment and submit an annual community benefits report to the Health Services Cost 
Review Commission (HSCRC) detailing the community benefits provided by the hospital 
during the preceding year. The community benefit report must include: 
 
 
the mission statement of the hospital; 
 
a list of the initiatives that were undertaken by the hospital to identify community 
health needs within the hospital’s community; 
 
the cost to the hospital of each community benefit activity; 
 
a description of how each of the listed activities addresses the community health 
needs of the hospital’s community; 
 
a description of efforts taken to evaluate the effectiveness of each community 
benefit activity; 
 
a description of gaps in the availability of providers to serve the community; 
 
a description of the hospital’s efforts to track and reduce health disparities in the 
community that the hospital serves; 
 
a list of the unmet community health needs identified in the most recent CHNA; and 
a list of tax exemptions the hospital claimed during the immediately preceding 
taxable year. 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission  
 
HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH established to contain hospital costs, 
maintain fairness in hospital payment, provide access to hospital care, and disclose 
information on the operation of hospitals in the State. HSCRC is responsible for 
implementing the Total Cost of Care Model, the successor to the Maryland All-Payer 
Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based revenues (commonly 
referred to as global budgets). 
 
HSCRC compiles the required community benefits reports and issues an annual Maryland 
Hospital Community Benefit Report. The most recent version of the report (fiscal 2023) 
can be found here. According to the report, all 49 nonprofit Maryland hospitals submitted 
their required fiscal 2023 community benefit reports. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 599/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Maryland Department of Health; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4