START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 575 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 575 
(Delegate Wilkins) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools - Student Attendance - Excused Absences for Civic Engagement 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and each local 
board of education to adopt an attendance policy for public school students that treats a 
student’s absence as excused if, during a regular session of the General Assembly, the 
student (1) testifies at a hearing of any committee of the General Assembly or (2) conducts 
civic engagement activities, as defined by the bill. An excused absence under the bill is a 
lawful absence and may not be included in a calculation of chronic absenteeism for the 
student or the school. Attendance policies and procedures under the bill must authorize a 
student to be excused for at least 15 hours or two school days to testify or conduct civic 
engagement activities. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MSDE can adopt a new attendance policy using existing resources. 
No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Local school systems can alter attendance policies and track student 
civic engagement, as defined by the bill, using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Civic engagement activities under the bill include (1) meeting with 
legislators; (2) advocating for or against legislation and policy issues; and (3) other 
activities deemed to be civic engagement by MSDE and the applicable local board. If the 
attendance policy requires a note to excuse an absence, the policy must authorize an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 575/ Page 2 
appropriate representative to provide a note or reasonable documentation to excuse the 
absence. A local board must adopt policies and procedures to carry out the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
Current Law:  A child age 5 to 17 must attend public school regularly unless the child is 
otherwise receiving regular, thorough instruction at an alternative setting (i.e., a private or 
home school). An individual who has legal custody of a child age 5 to 15 and fails to see 
that the child attends school is guilty of a misdemeanor. Compulsory attendance does not 
apply to specified individuals, including, among others, individuals who have obtained a 
high school diploma or GED, who is married or in military service, or an individual who 
is severely ill and requires home or hospital instruction. 
 
Absences from school are classified as lawful or unlawful. COMAR specifies the 
conditions that constitute a lawful absence from school. Among these conditions are 
(1) death in the immediate family; (2) illness of the student; (3) pregnancy and parenting 
conditions; (4) court summons; (5) hazardous weather conditions; (6) work approved or 
sponsored by the school; (7) observance of a religious holiday; (8) State emergency; 
(9) suspension; (10) lack of authorized transportation; or (11) other emergencies or 
circumstances which, in the judgement of the local superintendent or designee, constitutes 
a good and sufficient cause for absence from school. An absence, including absence for 
any portion of the day, for any reason other than those cited as lawful are presumed to be 
unlawful and may constitute truancy. 
 
Additional Comment:  The U.S. Department of Education defines chronic absenteeism 
as missing 10% or more of school for any reason (excused or unexcused). According to 
MSDE, absence for civic engagement would be the only type of absence that would be 
excluded from the calculation of chronic absenteeism. Thus, it is not clear if such exclusion 
is permissible under federal guidelines. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools;  
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools;  
Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Department 
of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 575/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3