START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 595 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 595 
(Delegate Lewis, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Health 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Credit for Physician Preceptors in Areas With Health Care 
Workforce Shortages - Alterations 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the State income tax credit for physician preceptors in areas 
with health care workforce shortages to include physicians who serve in a preceptorship 
program authorized by an accredited out-of-state medical school. The bill also (1) reduces 
the minimum number of community-based clinical training hours for each of the minimum 
required three rotations from 100 to 90 and (2) caps the aggregate amount of unissued 
credit that may be carried forward and issued in a subsequent year to $100,000. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the extent the 
bill increases utilization of the physician preceptors tax credit, as discussed below. 
Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A licensed physician who, during the tax year, serves without 
compensation as a physician preceptor in an area of the State identified by the  
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) as having a health care shortage may apply to 
MDH for a tax credit certificate equal to $1,000 per eligible student rotation, not to exceed 
$10,000. To be eligible for the credit, the preceptorship program must be authorized by an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 595/ Page 2 
accredited medical school in the State, and the physician preceptor must work a minimum 
of three rotations each consisting of 100 hours of community-based clinical training. The 
credit is nonrefundable and may not be carried over to any other tax year. 
 
MDH must approve qualifying applications on a first-come, first-served basis and 
generally may not issue more than $100,000 in tax credit certificates annually. However, 
any unused amount may be carried over and issued in a subsequent year. MDH must report 
to the Comptroller and the General Assembly annually on utilization of the tax credit. 
 
State Revenues:  Aggregate physician preceptor tax credit certificates averaged about 
$30,000 annually for tax years 2020 through 2024. To the extent the bill’s changes result 
in increased utilization of the tax credit, general fund revenues may decrease beginning as 
early as fiscal 2027, subject to the annual program cap as modified by the bill. Any such 
impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 466 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Health; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2