START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 563 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 563 
(Delegate Behler, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Emergency Response Animal - Prohibited Actions Against 
 
 
This bill repeals a prohibition against intentional infliction of bodily harm, permanent 
disability, or death on an animal owned or used by a law enforcement unit (except in the 
case of self-defense), which is as a felony (aggravated cruelty to animals). The bill instead 
establishes misdemeanors that (1) more broadly prohibit, except in the case of self-defense, 
specified intentional harm to, harassment of, or interference with, an “emergency response 
animal” (a dog or horse used by a law enforcement unit or in search and rescue efforts) and 
(2) are subject to a broader range of criminal penalties.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill replaces the existing prohibition on the intentional infliction of 
bodily harm, permanent disability, or death on an animal owned or used by a law 
enforcement unit (except in the case of self-defense) with provisions that more broadly 
prohibit actions against an emergency response animal. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 563/ Page 2 
“Emergency response animal” means: 
 
 
a dog used by a law enforcement unit in the State that is trained for law enforcement 
work and is subject to the control of a law enforcement officer who has completed 
handler training in accordance with the policies of the law enforcement unit that 
employs the officer; 
 
a horse used by a law enforcement unit in the State for law enforcement work; 
 
a search and rescue dog trained for or engaged in an effort directed by a State agency 
or a political subdivision of the State to locate or rescue a lost, injured, or deceased 
individual; or 
 
a horse used in a search and rescue effort directed by a State agency or a political 
subdivision of the State to locate or rescue a lost, injured, or deceased individual. 
 
The bill prohibits a person, except in the case of self-defense, from: 
 
 
intentionally harassing or interfering with an emergency response animal during the 
lawful performance of its duties; or 
 
intentionally injuring an emergency response animal. 
 
A person who violates those prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
imprisonment for up to one year and/or a fine of up to $5,000. A person who violates those 
prohibitions during the commission of another crime is subject to imprisonment for up to 
two years and/or a fine of up to $15,000. 
 
The bill also prohibits a person, except in the case of self-defense, from intentionally killing 
or causing serious physical injury to an emergency response animal, and a person who 
violates the prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a fine of up to $10,000. 
 
“Serious physical injury” means physical injury that causes permanent or protracted  
(1) disfigurement; (2) loss of function of any bodily member or organ; or (3) impairment 
of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
 
A sentence imposed under the bill’s misdemeanor provisions may be imposed separate 
from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the act 
establishing the violation of the provisions. 
 
The bill establishes that it is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating the bill’s 
prohibitions that the defendant acted reasonably to prevent physical harm resulting from a 
violation of the Maryland Use of Force Statute. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 563/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Intentional Harm to a Law Enforcement Animal 
 
A person may not, except in the case of self-defense, intentionally inflict bodily harm, 
permanent disability, or death on an animal owned or used by a law enforcement unit. A 
person who violates the prohibition is guilty of the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals 
and subject to imprisonment for up to three years and/or a fine of up to $5,000. 
 
Under provisions broadly applicable to crimes against animals, including the felony of 
aggravated cruelty to animals, a sentence imposed may be separate from and consecutive 
to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing the criminal 
violation. 
 
Maryland Use of Force Statute 
 
The Maryland Use of Force Statute (referenced in the bill), among other things, prohibits 
a police officer from using force against a person unless, under the totality of the 
circumstances, the force is necessary and proportional to (1) prevent an imminent threat of 
physical injury to a person or (2) effectuate a legitimate law enforcement objective. A 
police officer must cease the use of force as soon as (1) the person on whom the force is 
used is under the police officer’s control or no longer poses an imminent threat of physical 
injury or death to the police officer or to another person or (2) the police officer determines 
that force will no longer accomplish a legitimate law enforcement objective. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  By repealing the felony offense for specified intentional 
harm to an animal owned or used by a law enforcement unit (except in cases of 
self-defense) and establishing, instead, misdemeanor offenses for intentional harm to, 
harassment of, or interference with an emergency response animal (except in cases of 
self-defense), some cases may move from circuit courts (where felonies typically are heard) 
to the District Court (where misdemeanors are typically heard). However, some cases 
under the bill may remain in circuit courts due to the amount of the applicable maximum 
penalties. 
 
Any effect the bill has on monetary or incarceration penalties imposed for intentionally 
harming, harassing, or interfering with an emergency response animal is not expected to 
significantly affect State or local government finances. The Judiciary indicates that there 
have been relatively few felony convictions for intentionally harming a law enforcement 
animal under current law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 563/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 360 (Senator Henson, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4