START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 518 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 518 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Gaming - Problem Gambling and College Athlete Protections 
 
 
This bill requires the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) to adopt 
regulations to reduce or mitigate the effects of problem gambling, which must include 
establishing a voluntary exclusion list, as well as means for a sober and informed individual 
to request placement on the exclusion list, for the following:  State lottery, fantasy 
competitions, and sports wagering. SLGCC must provide contact information for 
individuals placed on specified voluntary exclusion lists to the Maryland Center of 
Excellence on Problem Gambling unless individuals decline to have their information 
shared. A sports wagering licensee may not offer or accept a wager, and an individual may 
not place a wager, on a player-specific proposition bet on a participant in a collegiate sports 
or athletic event. Sports wagering licensees must provide certain safeguards, controls, and 
mechanisms to assist individuals who may have a gambling problem. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect gaming revenues. The State Lottery and 
Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA), Morgan State University (MSU), Bowie State 
University (BSU), the University of Maryland School of Medicine, and the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can likely implement the bill with existing 
resources, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 518/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By August 1, 2026, SLGCC must update its application form for 
placement on SLGCC’s voluntary exclusion list to include a “No Contact” box regarding 
being contacted by the center. 
 
Sports wagering licensees must annually provide transactional data and metrics as specified 
to MSU, BSU, and the University of Maryland School of Medicine. 
 
The bill defines a “proposition bet” as a wager on an individual action, statistic, occurrence, 
or nonoccurrence, whether related to an individual player or team, the outcome of which is 
not directly connected to the final outcome or final score of a sporting event. 
 
Current Law:  SLGCC must adopt regulations to reduce or mitigate effects of problem 
gambling. The regulations must include establishment of a voluntary list of individuals 
with gambling problems who request to be excluded from any video lottery operation in 
the State, as well as means for a sober and informed individual to request placement on the 
exclusion list for a specified time period. A video lottery operation licensee may not permit 
an individual on the voluntary exclusion list to enter into the video lottery facility or to play 
a video lottery terminal (VLT). SLGCC may impose sanctions on a licensee for knowingly 
failing to exclude from the premises an individual on the voluntary exclusion list. 
 
Sports Wagering and Fantasy Competitions 
 
Chapter 492 of 2020, a constitutional amendment approved by the voters at the 
November 2020 general election, authorized sports and event wagering, contingent upon 
implementation legislation passed by the General Assembly. Chapter 356 of 2021 
implemented sports wagering in the State and provides for regulation of sports wagering 
and fantasy gaming competitions. Chapter 604 of 2025 increased the mobile sports 
wagering tax rate from 15% to 20%. Mobile sports wagering licensees receive 80% of 
mobile sports wagering proceeds, while all other licensees receive 85% of proceeds from 
sports wagering and fantasy gaming. Beginning in fiscal 2026, 5% of mobile sports 
wagering proceeds (i.e., 25% of State mobile sports wagering revenues) is distributed to 
the general fund and the remainder is distributed to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
Fund, which supports public education. Any winnings on a sports event not claimed within 
182 days after the wager is won revert to the Problem Gambling Fund. 
 
Problem Gambling 
 
Video lottery operation licensees must pay an annual fee of $425 per VLT for a 
Problem Gambling Fund administered by MDH, and SLGCC has established an annual fee 
of $500 per table game for the Problem Gambling Fund. The Problem Gambling Fund is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 518/ Page 3 
used to fund programs to treat and prevent gambling addiction. After satisfying specified 
requirements, any unspent funds in the Problem Gambling Fund may be expended by MDH 
on drug and other addiction treatment services. 
 
The Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling is a program of the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine and funded by MDH’s Behavioral Health 
Administration through the Problem Gambling Fund. The primary goal of the center is to 
minimize the risks and problems associated with gambling in the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SLGCA directed sports wagering operators to stop taking 
player-specific proposition bets on a participant in a collegiate sports or athletic event as 
of March 1, 2024, so that provision of the bill codifies existing practice. 
 
In 2011, SLGCA instituted a self-help program for individuals who wish to voluntarily 
exclude themselves from casino or lottery play. The program is also available at 
SLGCA-regulated bingo halls in Anne Arundel and Calvert counties and for sports 
wagering and daily fantasy sports. Thus, SLGCA can use existing resources to modify their 
voluntary exclusion program to have individuals opt out of having their information shared 
with the Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling. 
 
MDH anticipates increased demand for services at the Maryland Center of Excellence on 
Problem Gambling as a result of contact information of individuals on the voluntary 
exclusion list being shared with the center. MDH can likely handle an increase in demand 
for services with existing resources, but to the extent that there is a significant influx, MDH 
may need additional resources. 
 
Sports wagering licensees must annually provide transactional data and metrics as specified 
to MSU, BSU, and the University of Maryland School of Medicine. BSU anticipates 
needing two data analysts and a project manager to analyze this data and to publish reports 
and studies based on this data, with costs totaling $700,000 annually. However, the bill 
does not mandate what MSU, BSU, and the University of Maryland School of Medicine 
must do with the transactional data. As such, MSU, BSU, and the University of Maryland 
School of Medicine can receive the data with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 465 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 518/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4