START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 586 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 586 
(Delegate Behler, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
County Boards of Library Trustees - Membership - Student Member 
 
 
This bill authorizes a county board of library trustees to provide for the selection of a 
student member. The bill also establishes the qualifications, term of office, and voting 
rights of the student member, if selected. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A student member must be selected by a process established by the board. 
The student member of a board must: 
 
 
be a junior or senior year student enrolled in a public or nonpublic high school or a 
home instruction program in the county that the library serves, who is of good 
character and, in the case of a student enrolled in a public or nonpublic high school, 
is in good standing in the student’s high school; 
 
be selected in the student’s sophomore or junior year by a method established by 
the board; 
 
have an interest in library matters; and 
 
serve a term of one year. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 586/ Page 2 
A student member selected to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term (1) serves only for the 
remainder of that term and (2) is eligible for selection for a full term if the student meets 
the eligibility requirements noted above. 
 
Generally, a student member of a board may vote on all policy matters before the board. 
However, a board may adopt a policy or bylaw to authorize a student member to vote on 
additional nonpolicy matters. 
 
Current Law:  State law generally requires county boards of library trustees to consist of 
seven members appointed by the county governing body from nominees submitted by the 
boards of library trustees. (Generally, the county governing body does not directly select 
nominees.) Members serve without compensation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 535 (Senator King) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset 
counties; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland State Library Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2