START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 501 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 501 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Sexual Offense by a Person in a Position of Authority 
 
 
This bill (1) increases the penalties for existing sexual crimes involving a “person in a 
position of authority”; (2) establishes a new sexual crime involving a person in a position 
of authority, subject to a specified penalty; (3) requires specified individuals to register as 
Tier III sex offenders; and (4) designates a sexual offense by a person in a position of 
authority as a qualifying crime for sexual solicitation of a minor.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Person in a Position of Authority – Definitions and Prohibited Acts 
 
The bill relocates existing statutory provisions pertaining to sexual crimes committed by a 
“person in a position of authority,” including the definition of that term, from § 3-308 of 
the Criminal Law Article (sexual offense in the fourth degree) to a new and independent 
statutory section (§ 3-308.1 of the Criminal Law Article). The bill increases the penalties 
for these existing offenses. Under the bill, a person convicted of the standard offense 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 501/ Page 2 
(named “misdemeanor sexual offense by a person in a position of authority” under the bill) 
is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to three years and/or a 
$1,000 maximum fine (the current penalty is one year/$1,000).  
 
The bill establishes a new sexual offense by prohibiting a person from committing sexual 
offense by a person in a position of authority involving a child younger than age 13. 
Violators are guilty of felony sexual offense by a person in a position of authority, which 
is punishable by imprisonment for up to 15 years and/or a $25,000 maximum fine. 
 
A person convicted of the offenses above (including the new offense) who was previously 
convicted of specified offenses (same prior convictions as under current law), is guilty of 
a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 25 years and/or a $50,000 maximum fine 
(currently a misdemeanor, three years/$1,000). 
 
Unless specifically charged by the State, a violation of these provisions may not be 
considered a lesser included crime of any other crime. A sentence imposed under these 
provisions may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any 
crime based on the act establishing the violation of these provisions. 
 
Sex Offender Registration 
 
Consistent with existing statute, individuals convicted of misdemeanor sexual offense by 
a person in a position of authority continue to register as Tier I sex offenders. However, 
the bill requires individuals convicted of the new crime or under the repeat offender 
provisions to register as Tier III sex offenders. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Sexual Offense in the Fourth Degree 
 
A “person in a position of authority” is a person who is (1) at least age 21 and works for 
remuneration or as a volunteer for a public or private preschool, elementary school, or 
secondary school, or (2) at least age 22 and works for remuneration or as a volunteer for a 
“program” and exercises supervision over or works or interacts with one or more minors 
who attend the school or participate in the program. A person in a position of authority 
includes a principal, vice principal, teacher, coach, or school counselor at a public or private 
preschool, elementary school, or secondary school. 
 
A “program” means an individual, a business, a religious or faith-based institution, or an 
organization that provides, on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, instructional, coaching, 
recreational, spiritual, character-building, or supervisory services or activities for minors, 
including (1) sports, music, dance, art, or martial arts coaching or instruction; (2) tutoring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 501/ Page 3 
or academic enrichment; (3) day care or after school care; (4) scouting; or (5) day or 
overnight camping. “Program” also means any unit of local, State, or federal government. 
 
The fourth-degree sexual offense statute prohibits a person from (1) engaging in sexual 
contact with another without the consent of the other or (2) except as prohibited under the 
third-degree sexual offense statute, engaging in a sexual act or vaginal intercourse with a 
victim who is age 14 or 15 and the person performing the act is at least 4 years older than 
the victim. 
 
Except as prohibited under the third-degree sexual offense statute or the prohibitions above, 
a person in a position of authority may not engage in a sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal 
intercourse with a minor who, at the time of the sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal 
intercourse (1) is a student enrolled at a school where the person in a position of authority 
works or (2) is participating in a program for which the person in a position of authority 
works and is at least six years younger than the person in a position of authority. 
 
Fourth-degree sexual offense is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. However, an increased penalty of imprisonment 
for up to three years and/or a $1,000 maximum fine applies to a person who has been 
convicted on a prior occasion not arising from the same incident of violations of specified 
sexual crimes under State law. The specified crimes are:  first-degree rape; second‑degree 
rape; third-degree sexual offense; fourth-degree sexual offense; attempted rape in the first 
degree; attempted rape in the second degree; attempted sexual offense in the first-degree 
(as it existed before October 1, 2017); attempted sexual offense in the second degree (as it 
existed before October 1, 2017); continuing course of conduct with a child; and sexual 
abuse of a minor. 
 
Imposition of the subsequent offender penalty is subject to specified procedural 
requirements. Unless specifically charged by the State, a violation of the fourth-degree 
sexual offense statute may not be considered a lesser included crime of any other crime. 
There is a three-year statute of limitations for prosecution of a fourth-degree sexual offense 
involving a person in a position of authority or sexual contact with a minor without the 
consent of the minor.  
 
Sexual Solicitation of a Minor – § 3-324 of the Criminal Law Article   
 
“Solicit” means to command, authorize, urge, entice, request, or advise a person by any 
means, including (1) in person; (2) through an agent or agency; (3) over the telephone; 
(4) through any print medium; (5) by mail; (6) by computer or Internet; or (7) by any other 
electronic means.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 501/ Page 4 
A person may not, with the intent to commit any of the crimes listed below, knowingly 
solicit a minor, or a law enforcement officer posing as a minor, to engage in activities that 
would be unlawful for the person to engage in under the laws on (1) rape in the 
second degree; (2) sexual offense in the third degree; (3) engaging in prostitution;  
(4) receiving the earnings of a prostitute; (5) abduction of a child younger than age 16 for 
the commission of a sexual crime; (6) procuring or soliciting prostitution; (7) maintaining 
a house of prostitution; or (8) production or distribution of child pornography.  
 
Statute also prohibits a person who intends to commit any of the crimes listed above from 
knowingly soliciting the consent of a parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor, or a law 
enforcement officer posing as such a person, to engage in activities with the minor that 
would be unlawful for the person to engage in under the laws corresponding to those 
crimes.  
 
A violation of either prohibition is a felony with a maximum penalty of (1) imprisonment 
for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up to $25,000 for a first offense or (2) imprisonment for 
up to 20 years and/or a fine of up to $50,000 for a second or subsequent offense.  
 
Sex Offender Registration  
 
Generally, a person convicted of a sex crime or other specified crime in Maryland, 
including kidnapping and false imprisonment, is required to register with the State sex 
offender registry upon release from incarceration or release from court if the person did 
not receive a sentence with a term of incarceration. Offenders who are required to register 
in other states and who come to Maryland are required to register upon entering Maryland. 
Offenders from other states who may not be required to register in the home state are 
required to register in Maryland if the crime would have required registration in Maryland 
if committed in Maryland.  
 
A Tier I sex offender must register in person every six months with a local law enforcement 
unit for 15 years. A Tier II sex offender must register in person every six months with a 
local law enforcement unit for 25 years. A Tier III sex offender must register in person 
every three months with a local law enforcement unit for the life of the registrant.  
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  
 
Misdemeanors to Felonies 
 
Generally, changing crimes from misdemeanors to felonies means that (1) such cases are 
likely to be filed in the circuit courts rather than the District Court and (2) some persons 
may eventually serve longer incarcerations due to more stringent penalty provisions, 
applicable to some offenses for prior felony convictions. Accordingly, it is assumed that 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 501/ Page 5 
this bill shifts an unknown number of cases from the District Court to the circuit courts. It 
is not known whether such a prospective shift may spur more plea bargains and affect 
actual sentencing practices for this offense. However, as the data below indicates, this 
analysis assumes that the bill’s changes do not materially affect State or local operations 
or finances 
 
Relevant Offense Data 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of violations and guilty dispositions in the 
District Court and the circuit courts over the last two fiscal years for sexual offense in the 
fourth degree by a person in a position of authority.  
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Violations and Guilty Dispositions  
Sexual Offense in the Fourth Degree – Person in a Position of Authority  
Fiscal 2024 and 2025 
 
 
Fiscal 2024 
Fiscal 2025 
 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
District Court 
 
 
 
 
Sexual Act/Conduct with 
a Minor 
 
19 
0 
7 
0 
Vaginal Intercourse with 
a Minor 
2 
0 
3 
1 
Circuit Courts 
 
 
 
 
Sexual Act/Conduct with 
a Minor 
 
34 
10 
25 
0 
Vaginal Intercourse with 
a Minor 
1 
0 
3 
0 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 501/ Page 6 
Other Impacts of the Bill 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the operations or finances of the Maryland 
State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy, Office of the Public Defender, the 
Judiciary, and the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 407 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counites; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6