START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 531 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 531 
(Delegate Wu, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools STEM and Robotics Program Task Force - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Public Schools Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Mathematics (STEM) and Robotics Program Task Force to (1) collect specified 
information regarding existing STEM and robotics programs in public schools in the 
State and other states; (2) study the feasibility of implementing competitive STEM and 
robotics programs in public schools throughout the State, including potential approaches 
and resources needed; and (3) make recommendations on establishing competitive robotics 
programs as varsity sports in every public high school in the State. The Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) must provide staff for the task force. A member of the 
task force may not receive compensation as a member of the task force but is entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses. The task force must by December 15, 2026, report its findings 
and recommendations to General Assembly and specified committees of the 
General Assembly, including specified standing committees. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can likely staff the task force with existing resources. Any expense 
reimbursements are assumed to be minimal and absorbable with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Representatives from local school systems can participate in the task force 
with existing resources. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 531/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 681 and 682 of 2016 established the Robotics Grant Program to 
increase the number of robotics programs in the State. As expanded under Chapter 428 of 
2019, the program may provide grants to public schools and nonprofit organizations that 
(1) provide youth with an out-of-school-time experience that focuses on personal and 
workforce development and (2) serve public school students as a majority of its 
participating youth. Schools and nonprofit organizations proposing a new robotics club or 
with an existing robotics program or club are eligible for a grant. Nonprofit organizations 
must be associated with a public school to be eligible. The Governor must appropriate at 
least $350,000 in the annual State budget for the program. 
 
MSDE advises that the Robotics Grant Program supports 30 grantees across  
11 local school systems and 4 non-profit organizations, which support robotics programs 
at over 30 high schools, 12 middle schools, and 45 elementary schools. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
me/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2