START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 532 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 532 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Employment Standards - Firefighters - Payment of Wages and Payroll 
Information 
 
 
This bill requires a governmental unit that employs a firefighter to pay overtime wages for 
each hour over 168 hours that a firefighter works during a 28-day work period. A county 
or municipality must provide a firefighter (1) at the time of hiring and at the time of any 
change of the firefighter’s rate of pay, notice of the firefighter’s rate of pay, the regular pay 
periods, and the firefighter’s overtime rates of pay and (2) for each pay period, a statement 
of the hours worked, gross earnings, and deductions. The bill specifies the grievance 
process if a county or municipality fails to pay wages due or provide the required 
information. In specified circumstances, a firefighter is entitled to wages and damages. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) are likely 
not materially affected. The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) and the Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH) can handle enforcement of the bill with existing resources, 
as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures likely increase, potentially significantly in 
some jurisdictions, beginning in FY 2027 to pay additional overtime wages to firefighters 
or hire more firefighters. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In calculating overtime hours for a firefighter, the employer must include 
all regularly scheduled hours and, if the firefighter used earned or accrued leave during all 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 532/ Page 2 
or part of the regularly scheduled hours, may not be required to include earned or accrued 
leave in excess of 42 hours per week. A governmental unit may not be determined to have 
violated the overtime pay requirements if it pays overtime wages using an average of no 
more than 42 hours per week and a work period of between 7 and 28 days or is a party to 
a firefighter collective bargaining agreement that defines a shift as 42 hours per week. 
 
The bill applies prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on 
or application to any collective bargaining agreements in effect before October 1, 2026. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, an employer is required to pay an 
overtime wage of at least 1.5 times the usual hourly wage for each hour over 40 hours that 
an employee works during one work week. However, the definition of “employer” in the 
Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law generally does not include units of government except 
for specific provisions, like the minimum wage requirement. Thus, a unit of government is 
not subject to overtime provisions under Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law. For additional 
related information, see the Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law. 
 
Maryland’s Wage Payment and Collection Law regulates the payment of wages by 
employers in the State. Unless otherwise specified, the definition of “employer” in the 
State’s Wage Payment and Collection Law does not include units of government. Under 
Maryland’s Wage Payment and Collection Law, an employer must give to each employee 
at the time of hiring, written notice of the employee’s rate of pay, the regular paydays that 
the employer sets, and leave benefits, and for each pay period, a written statement on the 
physical pay stub or the online pay statement that includes: 
 
 
the employer’s name registered with the State, address, and telephone number; 
 
the date of payment and the beginning and ending dates of the pay period; 
 
the number of hours worked during the pay period, unless the employee is exempt 
from federal and State overtime requirements; 
 
the rates of pay; 
 
the gross and net pay earned during the pay period; 
 
the amount and name of all deductions; 
 
a list of additional bases of pay, including bonuses, commissions on sales, or other 
bases; and 
 
the applicable piece rates of pay and the number of pieces completed at each piece 
rate for each employee paid at a piece rate. 
 
An employer must provide notice of any change in a payday or wage at least one pay period 
in advance, but an employer is not prohibited from increasing an employee’s wages without 
advance notice. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 532/ Page 3 
Federal Fair Labor Standards Act 
 
Under Section 7(k) of the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), employees engaged 
in fire protection or law enforcement may be paid overtime on a “work period” basis. The 
regulations establish the maximum allowable non-overtime hours as 212 hours per  
28-day period for firefighters. Under certain prescribed conditions, a State or local 
government agency may give compensatory time, at a rate of not less than 1.5 hours for 
each overtime hour worked, in lieu of cash overtime compensation. Employees engaged in 
police and fire protection work may accrue up to 480 hours of compensatory time. When 
the state law differs from the federal FLSA, an employer must comply with the standard 
most protective to employees. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) within the Maryland 
Department of Transportation employs 99 firefighters at the Baltimore/Washington 
International Thurgood Marshall Airport. These firefighters are scheduled to work 
seven 24-hour shifts in a 28-day period, totaling 168 hours in a 28-day period. Since 
firefighters are not scheduled to work more than 168 hours in a 28-day period, the bill has 
no immediate fiscal effect. To the extent that there are unscheduled absences, and 
firefighters are required to work more than 168 hours in a 28-day period, TTF expenditures 
may increase. However, MAA advises that it currently pays overtime when firefighters 
work more than 24 hours in a shift, so the bill does not substantially change existing 
practice. 
 
Under current law, MD Labor investigates and enforces complaints regarding overtime 
pay. Under the bill, a firefighter employed by a county or municipality, or the firefighter’s 
exclusive representative, may file a grievance under any applicable grievance procedure or 
collective bargaining agreement if the county or municipality does not provide specified 
payroll information or wages due. This grievance process enables a firefighter to recover 
wages from failure to pay overtime wages, so some firefighters may opt to file grievances 
under this process instead of having MD Labor enforce overtime pay. However, to the 
extent that MD Labor receives additional complaints, MD Labor can likely investigate 
those complaints with existing resources. 
 
Under current law, OAH has authority to conduct hearings involving grievances and 
disciplinary appeals of specified State employees, and additionally hears contested cases 
regarding wage payments referred by MD Labor. Thus, to the extent that firefighters 
employed by the State file overtime wage grievances, OAH can likely handle an increase 
in cases with existing resources. Additionally, OAH notes that it needs to train 
administrative law judges on substantive aspects of the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill has no effect on local jurisdictions that do not employ 
firefighters, like Allegany, Dorchester, Garrett, and Harford counties. Baltimore, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 532/ Page 4 
Prince George’s, and Wicomico counties note that there is no fiscal impact as they 
currently pay firefighters overtime wages in accordance with the requirements of the bill. 
 
However, if local jurisdictions employ firefighters, depending on how overtime for 
firefighters is currently calculated, overtime expenditures likely increase, potentially 
significantly. Federal law generally requires governments to pay firefighters overtime 
wages after 212 hours are worked in a 28-day period, and under the bill, local jurisdictions 
must pay overtime wages after 168 hours are worked in a 28-day period. 
 
The Maryland Municipal League notes that fewer than 10 municipalities have paid 
firefighters as employees, but for those municipalities that do employ firefighters, 
expenditures may increase, potentially significantly, depending on how municipalities 
currently calculate overtime beginning in fiscal 2027. A few local jurisdictions, such as 
Frederick, Howard, and Montgomery counties estimate their personnel costs increasing by 
millions of dollars as a result of paying additional overtime wages or hiring more 
firefighters to cover shifts. Expenditures may increase further if grievances are filed and 
damages are awarded. 
 
Additionally, local jurisdictions with firefighters must comply with the bill’s payroll 
reporting requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 124 and HB 205 of 2025 and SB 1117 and HB 900 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 445 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany, Baltimore, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, and Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of Counties; cities of 
College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; U.S. Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 532/ Page 5 
Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law 
 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal Fair Labor 
Standards Act, which specifies minimum wage and overtime requirements for employers 
and employees in the State. State law specifies that an employee must be paid the greater 
of the federal minimum wage (which is currently $7.25 per hour) or $15.00 per hour. 
However, an employer may pay 85% of the State minimum wage rate to employees 
younger than age 18. 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law and minimum wage requirements do not apply to 
certain categories of employees, including those defined as administrative, executive, or 
professional; certain seasonal employees; part-time employees younger than age 16; 
salesmen and those who work on commission; an employer’s immediate family; 
drive-in theater employees; employees training in a special education program in a public 
school; employees of an establishment that sells food and drink for on-premises 
consumption and has an annual gross income of $400,000 or less; employees employed by 
an employer who is engaged in canning, freezing, packing, or first processing of perishable 
or seasonal fresh fruits, vegetables, poultry, or seafood; certain farm workers; specified 
minor league baseball players; and covered employees under the Secure Maryland Wage 
Act. 
 
Generally, the employer of a tipped employee is allowed a tip credit that can be applied 
against the direct wages paid by the employer. The employee can be paid tipping wages so 
long as the wages plus the tips received equal at least the minimum wage, the employee 
retains all tips, and the employee customarily receives more than $30.00 a month in tips. 
The tip credit is equal to the State minimum wage, less $3.63. Thus, the wage paid by 
employers to tipped employees is $3.63 as long as their wages plus tips equal the minimum 
wage. 
 
Under Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, an employer is required to pay an overtime wage 
of at least 1.5 times the usual hourly wage for each hour over 40 hours that an employee 
works during one work week. This requirement does not apply to an employer that is 
subject to federal rail laws; a nonprofit concert promoter, legitimate theater, music festival, 
music pavilion, or theatrical show; or specified amusement or recreational establishments. 
It also does not apply to an employee for whom the U.S. Secretary of Transportation sets 
qualifications and maximum hours of service under federal law; a mechanic, parts person, 
or salesperson, under certain conditions; a driver employed by a taxicab operator; or 
specified air carrier employees under certain conditions. Also, specific exemptions apply 
for farm work, bowling establishments, and infirmaries. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 532/ Page 6 
If an employer pays less than the wages required, the employee may bring an action against 
the employer to recover (1) the difference between the wage paid to the employee and the 
wage required; (2) an additional amount equal to the difference as liquidated damages; and 
(3) legal fees. The court must award these differences in wages, damages, and counsel fees 
if the court determines that an employee is entitled to recovery. However, if an employer 
shows to the satisfaction of the court that the employer acted in good faith and reasonably 
believed that the wages paid to the employee were not less than the required wages, then 
the court must award liquidated damages of an amount less than the difference in wages or 
no liquidated damages. 
 
A person who pays or agrees to pay less than the required wages is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $1,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 6