START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 582 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 582 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Voter Registration 
Requirement PG 318–26 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement that individuals must be registered voters to apply for 
specified alcoholic beverages licenses in Prince George’s County. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill repeals the requirement, in Prince George’s 
County, that an individual must be a registered voter to apply for the following licenses:   
 
 
a class C (country club) beer, wine, and liquor license; 
 
a class C (country and golf club) beer, wine, and liquor license; 
 
a class B/ECF (educational conference facility) beer, wine, and liquor license; 
 
a class B-ECF/DS (education conference facility/dining service) beer, wine, and 
liquor license; and 
 
a class C (yacht club) beer, wine, and liquor license;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 582/ Page 2 
The bill also repeals the registered voter requirement in the county for an application for a 
license on behalf of a sole proprietorship or partnership; and an application for a license on 
behalf of a corporation, an incorporated club, or limited liability company, as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2