START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 535 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 535 
(Delegate Arentz, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Food Establishments - Cottage Food Businesses - Maximum Annual Revenue 
 
   
This bill increases the annual maximum revenue for a cottage food business from  
$50,000 to $100,000. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase 
by $52,400 in FY 2027 for staff, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and 
ongoing costs. Potential minimal decrease in MDH general fund revenues beginning in 
FY 2027 to the extent businesses choose to operate as a cottage food business rather than 
a licensed food manufacturer, as discussed below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$52,400 
$59,000 
$61,900 
$64,800 
$67,700 
Net Effect 
($52,400) 
($59,000) 
($61,900) 
($64,800) 
($67,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local health departments (LHDs) can likely handle any increase in 
complaint investigations or inspections with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “cottage food business” is a business that (1) produces or packages 
cottage food products in a residential kitchen; (2) sells the cottage food products; and 
(3) has annual revenues from the sale of cottage food products in an amount not exceeding 
$50,000.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 535/ Page 2 
A “cottage food product” is a nonhazardous food that is sold in the State (1) directly to a 
consumer from a residence, at a farmer’s market, at a public event, by personal delivery, 
or by mail delivery, or (2) to a retail food store, including a grocery store or food 
cooperative. 
 
A cottage food business does not need to be licensed by MDH if it complies with applicable 
laws and regulations. Before selling cottage food products, the business owner must submit 
to MDH (1) documentation of successful completion of a food safety course and (2) the 
label that will be affixed to the cottage food product. MDH provides each cottage food 
business with a unique identification number, which must be included in their labeling. 
  
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that it currently provides free technical assistance to 
cottage food businesses to ensure proper product labeling and coordinates complaints and 
food-related illness investigations with LHDs.  
 
In 2022, the maximum revenue for a cottage food business was increased from $25,000 to 
$50,000. In response, MDH experienced a 12% increase in requests for unique 
identification numbers and a 19% increase in the number of cottage food businesses 
seeking to sell their products in retail food stores. Therefore, MDH assumes that increasing 
the maximum annual revenues permitted for a cottage food business to $100,000 results in 
a significant number of additional cottage food businesses entering the industry, likely 
requiring additional staff to handle the requests. 
 
Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $52,434 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring  
one part-time (50%) registered sanitarian to manage and process additional cottage food 
business requests and inquiries, issue unique identification numbers, review labels and food 
safety course completion certifications, and provide guidance to LHDs. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$43,758 
Operating Expenses 
    8,676 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$52,434 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
State Revenues:  MDH advises that, under the bill, an unknown number of businesses that 
otherwise would have applied for a food manufacturing license may instead opt to be a 
cottage food business under the increased revenue cap. To the extent that businesses choose 
to be a cottage food business rather than apply for a food manufacturing license, MDH 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 535/ Page 3 
general fund revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 due to the loss of license fees. Any 
such decrease is indeterminate but likely minimal.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Cottage food businesses may significantly increase their annual 
revenue under the bill.  
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that cottage food businesses operate out of private 
kitchens, which are not regulated by the State and are typically not designed to 
accommodate large amounts of food manufacturing like commercial kitchens. Home 
kitchens operating at a high capacity under the bill may be more likely to have food 
contamination or other safety concerns.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3