START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 587 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 587 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Procurement - Department of Transportation and Maryland Transportation 
Authority Contracts - Board of Public Works Contract Authority 
 
 
This bill repeals exemptions for capital expenditures and land purchases of $500,000 or 
more 
by 
the 
Maryland 
Department 
of 
Transportation 
(MDOT) 
and 
the 
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) in connection with State roads, bridges, and 
highways from the Board of Public Works’s (BPW) oversight and approval, thus requiring 
such contracts and land purchases to be submitted to and approved by BPW. The bill also 
repeals exemptions for the Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA), Maryland Port 
Administration (MPA), and Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) from specified notice 
requirements for capital expenditures with a value of $500,000 or more. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund (Transportation Trust Fund TTF) expenditures increase by 
$180,000 and nonbudgeted fund expenditures increase by $90,00 in FY 2027 for staffing; 
out‑year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. Delays in contract execution may 
negatively affect the cost of road, bridge, and highway projects, but any such effect cannot 
be reliably quantified. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
180,000 
212,000 
221,900 
231,900 
242,000 
NonBud Exp. 
90,000 
106,000 
110,900 
116,000 
121,000 
Net Effect 
($270,000) 
($318,100) 
($332,800) 
($347,800) 
($363,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 587/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Board of Public Works Procurement Authority 
 
BPW may control procurements by units, and may set policy, adopt regulations, and 
establish internal operational procedures regarding procurement. BPW must ensure that 
primary procurement units’ regulations establish procedures that align with general State 
procurement law and remain substantially consistent, except when specific procurement 
circumstances or unit needs require otherwise. BPW may delegate any of its authority that 
it determines appropriate to do so and may require prior board approval for specified 
procurement actions. 
 
Procurement law and regulations generally require BPW approval for construction and 
service contracts valued at more than $200,000, and for any contract funded with general 
obligation bond proceeds. However, capital expenditures by MDOT and MDTA, including 
purchases of land, in connection with State roads, bridges, or highways are not subject to 
oversight or approval by BPW; procurements by the Department of General Services 
(DGS) for the purpose of modernizing cybersecurity infrastructure for the State valued 
below $1,000,000 are similarly exempt (but not affected by the bill). 
 
Land Acquisition 
 
BPW is responsible for supervising the expenditure of any money that the 
General Assembly appropriates for the acquisition of land. Before execution, a contract for 
land acquisition must be reviewed by the Secretary of General Services and, except as 
stated in regulations on the lease of real property, must also be reviewed and approved by 
BPW; capital expenditures by MDOT and MDTA related to roads, bridges, or highways 
are exempt from these requirements. 
 
Except for capital expenditures by MAA, MPA, and MTA, at least 40 days before BPW 
may act on a land acquisition, DGS’s Land Acquisition Division must give written notice 
to the governing body of the county in which the land is located and, if the land is located 
within a municipal corporation, to the governing body of the municipal corporation. The 
governing body may submit written comments to the Land Acquisition Division within 
30 days of receiving the notice. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 587/ Page 3 
State Expenditures: 
 
Board of Public Works 
 
BPW advises that, although the bill results in an increased number of procurement items 
that are presented for review and approval by the board, it can handle any such increase 
with existing resources.  
 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
This bill has a significant operational and fiscal impact on some of MDOT’s modal units. 
Requiring BPW approval for most procurements using capital expenditures for roads, 
bridges, and highways significantly increases the number of items that MDOT needs to 
take to BPW, which creates operational inefficiencies. Considering the advanced notice of 
4.5 weeks that is required to put an item on BPW’s agenda, plus an extra 5 weeks for 
MDOT to do internal reviews prior to submission, the award of affected construction 
contracts could be delayed by at least two months and require significant staff time to 
prepare the items for presentation to and review by BPW staff and members. The delays in 
getting contract approval for MDOT procurements related to roads, bridges, and highways 
may negatively affect the costs of those projects, and the increased workload to submit 
those projects to BPW strains existing staff. Specifically, the State Highway 
Administration (SHA), and the Office of the Secretary of Transportation (TSO) cannot 
absorb the additional workload with existing resources. 
 
Accordingly, special fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $180,017 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring two BPW Coordinators (one each for SHA and TSO) to 
process contracts and perform quality assurance and quality control, as well as provide 
backup data for the increased volume of agenda items that are put before BPW. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$161,735 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 MDOT Expenditures 
$180,017 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 587/ Page 4 
Maryland Transportation Authority 
 
Similar to MDOT, MDTA cannot absorb the additional workload required to prepare 
contracts for BPW review and approval with existing resources. Accordingly, nonbudgeted 
fund expenditures increase by $90,008 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 90-day start-up 
delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one BPW Coordinator to process and perform quality assurance and quality control, as well 
as provide backup data for the increased volume of agenda items that are put before BPW. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$80,867 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 MDTA Expenditures 
$90,008 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 578 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4