START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 590 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 590 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Howard County - Transfer Tax - Use of Proceeds  
Ho. Co. 12-26 
 
 
This bill renames the Howard County Agricultural Land Preservation Fund to the 
Howard County Agricultural Preservation and Innovation Fund. The bill specifies that the 
purpose of the fund is to support the agricultural land preservation program and other 
programs, services, or initiatives to enhance the commercial viability or environmental 
sustainability of agriculture in the county. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not alter funding sources in Howard County or the 
amount of funding provided to the fund. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Howard County transfer tax rate must be set at 1.0%, with the revenue  
proceeds distributed as follows:   
 
 
25% to the School Site Acquisition and Construction Fund; 
 
25% to the Park Land Watershed Facilities Fund; and 
 
the remainder to the county general fund, with the stipulation that the county council 
use the funds as follows:  (1) 50% for the Howard County Agricultural Land 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 590/ Page 2 
Preservation Fund; (2) 25% for community improvement and housing programs 
primarily serving low‑income individuals and families and the homeless and for 
urban renewal; and (3) 25% for the acquisition or leasing of land for new fire house 
sites and training facilities and the construction and maintenance of fire house and 
training facilities, the acquisition and maintenance of fire equipment, and 
supplementation of financial needs of fire companies. 
 
Howard County is authorized to set a local transfer tax rate above the 1.0% required rate. 
The additional revenue proceeds must be distributed to the county general fund and used 
for the following purposes:   
 
 
25% for capital projects for the Howard County Public School System;  
 
25% for capital projects for the Department of Recreation and Parks;  
 
25% for community improvement and housing programs primarily serving 
low‑income individuals and families and the homeless and for urban renewal; and  
 
25% for the acquisition or leasing of land for new fire house sites and training 
facilities and the construction and maintenance of fire house and training facilities, 
the acquisition and maintenance of fire equipment, and supplementation of financial 
needs of fire companies. 
 
Local Transfer Tax Collections in Howard County 
 
Howard County imposes a 1.25% local transfer tax, with projected revenues totaling  
$38.9 million in fiscal 2026. Most of this revenue is designated for different types of capital 
related infrastructure projects and is not reflected in the operating budget. The only 
exceptions are the designated revenues for housing and community development which is 
reflected in the community renewal program fund; and the designated revenues for 
agricultural preservation which is reflected in the Agricultural Preservation and Promotion 
Fund. Based on the county’s fiscal 2026 budget, $5.8 million in transfer tax revenues is 
dedicated to the community renewal program fund and $7.8 million is dedicated to the 
agricultural preservation and promotion fund. 
 
Additional information on local transfer tax rates and revenues for Maryland counties and 
Baltimore City can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the report 
is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:   Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 590/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3