START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 502 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 502 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Governing Bodies of Common Ownership Communities - 
Member Training 
 
 
This bill generally requires each member of a board of directors or officer of a council of 
unit owners for a condominium and each member of the governing body of a homeowners 
association (HOA) to successfully complete a training curriculum on the responsibilities 
of being a member or an officer within specified timeframes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
Although local common ownership commissions and counties with coursework established 
by the local commission are authorized developers of the training curriculum, local 
governments are not explicitly required to develop or administer any training under the 
bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required training must have been developed by (1) a common 
ownership commission recognized by the State or a local government; (2) an organization 
approved to administer the training curriculum by a recognized common ownership 
commission; (3) an institution accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher 
Education; (4) a membership organization that offers nationally recognized certification 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 502/ Page 2 
credentials for community managers; or (5) a county with coursework established by the 
county common ownership commission. 
 
The training curriculum must include training on the following:   
 
 
the Maryland Homeowners Association Act, the Maryland Condominium Act, and 
the Maryland Cooperative Housing Corporation Act; 
 
roles and responsibilities of common ownership community governing bodies; 
 
fiduciary duty; 
 
responsible governance policies; 
 
legal structures and guidelines; 
 
reserves and audits; 
 
meeting procedures and requirements; 
 
handling of disputes; 
 
insurance and bonding; 
 
community maintenance; 
 
recordkeeping; and 
 
State and local resources for governing bodies. 
 
Officers and members must successfully complete the training within 90 days after 
first being elected or appointed to the office. Individuals who are in office as of the bill’s 
effective date of October 1, 2026, must successfully complete the training within 90 days 
after beginning a subsequent term. 
 
The board of directors, officers of the council of unit owners, or governing body of an 
HOA, as appropriate, must (1) certify that each member or officer successfully completes 
the training requirements; (2) retain a copy of the certificate of completion for each member 
or officer; and (3) within 90 days after the certification of the member or officer, report to 
the common ownership commission. Certificates are valid for three years and require 
renewal upon expiration. Failure to comply with the training requirement authorizes the 
relevant body to remove the individual from office or invalidate a vote of the individual. 
 
The bill’s training requirements only apply:   
 
 
to a member of a board of directors or an officer of a council of unit owners for a 
condominium that is composed solely of residential for-sale housing or consumer 
realty who serves after a required meeting to elect a board of directors for the council 
of unit owners, as specified; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 502/ Page 3 
 
to a member of the governing body of an HOA that consists solely of residential 
for‑sale housing who serves after a required meeting to elect the governing body, as 
specified. 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions do not address such training requirements for the 
governing entity of a condominium or an HOA. 
 
For more information on common ownership communities, see the Appendix – Common 
Ownership Communities. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments are not required to develop programs under the 
bill. However, local governments that exercise their authority to do so likely incur 
expenditures. For example, Prince George’s County advises that administering a training 
program would necessitate the hiring of additional staff to (1) administer and monitor 
compliance and (2) coordinate offered programs. To accomplish these tasks, the county 
reports the need to hire at least two additional staff, with expenditures of at least $200,000 
annually. Conversely, Charles County advises that due to the bill’s permissive language, 
expenditures are not impacted.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 299 of 2025 and HB 793 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles and Prince George’s counties; Office of the Attorney 
General (Consumer Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 502/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 4