START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 571 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 571 
(Delegate Allen) 
Economic Matters 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Nonprofit Housing Corporations - Taxes and Special Assessments Exemptions - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “nonprofit housing corporation” and makes subsidiary 
entities of nonprofit housing corporations exempt from State and local taxes in the same 
manner as subsidiary entities of housing authorities are currently exempt. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State property tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning 
in FY 2027 depending on the number of nonprofit housing corporations qualifying for the 
tax exemption under the bill. State expenditures are not directly affected.  
 
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning 
in FY 2027 depending on the number of nonprofit housing corporations that qualify for the 
tax exemption under the bill. Local government expenditures are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill alters the definition of nonprofit housing corporation for purposes 
of an existing tax exemption and expands the tax exemption to cover the additional entities 
included in the broader definition. Nonprofit housing corporation is defined to include a 
corporation:  (1) incorporated under the laws of the State or authorized to do business in 
the State by the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; (2) recognized by the 
Internal Revenue Service as an organization described in § 501(c)(3) of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 571/ Page 2 
Internal Revenue Code; and (3) organized and operated for the primary purpose of 
developing, owning, or operating safe and sanitary affordable housing. 
 
The bill also specifies that the exemption of a nonprofit housing corporation from all taxes 
and special assessments of the State or a local jurisdiction does not apply to a housing 
project owned by a nonprofit housing corporation or an entity that is controlled or wholly 
owned by a nonprofit housing corporation that, before July 1, 2026, received a financial 
contribution, including a loan, grant, or other direct financial assistance for the 
development of the housing project from a local government in which the housing project 
is located. 
 
Affordable housing is defined as rental housing:  (1) that has been awarded or approved 
for a federal low-income housing tax credit (LIHTC) and is subject to a covenant under the 
LIHTC program; or (2) approved by the local jurisdiction in which the project is located 
and for which at least 50% of the units are reserved for households earning at or below 
60% of the area median income for the metropolitan statistical area of the project and rent 
is restricted to 30% of gross household income for a family of four at or below 60% of the 
area median income for the metropolitan statistical area of the project, adjusted to 
1.5 individuals for each bedroom in the unit. 
 
Current Law:  A nonprofit housing corporation is a nonprofit or charitable private 
corporation that provides safe and sanitary housing to persons of eligible income in such a 
way that the corporation works essentially like a housing authority. 
 
Property that is used for essential public and governmental purposes and is exempt from 
all taxes and special assessments of the State or a political subdivision if the property:  
(1) belongs to an authority or a nonprofit housing corporation; (2) is used as housing for 
persons of eligible income and is owned in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, through 
one or more wholly or partially owned subsidiary entities of a housing authority entity; or 
(3) is used, or if planned or under construction will be used, as housing for persons of 
eligible income and is owned in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, through one or more 
wholly or partially owned subsidiary entities of a housing authority entity and has 
improvements, or has improvements planned or under construction, located on land that is 
owned by an authority or an entity that is controlled or wholly owned by an authority. 
 
An authority, a nonprofit housing corporation, or a housing authority may enter into a 
payment in lieu of taxes agreement with a political subdivision in which a housing project 
is wholly or partly located.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State property tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in fiscal 2027 depending on the number of nonprofit housing corporations 
qualifying for the tax exemption under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 571/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in fiscal 2027 depending on the number of nonprofit housing corporations that 
qualify for the tax exemption under the bill.  
 
Information on local property tax rates and revenues is provided in the County Revenue 
Outlook Report. A copy of the report is available on the Department of Legislative Services 
website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 369 (Senator Hettleman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
me/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3