START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 637 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 637 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Recommendations for Immunizations, Screenings, and 
Preventive Services - Pharmacist Administration and Required Health Insurance 
Coverage (The Vax Act) 
 
 
This Administration bill requires the Secretary of Health to issue, publish, and distribute 
specified recommendations for immunizations, screenings, and preventive services. A 
pharmacist may administer a vaccination recommended by the Secretary to an individual 
who is at least seven years old. The bill also alters health insurance coverage requirements 
for certain immunizations, screenings, and preventive services. Obsolete language 
regarding the pertussis vaccine is also repealed. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and 
applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed 
in the State on or after January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of 
forms can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Any additional workload on the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 637/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Secretary’s Recommendations for Immunizations, Screenings, and Preventive Services 
 
Recommendations must be made for infants, children, and adults that follow the generally 
accepted consensus within the scientific community and sound clinical guidance. These 
recommendations must also be made in accordance with the applicable recommendations 
of specified authoritative medical organizations and take into consideration the guidance 
of the Maryland Statewide Advisory Commission on Immunizations and specified federal 
entities. 
 
Before adopting a recommendation for a preventive service that is not an immunization 
and has not received a recommendation from the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services or an A or B rating from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), the 
Secretary must (1) hold a notice and comment period of at least 30 days; (2) obtain a 
specified analysis from the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) on the service; 
and (3) cite the applicable recommendations of the authoritative medical organizations on 
which a recommendation would be based.  
 
The Secretary must publish the recommendations on the MDH website and distribute them 
to licensed health professionals in Maryland and MIA. 
 
Pharmacist Administration of Vaccinations 
 
The bill repeals language enacted under Chapter 738 of 2025 specifying that the 
recommendations of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) that govern the administration of 
vaccinations by pharmacists refer to federal statutes, rules, and guidance in effect either on 
December 31, 2024, or at a later date to account for any new vaccines recommended by 
ACIP after that date. 
 
The bill also alters the requirements of the certification course a pharmacist must complete 
to administer vaccinations by removing the requirement that the course include instruction 
in the guidelines and recommendations of CDC regarding vaccinations in effect on 
December 31, 2024. 
 
Health Insurance Coverage Requirements for Preventive Services 
 
The bill repeals the authority of the Insurance Commissioner to adopt regulations necessary 
to carry out the requirement that carriers provide coverage for certain immunizations, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 637/ Page 3 
screenings, and preventive services without cost sharing consistent with specified 
recommendations and guidelines in effect on December 31, 2024. Instead, the bill specifies 
that the Commissioner must enforce the coverage requirement consistent with such 
guidelines (per current law), as updated by recommendations issued by the Secretary of 
Health. 
 
The bill requires a carrier to provide coverage for certain immunizations, screenings, and 
preventive services for plan years that begin on or after the date that is one year after the 
date the Secretary of Health’s recommendations are issued. 
 
The bill also specifies that the minimum package of child wellness services that a carrier 
must provide must cover all visits for and costs of childhood and adolescent immunizations 
recommended by ACIP as of December 31, 2024, as updated by recommendations issued 
by the Secretary of Health. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Vaccinations by Pharmacists 
 
A pharmacist may order and administer a vaccination to an individual who is at least 
age three if the vaccine is (1) an influenza vaccine; (2) a COVID-19 vaccine; or (3) used 
in response to a public health emergency. A pharmacist must have completed specified 
training, hold current cardiopulmonary resuscitation certification, complete specified 
continuing education as part of license renewal, comply with recordkeeping and reporting 
requirements, and inform child vaccination patients and their caregivers of the importance 
of well-child visits and refer them to a pediatric primary care provider when appropriate. 
 
A pharmacist who has met the above noted requirements may administer to an individual 
who is at least age seven a vaccination that is (1) recommended by ACIP or (2) approved 
or authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). For adults, a pharmacist 
may administer a vaccination that is recommended in CDC’s Health Information for 
International Travel. 
 
Chapter 738 of 2025 specifies that the ACIP recommendations governing the 
administration of vaccinations by pharmacists refer to federal statutes, rules, and guidance 
in effect either on December 31, 2024, or at a later date to account for any new vaccines 
recommended by ACIP after that date. 
 
Insurance Coverage for Preventive Services 
 
Each carrier must provide coverage for and may not impose any cost-sharing requirements, 
including copayments, coinsurance, or deductibles, with specified exception, for: 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 637/ Page 4 
 
evidence-based items or services that have in effect a rating of A or B in the current 
recommendations of USPSTF with respect to the individual involved; 
 
immunizations for routine use in children, adolescents, and adults, as specified; 
 
with respect to infants, children, and adolescents, evidence-informed preventive 
care and screenings provided for in comprehensive guidelines supported by the 
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA); and 
 
with respect to women, preventive care and screenings and contraceptive coverage 
as provided for in comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA, as specified. 
 
To the extent that cost sharing is otherwise allowed under federal or State law, a health 
benefit plan that uses a network of providers may impose cost-sharing requirements for 
evidence-based items or services that have in effect a rating of A or B in the current 
recommendations of USPSTF that are delivered by an out-of-network provider. 
 
If an insured or enrollee is covered under a high-deductible health plan, a carrier may apply 
the deductible to specified preventive services unless the Commissioner determines 
otherwise, as specified. 
 
Insurance Coverage for Child Wellness Services  
 
Certain insurance policies and nonprofit health service plans must include, under the family 
member coverage, a minimum package of child wellness services that are consistent with 
public health policy, professional standards, and scientific evidence of effectiveness. 
Among other things, the minimum package of child wellness services must cover all visits 
for, and costs of, childhood and adolescent immunizations recommended by ACIP as of 
December 31, 2024. A policy or plan may not impose a deductible on this coverage. Each 
policy and certificate must contain a notice of the prohibition on a deductible. The 
Insurance Commissioner may adopt regulations necessary to carry out these provisions. 
 
Required Assessments by the Maryland Health Care Commission 
 
Under § 15-1501 of the Insurance Article, MHCC must assess the social, medical, and 
financial impacts of a proposed mandated health insurance service (a legislative proposal 
or statute that would require a particular health care service to be provided or offered in a 
health benefit plan by a carrier). In assessing a proposed service, MHCC must consider, 
among other specified items, the extent to which coverage is already available or, if not 
available, the level of public demand for the service; the extent to which the service is 
generally recognized by the medical community as being effective and efficacious in the 
treatment of patients; and the extent to which coverage will increase or decrease the cost 
of services. Subject to the limitations of the State budget, MHCC may contract for actuarial 
services and other professional services to conduct its assessment. Annually by 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 637/ Page 5 
December 31, MHCC must submit a report on its findings, including any 
recommendations, to the Governor and the General Assembly, including an evaluation of 
any mandated health insurance service legislatively proposed or otherwise submitted to 
MHCC by a member of the General Assembly prior to July 1 of that year. 
 
Pertussis Vaccine 
 
Prior to the administration of a pertussis vaccine, a health care provider must provide 
specified information. At the time of administration of the vaccine, a health care provider 
must record specified information in the patient’s medical record. If a health care provider 
has reason to believe that an individual has had a major adverse reaction to the vaccine, the 
health care provider must (within 24 hours) record all relevant information in the patient’s 
permanent medical record and report the information to the local health officer. The local 
health officer must immediately forward the information to MDH, which must immediately 
notify the vaccine manufacturer. 
 
MDH must establish a system to collect data from local health officers, health care 
providers, and parents on the incidence of pertussis (whooping cough) and major adverse 
reactions to pertussis vaccine and report all information to CDC. MDH must adopt 
guidelines under which the vaccine should not be administered or should be delayed, any 
categories of potential recipients who are significantly more vulnerable to major adverse 
reactions, and procedures to notify physicians of the guidelines. The pertussis vaccine may 
not be required if a physician determines that the risk to the potential recipient outweighs 
the benefits to both the potential recipient and the public. 
 
Background:  Vaccine policy is regulated at the federal and state level. States have 
primary responsibility for enacting laws to promote the health, safety, and general welfare 
of individuals in their jurisdictions, such as laws mandating vaccination for school 
enrollment. The federal government has significant influence over state vaccine policy 
through the FDA vaccine approval process and guidance from CDC and ACIP. 
Recommendations from FDA, CDC, and ACIP are often linked to state policy, including 
the vaccines that insurers must cover. 
 
In September 2025, Maryland joined the Northeast Public Health Collaborative, a coalition 
of health agencies from nine states and New York City, to share expertise,  
improve coordination, and promote evidence-based public health. In October 2025,  
Governor Wes Moore joined the Governors Public Health Alliance, which was formed to 
support governors and their states in coordinating and collaborating to protect the public’s 
health by facilitating data sharing and communication, sharing best practices and 
challenges, and elevating national considerations for vaccine policy to keep science front 
and center. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 637/ Page 6 
MIA advises that, under the bill, consumers covered by MIA-regulated health insurance 
plans will be protected from erosion of preventive care requirements at the federal level by 
the establishment of State-specific recommendations for preventive care. Consumers under 
these plans will continue to receive coverage with no out-of-pocket costs for preventive 
care services that were recommended at the federal level as of December 31, 2024, and 
will also receive coverage for preventive services newly recommended by the Secretary of 
Health. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 385 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 637/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Health - Recommendations for Immunizations, Screenings, 
and Preventive Services - Pharmacist Administration and Required Health Insurance 
Coverage (The Vax Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 637 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
    X      WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
             WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7