START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 671 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 671 
(Delegates Shetty and Lopez) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Nursing Facilities - Medicaid Quality Assessment - Funding of Office of the 
Long-Term Care Ombudsman 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor, beginning in fiscal 2027, to include in the annual budget 
bill at least 3.0% of the funds collected by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
from the nursing facility quality assessment to fund the operations of the Office of the 
Long‑Term Care Ombudsman in the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA). The funds 
must supplement and not supplant funding otherwise appropriated for the office. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. MDOA special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase by $5.3 million in FY 2028; MDH special fund revenues and expenditures 
correspondingly decrease. MDH federal fund revenues also decrease by $5.3 million in 
FY 2028, as discussed below. Future years reflect 1.0% growth in assessment revenues. 
This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Revenue 
$0 
($5.3) 
($5.4) 
($5.4) 
($5.5) 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($5.3) 
($5.4) 
($5.4) 
($5.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures for area agencies on aging (AAAs) may 
increase due to additional funding for the Office of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 671/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 503 of 2007 authorized MDH to impose a 2.0% quality assessment 
on each freestanding nursing facility with 45 or more beds. The assessment does not apply 
to a nursing home bed in a continuing care retirement community. Budget reconciliation 
and financing legislation further increased the assessment to 4.0% in 2010, 5.5% in 2011, 
and 6.0% in 2012. 
 
The aggregate amount assessed on all nursing facilities may not exceed 6.0% of the 
operating revenue for facilities subject to the assessment for the previous quarter. The 
assessment must be based on an amount per patient day, not including Medicare days. 
Revenues from the assessment must be collected by the Comptroller and distributed to a 
special fund to be used by MDH only to fund nursing facility reimbursement under the 
Medicaid program. 
 
At least 65.0% of the funds allocated by MDH as reimbursements to nursing facilities must 
be in addition to and may not supplant funds already appropriated for nursing facilities.  
 
MDH must report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the assessment, 
including (1) the percentage and amount of the assessment charged to each nursing facility; 
(2) the number of nursing facilities subject to the assessment with a net loss; and (3) a 
comparison of the total amount provided in the Medicaid budget for nursing home 
reimbursement in the current year to the amount proposed for the upcoming fiscal year.  
 
Long-Term Care Ombudsman 
 
The State Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program was established under federal mandate 
through the Older Americans Act. Long-term care ombudsmen are advocates (volunteers 
or paid employees) for residents of nursing homes, board and care homes, assisted living 
facilities, and similar adult care facilities. They work to resolve problems of individual 
residents and bring about changes at the local, state, and national levels that will improve 
residents’ care and quality of life. Local long-term care ombudsmen serve through AAAs 
and are overseen by the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman Office. The State Long-Term 
Care Ombudsman must: 
 
 
identify, investigate, and resolve complaints from any source relating to any action, 
inaction, or decision that may adversely affect the health, safety, welfare, or rights 
of a resident, as specified; 
 
represent the interests of residents before governmental agencies and seek 
administrative, legal, and other remedies to protect the health, safety, welfare, and 
rights of residents; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 671/ Page 3 
 
provide information to other agencies and the public regarding the problems and 
concerns of residents; 
 
comment on, facilitate public comment on, and recommend changes to existing or 
proposed laws, rules, regulations, and other governmental policies and actions that 
affect the health, safety, welfare, and rights of residents; 
 
provide technical support for the development of resident and family councils to 
protect the well-being and rights of residents; 
 
educate facilities, agencies, and staff members concerning the rights and welfare of 
residents; 
 
promote the development of citizen organizations to advocate for the well-being and 
rights of residents; and 
 
provide services to assist residents in protecting the health, safety, welfare, and 
rights of residents. 
 
Area Agencies on Aging  
 
In Maryland, each of the 23 counties and Baltimore City designates an AAA. The agency 
may be a unit of local government or a private, nonprofit corporation. AAAs provide a 
variety of adult services, incorporating assisted living, protective services, and temporary 
disability programs.  
 
Each AAA must operate a single point-of-entry program to access the needs of seniors and 
their caregivers and provide appropriate services, including (1) providing current 
information on available programs, services, or benefits; (2) determining the service needs 
of each senior who requests service; (3) processing requests for service from seniors; 
(4) providing access to available public and private programs and services for seniors; 
(5) monitoring the outcome of requests for service or information; and (6) arranging for 
individual screenings to determine the service needs of a frail or health-impaired senior. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Mandated Appropriation 
 
The bill requires the Governor, beginning in fiscal 2027, to include in the annual budget 
bill at least 3.0% of the nursing facility quality assessment funds collected by MDH to fund 
the operations of MDOA’s Office of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman. The Department 
of Legislative Services notes that any legislation mandating funding of a program must be 
enacted before July 1 of the fiscal year before the first fiscal year in which the funding is 
mandated. As the bill takes effect July 1, 2026, the Governor cannot be required to include 
funding in the fiscal 2027 budget. Thus, the bill’s mandated appropriation cannot begin 
until fiscal 2028. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 671/ Page 4 
Nursing Facility Quality Assessment 
 
In fiscal 2025, MDH collected $171.4 million in special fund revenue through the nursing 
facility quality assessment. MDH advises that assessment revenues increase by 
1.0% annually. Therefore, MDH is projected to collect $173.1 million in special fund 
revenue from the assessment in fiscal 2026, increasing to $182.0 million by fiscal 2031. 
 
Special Fund Revenues and Expenditure Impact 
 
Under the bill, at least 3.0% of the nursing facility quality assessment funds collected must 
be used to fund the Office of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman. Thus, at least $5.3 million 
in special funds will be redirected to MDOA in fiscal 2028, increasing to $5.5 million in 
fiscal 2031. This analysis assumes that MDOA special fund expenditures increase 
accordingly. Likewise, MDH special fund revenues and expenditures decrease by at least 
$5.3 million in fiscal 2028, increasing to $5.5 million in fiscal 2031. There is no net impact 
on State special fund revenues or expenditures under the bill. 
 
Federal Fund Revenue Impact 
 
Although there is no net State special fund impact under the bill, MDH advises that there 
is a federal fund impact. Special fund revenues collected under the nursing facility quality 
assessment are used for Medicaid (with at least 65.0% of funds allocated for enhanced 
reimbursement for nursing facilities) and subject to a 50.0% federal matching rate. If these 
revenues are transferred to MDOA, Medicaid federal matching funds will not be available. 
Therefore, MDH federal fund revenues decrease by at least $5.3 million in fiscal 2028 and 
by at least $5.5 million in 2031. 
 
To compensate for this loss in federal matching funds, MDH could reduce the enhanced 
nursing facility rates or pay-for-performance payments it funds with assessment revenues 
or replace the funds with general funds. As noted above, this analysis assumes that MDH 
special fund expenditures are reduced. To the extent MDH elects to backfill reduced 
special funds, general fund expenditures increase beginning as early as fiscal 2028. 
 
Office of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $1.1 million in general funds and 
approximately $668,000 in federal funds for the Office of the Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman. MDOA advises that current funding levels have not increased for 
several years and are not sufficient to, among other things, fully fund local AAAs to utilize 
local long-term care ombudsmen staff. As noted above, under the bill, funding for the office 
increases by at least $5.3 million in fiscal 2028 and by $5.5 million in 2031. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 671/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  MDOA advises that many AAAs are currently only able to hire  
one part-time local long-term care ombudsman, although some local long-term 
ombudsmen are volunteers. An increase in funding for local AAAs from the statewide 
Office of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman would likely increase revenues to local AAAs, 
allowing the agencies to fully fund local long-term care ombudsman offices.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 340 (Senator Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5