START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 625 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 625 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Human-Relevant Research Fund - Collection of Contributions - Responsible 
Entity 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA), instead of the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), to collect already required contributions from 
specified research facilities. As a result, the Secretary of Agriculture, instead of the 
Secretary of Health, must distribute the monies collected to the Human-Relevant Research 
Fund (HRRF) administered by the Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
(TEDCO). The research facilities required to make the contribution and the applicable 
payment amounts are unchanged by the bill. Likewise, existing civil penalty provisions 
continue to apply to research facilities that fail to pay the contribution. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDA increase by $42,900 in FY 2027; 
out‑years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. HRRF special fund revenues and 
expenditures for TEDCO continue, and may increase, as discussed below. There is no 
material effect on public higher education institutions subject to the contribution, MDH 
expenditures, or general fund revenues from existing penalty provisions. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
42,900 
47,100 
49,500 
51,900 
54,200 
Net Effect 
($42,900) 
($47,100) 
($49,500) 
($51,900) 
($54,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances are not materially affected, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal, as discussed below. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 625/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 447 and 448 of 2023 established HRRF as a special, nonlapsing, 
fund administered by TEDCO and capitalized by annual contributions from specified 
research facilities. HRRF’s stated purpose is to promote State-funded research intended to 
develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in medical and product 
testing and research through grants and loans to public and private entities in the State. The 
fund may only be used to (1) award grants and loans for State-funded, human-relevant 
animal testing alternatives research in accordance with the recommendations of the 
independent scientific review board (with which TEDCO must contract) and (2) pay the 
costs necessary to administer the fund. Interest earnings of the fund accrue to the fund. 
 
By January 15 each year, beginning in 2024, each research facility located in Maryland 
that is required to submit an Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) 
Form 7023 must make a contribution to MDH based on the total number of animals used 
in its research. The annual amount ranges from $5,000 to $75,000, depending on the 
number of animals reported in Column F of the most recently submitted form. A research 
facility that fails to pay the contribution as required may be subject to a civil penalty of  
up to $1,000 per day. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture 
 
MDA advises that it does not have sufficient capacity to absorb the workload required by 
the bill, particularly since the duty for MDA to collect the contribution, and research 
facilities to pay it to MDA, extends back to 2024. Accordingly, for any such facilities that 
did not make their required contributions to MDH, MDA likely must attempt to collect 
delinquent payments as well as any due beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures for MDA increase by $42,932 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one half-time administrative officer to collect contributions from research facilities 
and track compliance as required by the bill. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$34,833 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$42,932 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 625/ Page 3 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for HRRF continue as contributions collected by 
MDA are used to pay for TEDCO administrative expenses and provide grants and/or loans 
to eligible recipients. However, HRRF revenues and expenditures may increase beginning 
in fiscal 2027. TEDCO advises that MDH has encountered challenges in collecting the 
required contribution under Chapters 447 and 448 – more specifically, TEDCO advises 
that only $185,000 has been distributed to HRRF to date. Thus, to the extent MDA is more 
successful in collecting contributions given its greater nexus with animal research facilities, 
special fund revenues and related expenditures for HRRF increase. Any such increase 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time. For context, the fiscal and policy note for the 
implementing legislation estimated that revenues could increase by as much as 
$915,000 annually. However, that estimate was based on 35 facilities being subject to the 
contribution at that time and the 15 federal facilities among them voluntarily making the 
payment. 
 
Public Institutions of Higher Education 
 
Of the 31 registrants required to make annual contributions under Chapters 447 and 448, 
based on the latest APHIS Form data from 2024, four are public senior institutions of 
higher education. While the bill changes the entity responsible for collecting their 
contributions, these institutions will continue to make the same payments they would have 
under current law. This analysis assumes that they have been compliant in making the 
existing required contributions. Nevertheless, to the extent that public higher education 
institutions receive more or greater awards through HRRF due to additional funding being 
available from enhanced compliance by other research facilities, higher education revenues 
increase. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
General fund expenditures for MDH are unaffected as staffing does not change. Any staff 
who have been responsible for collecting contributions are diverted to other priorities. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local expenditures continue for local institutions required to make 
the contribution under Chapters 447 and 448 . Thus, the Community College of 
Baltimore County, based on the 2024 APHIS Form data, continues to be subject to the 
requirement. This analysis assumes that the community college has been compliant in 
making payments. However, to the extent MDA is more successful at collecting 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 625/ Page 4 
contributions than MDH, more funding is available to award as research grants and loans 
through HRRF (which could be made to local institutions). 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent MDA is more successful at collecting contributions 
than MDH, more funding is available to award as research grants and loans through HRRF. 
Accordingly, small businesses may benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 585 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Technology 
Development 
Corporation; 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Maryland Department of Health; U.S. Department of Agriculture; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4