START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 635 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 635 
(Delegate Miller, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Child Care Facilities – Criminal History Records Check – Requirement 
 
 
This bill requires individuals who will have direct contact with children in certain child 
care facilities to submit to a criminal history records check (CHRC), in accordance with 
current statutory provisions under the Family Law Article. The Maryland State Department 
of Education (MSDE) must establish a centralized unit for the processing and management 
of information about CHRCs. The bill also alters statutory provisions requiring MSDE to 
establish probationary employment qualifications for first-time child care teachers in a 
child care center that serves preschool or school‑age children. Finally, the bill repeals the 
limitation on the number of Deputy State Superintendents of Schools that may be 
appointed.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is generally anticipated that MSDE can implement the bill’s requirements 
with existing resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.    
 
Local Effect:  None.     
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Required Criminal History Record Checks 
 
The bill requires an “applicant” (i.e., an individual who is applying for a position involving 
direct contact with children in a child care facility) to submit to a criminal history records 
check in accordance with Section 5‑555 of the Family Law Article. “Applicant” includes 
a volunteer or other individuals who may be subject to federally required background 
checks. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 635/ Page 2 
Establishment of Centralized Unit  
 
The centralized unit may be staffed by licensing specialists in the regional child care 
licensing offices throughout the State. The centralized unit must notify an applicant for a 
CHRC (1) of the status of the application within 10 days after submission and (2) subject 
to the receipt of the CHRC information from the Criminal Justice Information System 
Central Repository (CJIS‑CR), of the applicant’s eligibility to provide child care services 
in a child care facility.  
 
The centralized unit must review and maintain background checks completed in 
accordance with Section 5‑555 of the Family Law Article. Information obtained from 
CJIS‑CR under the bill (1) is confidential; (2) may not be disseminated without the express 
permission of the applicant; and (3) may be used only for the purposes authorized by 
Title 9.5 of the Education Article.  
 
The centralized unit may maintain a list of applicants who have submitted a CHRC in 
accordance with the bill. The centralized unit may also share the name and status of an 
applicant on the list with (1) a child care facility at which the applicant seeks to be 
employed or volunteer and (2) the applicant.  
 
On request by an applicant or a child care facility, the centralized unit may provide written 
notice to the applicant or the child care facility that an applicant who seeks to be employed 
by (or volunteer with) the child care facility has a criminal history records check on file 
with the department. 
 
Probationary Employment Qualifications  
 
The bill requires MSDE to establish probationary employment qualifications for an 
individual who is applying for the first time to be a child care teacher in a child care center 
in the State that serves preschool or school‑age children who are least age two (rather than 
age three).  
 
Current Law:  CJIS‑CR is established by the Criminal Procedure Article, 
§§ 10‑213 et seq., within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) to collect, manage, and disseminate Maryland CHRCs for criminal justice and 
noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. For national records’ 
checks, CJIS‑CR collects the fee and submits the requests for national information to the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) electronically. 
 
Pursuant to provisions in the Family Law Article, in general, employees and employers 
who work in specified facilities and who care for or supervise children (or have access to 
children who are cared for or supervised in the facility) are required to apply to DPSCS for 
a national and State CHRC. Among the facilities requiring records’ checks are child care 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 635/ Page 3 
centers, family child care homes, schools, foster care homes, and recreation centers that 
primarily serve minors.  
 
Furthermore, each employee of a child care center that is required to be licensed or to hold 
a letter of compliance must apply to the Department of Human Services (DHS), on or 
before the first day of actual employment, for a child abuse and neglect clearance. DHS 
may prohibit the operator of a child care center that is required to be licensed or to hold a 
letter of compliance from employing an individual who:  
 
 
has received a conviction, a probation before judgment disposition, a not criminally 
responsible disposition, or a pending charge for any crime or attempted crime 
enumerated in specified regulations; or 
 
has been identified as responsible for child abuse or neglect. 
 
Similarly, the operator of a child care center that is required to be licensed or to hold a letter 
of compliance must immediately notify DHS if an employee reports a conviction, a 
probation before judgment disposition, a not criminally responsible disposition, or a 
pending charge for any crime or attempted crime enumerated in specified regulations.  
 
State Superintendents  
 
The following employees must be appointed to positions in MSDE:   
 
 
no more than three Deputy State Superintendents of Schools; 
 
any assistant State superintendents and directors authorized by the State Board of 
Education and provided in the State budget; and 
 
any other employees to fill positions authorized by the State Board and provided in 
the State budget.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that the new unit required by the bill can likely be 
established with existing resources, but also notes that additional support (i.e., greater 
funding or staffing levels) may be required should the unit or its responsibilities be 
expanded. However, the bill does not contemplate the expansion of responsibilities or 
increase the overall volume of CHRCs for child care facility employees that MSDE is 
already responsible for ensuring are reviewed appropriately. Thus, it is assumed that 
MSDE can generally implement the new centralized unit with minimal fiscal impact.  
 
While the bill authorizes the appointment of additional Deputy State Superintendents, it 
does not require additional positions nor provide additional specifications regarding how 
the existing structure of MSDE might be altered. MSDE advises that should the department 
decide to appoint another deputy, comprehensive assessments are likely required to 
determine whether additional operational costs and other changes are necessary. Any 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 635/ Page 4 
associated impacts are outside the scope of this analysis and have therefore not been 
accounted for. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Expanding the probationary teacher qualification to include 
children who are at least two years old (rather than three) may help child care programs 
maintain child to staff ratios by increasing access to more probationary staff while 
individuals complete their remaining qualifications/training.  
 
Additional Comments:  DPSCS advises that the FBI requires each agency to be 
responsible for its own background checks and that MSDE cannot be a hub for background 
checks of other agencies. To the extent the FBI does not approve provisions within the bill, 
national background checks would not be permitted until the requirements are changed and 
then approved by the FBI. 
 
As referenced above, current law generally already requires individuals within child care 
facilities to obtain CHRCs, pursuant to provisions in the Family Law Article that are 
unchanged by the bill. However, the bill includes a provision for the centralized unit to 
review and maintain background checks completed in accordance with § 5-555 of the 
Family Law Article; background checks required under this section include those unrelated 
to MSDE. The Department of Legislative Services notes that legislation has been 
introduced in multiple years at the request of DPSCS to clarify State statutory language 
regarding CHRCs in order to remain compliant with the FBI’s stringent standards 
regarding national background checks. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 359 (Senator Henson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel; Howard; and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
State Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 635/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5