START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 698 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 698 
(Delegate Bhandari, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors – Board Operations and 
Regulation of Crematories and Reduction Facilities 
 
 
This bill renames the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors to be the State Board 
of Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories and gives regulatory oversight of 
crematories and reduction facilities exclusively to the board – removing the role that the 
Office of Cemetery Oversight (OCO) has had over crematories and reduction facilities. 
Even so, a person who holds a permit or registration from OCO may continue to operate 
under the permit or registration until it expires and may renew the permit or registration 
with the board. Also, OCO retains jurisdiction over complaints (and any individuals cited 
in such complaints) regarding crematories and reduction facilities filed with the office 
before October 1, 2026. In addition, the bill also (1) alters the membership of  
OCO’s Advisory Council on Cemetery Operations; (2) alters provisions regarding the 
removal of board members, board quorum, and specified board disciplinary processes; and 
(3) requires the board to employ at least two inspectors to perform inspections. The bill 
makes clarifying and conforming changes to effectuate the transfer of regulatory oversight 
from OCO to the board. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Beginning in FY 2027, OCO special fund revenues decrease minimally, 
while board special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount, as discussed 
below. Board special fund expenditures increase by at least $77,700 in FY 2027 for an 
inspector, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. OCO 
special fund expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$77,700 
$90,600 
$94,900 
$99,200 
$103,500 
Net Effect 
($77,700) 
($90,600) 
($94,900) 
($99,200) 
($103,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 698/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None.      
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, requirements related to the final 
disposition of human bodies are established under the Health – General Article. Cremation 
is regulated either by OCO within the Maryland Department of Labor (under the Business 
Regulation Article) or the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors within the 
Maryland Department of Health (under the Health Occupations Article), based on 
ownership of the crematory or reduction facility. Specifically, OCO and the board each 
regulate facilities in which their registrants/permit holders or licensees hold majority 
ownership. As part of their joint oversight of crematories and reduction facilities, OCO and 
the board must adopt identical regulations.  
 
Transfer of Regulatory Authority Over Crematories and Reduction Facilities 
 
The bill transfers responsibility for regulating crematories and reduction facilities currently 
under the authority of OCO to the board. Uncodified language requires that all functions, 
powers, duties, books, and records (including electronic records) related to the regulation 
of crematories and reduction facilities be transferred from OCO to the board. Regulatory 
oversight is transferred from Title 5 of the Business Regulation Article to Title 7 of the 
Health Occupations Article, including provisions related to:  
 
 
specified definitions; 
 
requirements related to a registration to operate a crematory or reduction facility, 
including procedures for obtaining and renewing a registration and the authority of 
registrants;  
 
requirements related to a permit to operate a crematory or a reduction facility, 
including procedures for obtaining and renewing a permit and the authority of 
permit holders;  
 
the authority to collect specified registration and permit fees; 
 
the requirement to display a registration or permit conspicuously;  
 
the authority to deny a registration or permit to an applicant, reprimand a person, or 
suspend or revoke a registration or permit under specified circumstances;  
 
procedures for complaints made against a registrant or permit holder;  
 
hearing provisions related to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a registration 
or permit or against an applicant; and  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 698/ Page 3 
 
requirements related to preneed contracts and the prohibition on assessing a 
crematory a per-occurrence cremation fee.  
 
Oversight Over Pending Complaints 
 
OCO must retain jurisdiction over (1) complaints regarding crematories and reduction 
facilities filed with OCO before October 1, 2026, until the complaint is closed or resolved, 
and (2) any persons who are the subject of the complaints to the extent necessary to close 
or resolve the complaint.  
 
Current Registrants and Permit Holders  
 
The bill specifies that a person registered as a crematory operator or a reduction operator, 
or who holds a permit to engage in the operation of a crematory or reduction facility issued 
by OCO, may continue to operate under that registration or permit until it expires and may 
renew the registration or permit with the board in accordance with the bill. A person that 
was originally registered or issued a permit under a provision of law repealed by the bill as 
obsolete or inconsistent continues to meet the requirements of the registration to the same 
extent as though that provision had not been repealed.  
 
Office of Cemetery Oversight  
 
Under current law, OCO, among other duties, regulates and provides registration for certain 
crematories and reduction facilities – generally those with 50% or more ownership by a 
licensee of the office. Responsibilities of OCO include the investigation and mediation of 
consumer complaints involving registrants and permit holders. To protect Maryland 
citizens from unfair and unscrupulous practices, OCO determines and enforces the ethical 
standards related to the operation of cemeteries and those related to the provision of burial 
goods and services within the State. OCO also regulates and monitors the funds held in 
perpetual care and preneed trusts by its licensees. OCO’s administrative costs are paid from 
the Cemetery Oversight Fund, which receives fees paid by licensees and registrants.  
 
Advisory Council on Cemetery Operations 
 
Under current law, the Secretary of Labor must appoint an Advisory Council on Cemetery 
Operations to advise OCO on issues related to the regulation and administration of the 
office. The advisory council consists of 12 members:  three registered cemeterians 
representing the for-profit cemetery industry; one registered cemeterian representing a 
nonprofit cemetery; one registered seller from a monument company; one representative 
from a religious cemetery; one representative from a crematory; and five consumer 
members. The bill removes the representative from a crematory from the advisory council.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 698/ Page 4 
State Board of Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories 
 
Under current law, the primary purpose of the board is the protection of the public’s health 
and welfare through proper credentialing; examination; licensure; and discipline of 
morticians, funeral directors, corporations, crematory operators, reduction facility 
operators, apprentices, surviving spouses, mortuary transport services, transporters, 
courtesy card holders, and holders of an executor license in Maryland. The board also 
licenses, permits, and inspects funeral establishments and specified crematories for 
compliance with all applicable federal, State, and local laws and takes disciplinary action 
against such establishments where warranted. The board has jurisdiction over crematories 
and reduction facilities that are majority-owned by its licensees.  
 
Board Membership:  Under current law, the board consists of 11 members. Upon the 
recommendation of the Secretary of Health, the Governor may remove an appointed 
member whom the Secretary finds to have been absent from two successive board meetings 
without adequate reason. 
 
The bill removes this authorization; instead, the Governor may remove an appointed 
member for repeated and unexplained absences or for any just and reasonable cause. 
 
Under current law, a majority of the full authorized membership of the board is a quorum 
to do business. The bill specifies that a majority of then-serving appointed members of the 
board constitutes a quorum, and an action may be taken by a simple majority vote of the 
quorum. 
 
Board Special Fund:  The bill renames the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors 
Fund to be the State Board of Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories Fund.  
 
Inspections:  Under current law, the board may conduct unannounced inspections of funeral 
establishments at any time without notice (1) in response to valid information provided to 
the board resulting in a complaint being opened concerning the preparation or body storage 
areas of a licensed funeral establishment, but only if the board has provided a copy of the 
complaint to the establishment or (2) of a funeral establishment that the board has placed 
on probationary status. The board must provide the results of an unannounced inspection 
to the holder of the funeral establishment license or the supervising mortician within 
24 hours after completion of the inspection. The board may employ inspectors and other 
staff in accordance with the budget of the board.  
 
The bill transfers, from OCO to the board, the authorization – on receipt of a written 
complaint or at the discretion of the board or the board’s designee – to conduct an 
investigation and an inspection of the records and site of a registered crematory operator 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 698/ Page 5 
or registered reduction operator or any other person subject to the registration or permit 
provisions of the board.  
 
Appeal from an Order of Suspension or Revocation:  Under current law, generally, any 
person aggrieved by a final decision of the board in a contested case may petition for 
judicial review. However, any health care professional aggrieved by a final decision of the 
board may not appeal to the Secretary of Health but may take a direct judicial appeal. If a 
person notes an appeal from an order of suspension or revocation by the board, the order 
is stayed.  
 
The bill removes the requirement that, if a person notes an appeal from an order of 
suspension or revocation by the board, the order is stayed.  
 
State Revenues:   
 
Office of Cemetery Oversight 
 
The bill removes regulatory oversight of crematories, crematory operators, reduction 
facilities, and reduction operators from OCO. Effective October 1, 2026, the office will no 
longer collect registration or permit fees from 4 crematories and 15 crematory operators. 
Therefore, OCO special fund revenue decreases by approximately $6,000 on a biannual 
basis beginning as early as fiscal 2027. OCO has not yet issued a reduction facility 
registration or permit to operate a reduction facility. 
 
State Board of Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories 
 
The bill transfers regulatory oversight of crematories, crematory operators, reduction 
facilities, and reduction operators from OCO to the board. The bill also authorizes the board 
to collect renewal fees from the 19 existing registration and permit holders, as well as for 
any new crematories, crematory operators, reduction facilities, and reduction operators in 
the future. Thus, board special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027. As the board did not indicate the amount it will charge 
for registration and permit fees under the bill, the exact amount of such revenues cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. Given the small number of anticipated registration and 
permit holders, such revenues are not anticipated to be significant. 
 
State Expenditures:  OCO advises that the bill has an operational impact on the office but 
is not anticipated to have a material impact on OCO special fund expenditures. 
 
The board advises that any administrative updates, including amending regulations, 
processing registrations and permits, and oversight activities associated with the transfer 
of authority from OCO to the board can be absorbed by existing board staff. However, the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 698/ Page 6 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the bill requires the board to employ at least 
two inspectors to perform inspections (the board currently employs one). Thus, the board 
must hire one additional inspector. The board has previously advised that the cost of 
one inspector is $101,159 for the first fiscal year (not including any vehicle costs).  
 
Therefore, board special fund expenditures increase by at least $77,674 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one inspector to perform inspections as required under the bill. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$68,533 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 Board Special Fund Expenditures 
$77,674 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 413 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6