START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 607 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 607 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Governor's Salary 
Commission) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Constitutional Officers - Salaries 
 
   
This bill implements the salary recommendations of the Governor’s Salary Commission 
for the Attorney General, Comptroller of the Treasury, Secretary of State, and 
State Treasurer for the upcoming term of office.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $10,800 in 
FY 2028 for salaries and fringe benefits. Future years reflect annualization and statutory 
salary increases. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
10,800 
21,500 
32,300 
43,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($10,800) 
($21,500) 
($32,300) 
($43,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill increases the salaries of the Comptroller, Treasurer, 
Attorney General, and Secretary of State for the next four-year term as depicted in 
Exhibit 1.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 607/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Salary Changes for the Attorney General, Comptroller,  
Secretary of State, and Treasurer 
 
Year 
of Term 
Calendar 
Year 
Attorney General, 
Comptroller, and 
Treasurer 
% Increase 
From Prior 
Year 
Secretary 
of State 
% Increase 
From Prior 
Year 
First 
2027 
$175,000 
0.0 
$120,000 
0.0 
Second  
2028 
180,000 
2.9 
124,000 
3.3 
Third 
2029 
180,000 
0.0 
124,000 
0.0 
Fourth 
2030 
185,000 
2.8 
128,000 
3.2 
 
 
Current Law:  The Governor’s Salary Commission was established by a 
1976 constitutional amendment to create a salary setting mechanism for the Governor and 
Lieutenant Governor. Since its inception, the commission has had seven members, 
including the State Treasurer, three persons appointed by the President of the Senate, and 
three persons appointed by the Speaker of the House of Delegates. Appointees serve a  
four-year term. Members of the General Assembly and officers and employees of the State 
or a political subdivision of the State are not eligible for appointment to the commission. 
The bill adopts the commission’s most recent recommendations for the Governor and 
Lieutenant Governor, which can be located in the Report of the Governor’s Salary 
Commission, published in January 2026. 
 
The commission must submit salary recommendations for the Governor and 
Lieutenant Governor to the General Assembly within 10 calendar days after the beginning 
of the last regular General Assembly session in a four-year term of office.   
 
State Expenditures:  The estimate accounts for the new salary schedule going into effect 
at the beginning of the January 2027 term of office and assumes the calendar 2030 salary 
for each office continues for calendar 2031. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 607/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  SB 312 (The President)(By Request - Governor's Salary Commission) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3