START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 649 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 649 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Civil Rights 
Commission) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Advancing Equal Educational Opportunities for All Students in Maryland 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) to 
enforce prohibitions against discrimination in educational institutions. It establishes the 
powers, duties, and limitations of this authority and how MCCR and the 
State Superintendent of Schools are to share concurrent jurisdiction in the investigation, 
mediation, and resolution of complaints. Among other provisions, the bill also 
(1) authorizes a private civil action for discrimination in education; (2) requires 
information regarding a complaint of discrimination in postsecondary education to be 
referred to MCCR; and (3) expresses the policy of the State that all individuals must have 
equal opportunity for education. MCCR must adopt implementing regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MCCR can likely implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. 
Higher education expenditures may increase, potentially significantly, due to increased 
enforcement of nondiscrimination laws, as discussed below. The bill is otherwise not 
anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures for school systems potentially increase due to increased 
enforcement of nondiscrimination laws as discussed below. No assumed material impact 
on local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MCCR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 649/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill establishes a new subtitle to the State Government 
Article (Subtitle 7A – Discrimination in Education) and expands the definition of 
“discriminatory act” under the State Government Article to include acts prohibited under 
Subtitle 7A. The subtitle is an exercise of the police power of the State for the protection 
of the people of the State and makes MCCR a state educational authority under the federal 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act. In general, the provisions under Subtitle 7A, 
as well as other provisions in the bill related to MCCR’s new authority in regard to 
discrimination in education, are to be administered and enforced beginning 30 days after 
MCCR adopts initial regulations, as required by the bill.  
 
Prohibitions:  An educational institution is prohibited under the subtitle from excluding an 
individual from participation in, denying a person the benefits of, or subjecting an 
individual to discrimination within any program or activity of the educational institution 
on the basis of race, color, national origin, ethnicity, ancestry, religion, sex, pregnancy, 
sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, age, or marital status . 
 
The prohibition against discrimination includes any contractual or other arrangement made 
by an educational institution that (1) uses criteria or methods of administration that have 
the effect of subjecting an individual to discrimination because of the individual’s protected 
class and (2) results in defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the 
objectives of a program or an activity of the educational institution with respect to 
individuals of a protected class. The bill includes limits on applicability, generally 
consistent with limits under current law.  
 
An educational institution may not intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any 
individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by the subtitle 
or because the individual has made a complaint or testified, assisted, or participated in any 
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing that arises from alleged behavior 
prohibited by the subtitle. 
 
Definitions:  “Disability” means a physical or mental impairment, record of having a 
physical or mental impairment, or being regarded as having a physical or mental 
impairment, that substantially limits one or more of an individual’s major life activities. 
Disability includes any condition that requires a student to have an individualized 
education program under the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 
a § 504 plan under the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or any other special education 
or related services. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 649/ Page 3 
“Educational institution” means a public or nonpublic (1) prekindergarten program; 
(2) elementary school; (3) secondary school; (4) institution of postsecondary education, as 
defined by the Education Article; (5) institution of higher education, as defined by the 
Education Article; or (6) other educational program with an organized course of study that 
leads to the award of a certificate, diploma, or degree. “Educational institution” includes 
the governing body responsible for the administration of any school or program described 
above. 
 
Concurrent Jurisdiction Between the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights and the State 
Superintendent of Schools  
 
In General:  Under current law, local boards of education, public prekindergarten 
programs, primary and secondary schools, and nonpublic prekindergarten programs and 
primary and secondary schools that receive State funds, are prohibited from refusing 
enrollment of a prospective student, expelling a current student, withholding privileges 
from, or otherwise discriminating against any individual because of an individual’s race, 
ethnicity, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, or disability. Further, retaliatory actions against a student or parent or guardian of 
a student who files a complaint alleging specified discrimination are prohibited. Statutory 
provisions also sets forth a complaint, mediation, and appeal process for violations, mainly 
conducted by the State Superintendent, as generally described below. All or part of 
specified funding may be withheld from a board, program, or school that violates the 
nondiscrimination requirements.  
 
Under the bill, MCCR has concurrent jurisdiction with the State Superintendent over the 
enforcement of prohibitions against discrimination in education.  
 
Complaint Process:  Under current law, a person alleging specified discrimination in 
education may file a complaint with the State Superintendent. A complaint must specify 
the relief or remedy requested, and a parent or guardian may submit a complaint on behalf 
of a minor.   
 
The bill also allows for filing a complaint directly with MCCR, generally under the same 
procedures. The bill also authorizes a parent or guardian to file a complaint (with either 
entity) on behalf of a student with a disability with has reached the age of 18, who remains 
enrolled in a secondary education program, and whose rights remain with a parent or 
guardian under the federal IDEA. MCCR may also file a complaint with the 
State Superintendent alleging an act of discrimination in education.   
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 649/ Page 4 
Notice Requirements:  Under current law, on receipt of a complaint, the 
State Superintendent must provide notice of the complaint to the program or school and 
the local school board in which the public prekindergarten program or public primary or 
secondary school is located. Within 30 days of receiving notice, the program or school and, 
if appropriate, local board must submit a response to the State Superintendent. Under the 
bill, on receipt of a complaint filed with the State Superintendent, the State Superintendent 
must provide notice of the complaint to MCCR. Similarly, on receipt of a complaint filed 
with MCCR, MCCR must provide notice of the complaint to (1) the program or school that 
is the subject of the complaint; (2) the local board for the county in which the public 
prekindergarten program or public primary or secondary school is located; and (3) the 
State Superintendent. Unless a complainant objects, MCCR or the State Superintendent 
must provide the other with all information regarding a complaint alleging discrimination 
on request. At their discretion, MCCR and the State Superintendent may each refer a 
complaint to the other to be heard. The State Superintendent and MCCR must treat a 
referral from each other in the same manner as a complaint otherwise received. 
 
Mediation:  Under current law, the State Superintendent must attempt to mediate an 
agreement between the complainant and respondent to remedy and eliminate the 
discrimination. If mediation results in an agreement between the parties, the 
State Superintendent must issue a written statement to both parties of the mediation 
findings and agreement, including the timeline within which any agreed actions must be 
taken. If a mediation agreement is not reached within 60 days after the complaint is filed, 
the State Superintendent must issue a decision on the complaint to both parties. A decision 
must be in writing, contain findings of fact determined by the State Superintendent, and 
specify any actions necessary to remedy or eliminate the discrimination, including the 
timeline within which the actions must be taken.  
 
The bill similarly requires MCCR to attempt to mediate an agreement and resolve the 
complaint, generally under the same procedures and requirements. In addition, the 
State Superintendent and MCCR may assist each other with mediation, including by 
making recommendations for remedying and eliminating discriminatory practices. If a 
complaint was submitted by MCCR, however, MCCR may also assist by representing the 
policy of the State against discrimination in education as part of the mediation process 
before the State Superintendent.  
 
Failure to Remedy:  Under current law, a complainant alleging that a local board, program, 
or school did not remedy or eliminate the discrimination as agreed or required under the 
decision issued by the State Superintendent may reopen a complaint with the 
State Superintendent without filing a new complaint or engaging in mediation.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 649/ Page 5 
If the State Superintendent finds that a local board, program, or school did not remedy or 
eliminate the discrimination as agreed or required, the State Superintendent must issue an 
updated written decision to both parties requiring the Comptroller to withhold funding from 
the program or school in an amount determined by the State Superintendent in accordance 
with law. Under the bill, a complaint may be reopened by MCCR under the same 
conditions, and MCCR is similarly required to notify the State Superintendent and issue an 
updated decision requiring the withholding of funds. On receipt of notice from MCCR, the 
State Superintendent must require the Comptroller to withhold funding from the program 
or school. 
 
Appeals:  Under current law, a complainant or respondent may appeal a decision by the 
State Superintendent to the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) within 10 days after 
receiving a decision issued by the State Superintendent or, if the State Superintendent does 
not issue a decision as required, within 10 days after the date by which the decision should 
have been issued. Under the bill, a complainant may appeal to OAH on similar grounds if 
MCCR has or has not issued its decision within 10 days. If MCCR submitted the complaint 
and the decision was issued by the State Superintendent, MCCR may also appeal the 
decision to OAH.  
 
If, after reviewing all the evidence, the administrative law judge finds that the respondent 
has engaged in discrimination, the administrative law judge must (1) issue a decision and 
order stating the findings of fact and conclusions of law and (2) issue and cause to be served 
on the respondent an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist from engaging in 
the discrimination and take affirmative action to effectuate nondiscrimination. 
 
Regulations:  Under current law, the State Board of Education (SBE), in consultation with 
the State Superintendent, must adopt regulations to establish procedures for complaint 
processing, mediation, and enforcement and otherwise carry out the requirements above. 
As referenced above, MCCR is also required to adopt regulations to establish procedures 
for complaint processing, mediation, and enforcement. Under the regulations adopted 
pursuant to the bill, SBE and the State Superintendent must defer to MCCR on 
interpretations of whether an act constitutes discrimination; MCCR must defer to SBE and 
the State Superintendent on matters related to the education of students. The 
State Superintendent and MCCR must each defer to the authority of the entity generally 
facilitating the complaint. SBE (in consultation with the State Superintendent, as specified) 
and MCCR must jointly set guidelines for determining when allegations of discriminatory 
practices are sufficient to warrant mediation.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 649/ Page 6 
Civil Actions 
 
In addition to a complaint made with MCCR, the bill authorizes an individual alleging a 
discriminatory educational practice to bring a civil action. If a complaint for discriminatory 
educational practice has been brought before MCCR, MCCR may elect to bring a civil 
action on its own behalf if (1) MCCR has found probable cause to believe that the 
respondent has engaged or is engaging in a discriminatory educational practice and 
(2) there is failure to reach an agreement to remedy and eliminate the discriminatory 
educational practice. If MCCR elects to bring a civil action on its own behalf, MCCR must 
give notice to all complainants and respondents.  
 
A civil action must be filed in the circuit court for the county where the alleged 
discriminatory educational practice occurred. Filing a civil action automatically terminates 
any proceeding before MCCR based on the underlying complaint. If the court finds that a 
discriminatory educational practice occurred, the court may provide the following 
remedies: 
 
 
enjoining the defendant from engaging in the discriminatory educational practice; 
 
ordering appropriate affirmative relief; 
 
awarding compensatory damages; 
 
awarding punitive damages, if (1) the defendant is not a governmental unit or 
political subdivision and (2) the court finds that the defendant engaged or is 
engaging in a discriminatory educational practice with actual malice; and 
 
ordering any other equitable relief that the court considers appropriate. 
 
Higher Education Referrals 
 
Under the bill, if the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) or University 
System of Maryland’s (USM) Board of Regents receives a complaint that an individual 
was excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination 
in an institution of postsecondary education or constituent institution because of race, color, 
national origin, ethnicity, ancestry, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, disability, age, or marital status, MHEC or the Board of Regents must refer any 
information received about the alleged discrimination to MCCR for investigation.  
 
Federal Prohibitions Against Discrimination in Education  
 
Prohibited Acts:  Numerous provisions of federal law prohibit discrimination in education. 
The federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 649/ Page 7 
sex, religion, or national origin by public elementary and secondary schools and public 
institutions of higher learning. Private (nonpublic) schools receiving federal funds must 
comply with federal law provisions regarding discrimination. Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex by private schools 
receiving federal funding. Federal law includes exceptions for the admissions practices of 
single-sex schools. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) also prohibits state and 
local governments from discriminating on the basis of disability. Private schools not run or 
controlled by religious organizations must abide by the ADA. Title VI of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 states:  “No person in the United States shall, on the grounds of race, color, or 
national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected 
to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.” 
 
Office of Civil Rights:  Any individual who believes that an education institution that 
receives federal financial assistance has discriminated against someone on the basis of race, 
color, national origin, sex, disability, or age may file a complaint with the Office for Civil 
Rights (OCR). The person or organization filing the complaint does not have to be a victim 
of the alleged discrimination. A complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged 
discrimination. OCR does not handle cases that are being addressed by another agency or 
within a school’s formal grievance procedure if OCR anticipates the agency or school will 
provide a comparable resolution process. Once that complaint process is complete, an 
individual has 60 days to file a complaint with OCR.  
 
Background:  According to MCCR, the bill supplements and expands existing 
prohibitions on discrimination in education. MCCR notes that existing State prohibitions 
are limited to elementary and secondary schools, which leaves students in higher education 
without similar protections. MCCR advises that the bill is needed to provide a mechanism 
by which all Marylanders who believe they have been victims of discrimination in 
education may file a complaint with MCCR, an independent State agency that is generally 
charged with the enforcement of laws prohibiting discrimination in the State.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  It is assumed that MCCR, the Judiciary, and OAH can handle 
additional complaints/cases under the bill. Higher education expenditures and local 
expenditures potentially increase to the extent there is more robust enforcement of 
discrimination in education.  
 
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) notes, for example, that current 
regulations require for a complaint of an alleged discriminatory act in education to be filed 
within 60 days of the act occurring (COMAR 13A.01.07.04). Under the bill, however, a 
complainant may file with MCCR within six months of the act occurring (generally 
consistent with timeframes for filing complaints alleging other discriminatory acts handled 
by MCCR). While the bill does not grant MCCR superseding enforcement authority 
comparatively to MSDE, the extended time period for filing a complaint and additional 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 649/ Page 8 
oversight from MCCR may result in more robust enforcement of complaints of 
discrimination.  
 
For example, both the Frederick County Public School System and Prince George’s County 
Public School System advise of a potential significant fiscal impact, largely due to 
increased exposure to civil litigation. Prince George’s County anticipates an increase in 
complaints that may necessitate additional legal staff. For illustrative purposes only, to the 
extent that an additional attorney is required by Prince George’s County, local expenditures 
increase by approximately $250,000 annually. 
 
Further, according to USM, higher education expenditures may increase due to increased 
litigation risk. Salisbury University anticipates an increase of pre-litigation demands, 
earlier civil action filings, and more resource-intensive defense strategies. University of 
Maryland, Baltimore and Towson University also anticipate potential litigation and 
settlement costs; these costs may be significant.  
 
DLS notes that, while oversight of discrimination in education increases with the 
involvement of MCCR, the responsibilities for educational institutions – mainly in 
response to the complaint process – are largely unchanged by the bill, as are the 
prohibitions against discriminating based on certain protected classes. However, to the 
extent that more robust enforcement of discrimination prohibitions results in increased 
exposure to litigation and higher complaint volumes, expenditures may increase 
accordingly.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to MCCR, OCR reported the following number of 
complaints alleging discrimination in kindergarten through higher education in the State:  
41 complaints in 2022; 55 complaints in 2023; and 130 complaints in 2024. OCR complaint 
data was last updated January 14, 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Prince George’s County; 
Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
University System of Maryland; Office of Administrative Hearings; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 649/ Page 9 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 649/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Advancing Equal Educational Opportunities for All Students in 
Maryland 
BILL NUMBER: HB 649 
PREPARED BY: S. Spencer Dove, Special Assistant to the Executive Director 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
No impact. All for profit colleges and universities in Maryland – DeVry University, 
University of 
Phoenix Maryland Campus, Fortis College Landover, and Purdue Global Hagerstown 
Campus – 
that could be found online but were not listed in MHEC's institution directory 
https://mhec.maryland.gov/institutions_training/Pages/collegeinfo.aspx) have more than 
50 full-time employees. 

END OF PAGE 10