START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 639 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 639 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Transportation - Aviation - Passenger Health and Safety (Aviation Health and 
Safety Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes various requirements and prohibitions for specified entities, including 
the Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA), airports operated by local governments, 
fixed base operators (FBOs), and aviation service companies, related to the treatment and 
transport of detained individuals traveling on aircraft in the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase minimally beginning 
in FY 2027 for administrative costs associated with the development, distribution, and 
collection of the forms required by the bill. Federal fund revenues and expenditures for 
MAA may be significantly affected beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below.  
 
Local Effect:  Local government finances and operations for airports owned and/or 
operated by local governments may be affected, as discussed below.    
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Definitions  
 
“Aeronautical services” includes (1) fueling, hangaring, tying down, or parking an aircraft; 
(2) aircraft rental; (3) aircraft maintenance; and (4) flight instruction. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 639/ Page 2 
“Aviation service company” means a single-service fixed base operator that offers 
specialized aeronautical services. 
 
“FBO” means a commercial business that an airport has granted the right to operate at an 
airport facility and provide aeronautical services. 
 
“Detained individual” means a passenger who is traveling involuntarily or while being held 
in any kind of restraint.  
 
Detained Individual Forms 
 
MAA must develop a form to be used for any passenger on an aircraft who is a detained 
individual. The form must collect information on the individual’s medical history 
(including allergies, current medical conditions, and medications) and legal history 
(including contact information for the individual’s attorney and any pending legal 
proceedings). In addition, the form must (1) identify whether the individual is a minor and, 
if so, provide guardianship information if the guardian is not on board the aircraft;  
(2) state that the forms will be reviewed by an FBO or an aviation service company and 
may be shared with emergency responders in the case of an emergency; (3) inform the 
individual that completion of the form is voluntary; and (4) contain a space for an 
individual who declines to complete the form to affirmatively indicate that they have seen 
the form and are choosing not to complete it.  
 
The flight crew on each aircraft is responsible for distributing the forms to and collecting 
them from each detained passenger on board. Copies of the form must be kept on board 
each aircraft, and in the event of an emergency, provided to emergency responders or 
hospitals in the State.  
 
Responsibilities of Fixed Base Operators and Aviation Service Companies 
 
Before providing service to an aircraft, each FBO or aviation service company must inspect 
the aircraft to confirm that the forms are on board the aircraft. Each month, each FBO or 
aviation service company must compile and submit to MAA a report that documents, for 
each aircraft traveling with a detained individual, the following:  
 
 
the agency or company responsible for the aircraft; 
 
the presence of the forms required by the bill; and 
 
compliance with the refueling procedures specified in the bill (described below). 
 
A member of each flight crew and FBO or aviation service company must sign each 
monthly report.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 639/ Page 3 
Aircraft Refueling Requirements 
 
The bill prohibits an aircraft from being refueled if an individual on board is in any kind of 
restraint. If a restrained individual is removed from an aircraft for the aircraft to refuel, the 
individual must (1) be placed in a climate-controlled enclosure and (2) have access to 
restrooms and water.  
 
Contract, Grant, and Agreement Requirements  
 
The bill prohibits a person (including the State, a county, a municipality, any other political 
subdivision, and a unit of State government or a political subdivision) from entering into a 
contract, grant, or other agreement with an airline that transports detained individuals 
unless the airline provides evidence of (1) a valid warrant issued by a federal court or court 
of the State; (2) a valid court order; or (3) the Governor’s authorization of the extradition 
of the detained individual to another state.  
 
MAA is also prohibited from entering into a contract, grant, or other agreement with an 
FBO or an aviation service company that services airlines that transport detained 
individuals through Baltimore-Washington International (BWI) Thurgood Marshall 
Airport unless the airline provides evidence of (1) a valid warrant issued by a federal court 
or court of the State; (2) a valid court order; or (3) the Governor’s authorization of the 
extradition of the detained individual to another state. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Federal Aviation Regulation  
 
The Federal Aviation Act gives the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) exclusive 
authority to regulate aviation safety and civil aviation. The Act authorizes FAA to manage 
and control the national airspace system, regulate airline operations, set safety standards 
for aircraft design and maintenance, certify pilots and mechanics, and enforce rules 
intended to promote safe and efficient air travel.  
 
The Airline Deregulation Act, passed in 1978, deregulated the aviation industry and allows 
airlines to set their own prices and fares. The federal preemption clause of the Act forbids 
states from enacting or enforcing a law or regulation related to a price, route, or service of 
an air carrier.  
 
Maryland Aviation Administration  
 
MAA, as a unit of the Maryland Department of Transportation, has responsibility for 
fostering, developing, and regulating aviation activity throughout the State. MAA is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 639/ Page 4 
responsible for operating, maintaining, and developing BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport (a 
State-owned airport) as a major center of commercial air carrier service in the State and 
Martin State Airport as a general aviation facility and as a support facility for the Maryland 
Air National Guard and the Department of State Police.  
 
MAA regulations require that all aeronautical activities at BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport 
and Martin State Airport conform to the current applicable provisions of FAA regulations 
and orders and applicable State law, regulations, and orders issued by MAA or an air traffic 
controller on duty in the control tower.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  TTF expenditures increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2027 as 
MAA incurs administrative costs associated with the development, distribution, and 
collection of the form required by the bill for detained individuals. MAA can receive the 
compiled reports from FBOs and aviation service companies using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
MAA advises that it could lose up to $300 million in federal fund revenues (which reflects 
federal funding provided to MAA in the Consolidated Transportation Program for 
fiscal 2026 through 2031), to the extent the bill puts MAA in noncompliance with federal 
law and regulations. FAA grantees are required to maintain compliance with applicable 
provisions of federal laws, regulations, executive orders, policies, guidelines, and 
requirements, and the Airline Deregulation Act preempts state and local governments from 
regulating carriers’ routes, services, and operations. As a result, BWI Thurgood Marshall 
Airport and Martin State Airport may be prohibited from restricting duly authorized flight 
operations under the bill. MAA advises that, depending on the implementation of the bill, 
if MAA is found to be noncompliant with federal law, it could lose federal fund revenues 
or be required to pay back previously provided federal funds.  
 
To the extent MAA loses federal funding, federal fund revenues and expenditures decrease 
accordingly; however, any such impact is speculative.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Similar to the effects described above for State-owned airports, 
airports owned and/or operated by local governments (such as Ocean City Municipal 
Airport, Frederick Municipal Airport, Carroll County Regional Airport, and St. Mary’s 
County Regional Airport) may be affected. These airports likely incur a minimal increase 
in administrative costs to distribute and collect the form for detained individuals. Federal 
funds may also be jeopardized, although any such impact is speculative.  
 
For informational purposes, a list of the airports owned and/or operated by local 
governments can be found on the Maryland State Archives website, here.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 639/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 505 (Senators Lam and Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Institute for 
Emergency Medical Services Systems; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Archives; Federal Aviation Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5