START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 623 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 623 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Purple Star Schools Program and Purple Star Colleges Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Purple Star Colleges Program administered by the Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to recognize colleges, including private career 
schools, that provide strong services and support for military-connected students. To 
qualify, a college must, at a minimum, designate a staff liaison to perform specified duties, 
create an easily accessible web page with pertinent resources, maintain a transition program 
led by students as appropriate, and offer professional development for staff on issues 
related to military-connected students transferring to new schools. The bill also changes 
the definition of “military-connected student” for purposes of the Purple Star Schools 
Program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHEC general fund expenditures increase by $43,800 and $46,400 in 
FY 2027 and 2028, respectively, for contractual personnel, as discussed below. If a public 
four-year institution of higher education or Baltimore City Community College elects to 
seek Purple Star College designation, higher education expenditures may increase and 
operations may be affected; however, any such impacts are voluntary and likely 
absorbable. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can update regulations 
for the Purple Star Schools Program with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
43,800 
46,400 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($43,800) 
($46,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  If a local community college elects to seek Purple Star College designation, 
expenditures may increase and operations may be affected; however, any such impacts are 
voluntary and likely absorbable. Revenues are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 623/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MHEC must designate a college as a Purple Star College if the college 
applies and meets the specific criteria adopted by MHEC (in consultation with the 
Maryland College Collaboration for Student Veterans Commission). A college may partner 
with its governing board to meet the criteria. MHEC (again in consultation with the 
Maryland College Collaboration for Student Veterans Commission) must adopt regulations 
to implement the bill. 
 
The liaison’s duties must include (1) identifying newly enrolled military-connected 
students; (2) serving as the point of contact between the college and newly enrolled 
military-connected students; (3) determining appropriate college services available to 
newly enrolled military-connected students; (4) assisting in coordinating college programs 
for newly enrolled military-connected students; and (5) generally assisting in a 
military‑connected student’s transition to a new college.  
 
The web page required for recognition as a Purple Star College must include information 
regarding (1) relocation to, enrollment at, registration at, and transferring records to the 
college; (2) academic planning, course sequences, and advanced courses available at the 
college; and (3) counseling and other support services available for military-connected 
students transitioning into the college.  
 
For purposes of the Purple Star Colleges Program, the bill defines “military-connected 
student” as a service member, a veteran, or the dependent of a service member or veteran. 
For the purposes of the Purple Stars Schools Program “military-connected student” is a 
student who is a dependent of a service member or a service member who was killed in the 
line of duty. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Purple Star Schools Program 
 
Chapters 65 and 66 of 2022 established the Purple Star Schools Program to recognize 
public schools that provide strong services and support for military-connected students and 
their families when students transfer schools as a result of a parent or guardian’s military 
service. To qualify as a Purple Star School, a public school must meet criteria adopted by 
MSDE. At a minimum, the criteria must require a school to designate a staff liaison to 
perform specified duties, create an easily accessible web page with pertinent resources, 
maintain a transition program led by students, and offer professional development for staff 
on issues related to military-connected students transferring to new schools. A public 
school may partner with the county board to fulfill MSDE’s criteria.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 623/ Page 3 
For purposes of the Purple Star Schools Program, “military-connected student” means a 
student who is a dependent of (1) an active duty uniformed services member; (2) a member 
of a reserve component; or (3) an active duty uniformed services member or a member of 
a reserve component who was killed in the line of duty.  
 
Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for Military Children 
 
Since 2010, Maryland has been a member of the Interstate Compact on Educational 
Opportunity for Military Children, which addresses enrollment of dependents of members 
of the uniformed services when the service member is under active orders. The purpose of 
the compact is to remove barriers to educational success imposed on children of military 
families because of frequent moves and deployment by their parents. Among other things, 
it seeks to (1) facilitate the timely enrollment of children of military families and 
(2) facilitate the student placement process.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MHEC estimates that two regular full-time positions are needed 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to implement the bill, including (1) a program manager to establish 
regulations, regularly review institutional applications, coordinate with other State 
agencies, and generate reports and (2) a technical assistance and outreach specialist to 
coordinate with institutions, create and deliver professional development, provide technical 
support, curate resources, and engage additional stakeholders. The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS), however, advises that the bill merely requires MHEC to 
establish criteria and certify institutions as Purple Star Colleges as they apply. The onus of 
responsibility for providing services that would qualify institutions as Purple Star Colleges 
is on the institutions themselves. Therefore, DLS advises that MHEC can likely establish 
and manage the Purple Star Colleges Program using only one contractual half-time (50%) 
program manager.  
 
General fund expenditures for MHEC increase by $43,821 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for a 90-day start‑up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one contractual half-time (50%) program manager to establish the 
Purple Star Colleges Program, including criteria for qualification as a Purple Star College, 
development of application materials, and promulgation of regulations. It includes a 
half‑time (50%) salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$35,722 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 MHEC Expenditures 
$43,821 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 623/ Page 4 
Fiscal 2028 expenditures reflect a half-time (50%) salary with an annual increase and 
employee turnover as well as increases in ongoing operating expenses. This analysis 
assumes that the position terminates on June 30, 2028. After that time, it is assumed that 
MHEC can more readily absorb any ongoing responsibilities under the bill, such as 
reviewing applications. This analysis does not reflect the costs of ongoing stakeholder 
coordination, expanded technical assistance, or detailed reporting on program 
implementation. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  If an independent institution of higher education, including a 
private career school, wishes to be recognized as a Purple Star College, expenditures may 
increase and operations may be affected to achieve such recognition. However, any 
expenditure increases or operational changes can likely be managed with existing 
resources.  
   
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 709 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Morgan State University; University System of Maryland; Maryland 
Independent College and University Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4