START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 668 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 668 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
St. Mary's County - Prohibition on Standing in Inherently Dangerous Highway 
 
 
This bill prohibits, in St. Mary’s County, a person from standing in a roadway, shoulder, 
median divider, or intersection determined to be inherently dangerous by the county or a 
municipality in the county, in consultation with the State Highway Administration (SHA). 
The bill prohibits a police officer from issuing a citation for violating this prohibition unless 
(1) the inherently dangerous roadway, shoulder, median divider, or intersection has 
appropriate signs installed by the county or a municipality in the county that notify the 
public that a person may not stand in that area, and (2) the signs are installed in accordance 
with the manual and specifications for a uniform system of traffic control devices adopted 
by SHA. St. Mary’s County or a municipality in the county must get approval from SHA 
before installing the signs specified under the bill on a State highway. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. SHA can 
handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect St. Mary’s County operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except for the occupant of a disabled vehicle who seeks the aid of another 
vehicle, a person may not stand in a roadway to solicit a ride, employment, or business 
from an occupant of any vehicle. Further, a person is prohibited from standing on or near 
a highway to solicit any other person to guard any vehicle while it is parked or about to be 
parked on the highway. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 668/ Page 2 
In Calvert, Carroll, Charles, Harford, and Washington counties, a person may not stand in 
a roadway, median divider, or intersection to solicit money or donations of any kind from 
the occupant of a vehicle. 
 
In Anne Arundel County, a person may not stand in a highway to solicit money or 
donations of any kind from the occupant of a vehicle or advertise any message. 
 
In Howard County, a person may not stand in a State highway or the highway right-of-way 
to solicit money or donations of any kind from the occupant of a vehicle. 
 
In Prince George’s County, a person may not stand in a highway to solicit money or 
donations of any kind from the occupant of a vehicle. An adult may not cause, encourage, 
allow, or petition a child younger than age 15 to engage in such activity. 
 
In Allegany and Cecil counties, the county governing body or a municipality is authorized 
to adopt a permit program for roadside solicitation. A person is prohibited from standing 
in a roadway, median divider, or intersection to solicit money or donations from occupants 
of motor vehicles (without a valid permit) and from causing, encouraging, allowing, or 
petitioning others to do so. An individual or a representative of a qualified organization 
who is at least age 18 may obtain a permit from the county-governing body or a 
municipality, upon submitting proof of a plan to safely solicit donations. Only one permit 
per individual or organization can be issued in a calendar year, and statute limits the 
duration of the permits. 
 
In Baltimore and Montgomery counties, the county council is authorized to enact a permit 
program to allow a person to stand in a roadway, median divider, or intersection to solicit 
money or donations from the occupant of a vehicle if the permit program meets specified 
conditions. 
 
In Frederick County, the county or a municipality is authorized to enact a permit program 
allowing a person to stand in a roadway, median divider, or intersection to solicit money 
or donations from the occupant of a vehicle. If the county or municipality enacts an 
ordinance establishing a permit program, the ordinance must require a person seeking a 
permit to file an application containing the following information:  (1) the date, time, and 
location of the solicitation; (2) the manner and conditions under which the solicitation is to 
occur; and (3) the name, address, and telephone number of a contact person of the 
employing or sponsoring person, agency, or entity on whose behalf the solicitation is to be 
made, who will be able to provide additional information to the county, municipality, or 
the designee of the county or municipality. The county or municipality must approve the 
application within five days after the application is filed and may impose conditions on the 
solicitation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 668/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Maryland Department of Transportation; St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3