START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 610 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 610 
(Delegate T. Morgan) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
St. Mary's County - Gaming by Qualified Organization - Permit Required 
 
 
This bill requires a qualified organization to hold a gaming permit whenever the qualified 
organization operates a gaming device in St. Mary’s County in accordance with current 
law. A gaming device is a mechanism for playing a game of chance. The St. Mary’s County 
Commissioners must designate a person (designee) to issue gaming permits and may adopt 
regulations, in consultation with the designee, to administer and enforce gaming device 
permits. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County can issue permits and enforce the bill with existing 
resources. St. Mary’s County revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A qualified organization in St. Mary’s County may conduct a gaming event 
(a carnival, bazaar, or raffle) and may operate a gaming device (including a paddle wheel, 
a wheel of fortune, a chance book, bingo, Nevada card, and a stamp machine) for the 
exclusive benefit of a qualified organization if an individual or a group of individuals does 
not benefit financially from the gaming device or gaming event or receive any of the 
proceeds from the gaming device or gaming event for personal use or benefit. Qualified 
organizations include volunteer fire companies and bona fide religious, fraternal, civic, war 
veterans’, and charitable organizations. Members of qualified organizations must 
personally manage the operation of gaming devices and gaming events. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 610/ Page 2 
If a qualified organization uses a gaming device on a daily basis, the qualified organization 
may not operate more than five gaming devices and the premises in which the qualified 
organization operates the gaming device may not contain more than five gaming devices. 
 
A qualified organization must keep accurate records of proceeds and expenditures 
involving gaming devices. On request, a qualified organization must allow the  
State’s Attorney for the county, a State Police officer, the designee, and the sheriff or 
deputy sheriff to examine these records. 
 
A qualified organization must have a bingo license to conduct bingo in St. Mary’s County. 
The St. Mary’s County Commissioners must designate a person to issue bingo licenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 357 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Comptroller’s Office; Department of State 
Police; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2