START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 681 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 681 
(Delegate Lewis, et al.) (By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Judicial Proceedings and Budget and Taxation 
 
Baltimore City - Ordinance Enforcement - Fines and Penalties 
 
 
This bill repeals the maximum civil and criminal fines and penalties Baltimore City may 
impose for the violation of any ordinance, rule, or regulation established by the city, as 
specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues may increase, beginning in FY 2027, to the extent 
that higher fines or penalties are imposed for civil or criminal offenses. Baltimore City 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Baltimore City is authorized to provide civil and criminal fines and 
penalties for the violation of any ordinance, rule, or regulation established by the city, as 
specified. The maximum fine or penalty for these violations is $1,000. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the 
extent higher fines are imposed and collected under the bill. In fiscal 2024, the  
Baltimore City Environmental Control Board (ECB) issued 7,778 environmental citations 
totaling approximately $7.8 million, as shown in Exhibit 1. Baltimore City collected  
$5.9 million in fine revenues from these environmental citations, a 75.8% collection rate. 
In addition, Baltimore City collected $1,630 from other civil citations in fiscal 2024.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 681/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Fiscal 2024 Baltimore City Environmental Control Board Citations 
 
Citations Issued in FY 2024 
Citations Issued Value at $1,000 
Failed to Abate Unsafe Structure 
7,579 
$7,579,000 
Failed to Obtain License to 
Operate a Rental Dwelling 
155 
155,000 
Dumping Over 25 lbs. of Waste 
on Public Property 
30 
30,000 
Dumping Over 25 lbs. of Waste 
on Private Property 
11 
11,000 
Violation of Corrective Actions 
1 
1,000 
Dog Not on Leash 
1 
1,000 
Neglect of Animal 
1 
1,000  
Total 
7,778 
$7,778,000  
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Baltimore City advises that significantly higher fines may initially serve to reduce 
collection rates. However, any unpaid ECB fines can result in property liens, and the 
potential for a property to be sent to tax sale may serve as incentive for payment. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 573 and HB 1009 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 290 (Senator McCray)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Judicial Proceedings and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 681/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3