START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 660 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 660 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Libraries - State Library Resource Center - Funding 
 
 
This bill increases the per capita funding amount that must be provided to the State Library 
Resource Center (SLRC) beginning in fiscal 2028. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $628,900 in FY 2028, 
increasing to $2.8 million in FY 2031; future year increases reflect higher per capita 
funding amounts and population growth. Revenues are not affected. This bill increases a 
mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
628,900 
1,328,500 
2,036,600 
2,817,200 
Net Effect 
$0 
($628,900) 
($1,328,500) 
($2,036,600) 
($2,817,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Although local library systems benefit from SLRC funding, local finances 
are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill increases per capita State aid for SLRC beginning in fiscal 2028 
by varying amounts (ranging from an additional 10 cents per capita in fiscal 2028 to an 
additional 57 cents per capita in fiscal 2032). Exhibit 1 compares per capita State aid under 
current law and under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 660/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Per Capita State Library Resource Center Aid Increases under the Bill 
Fiscal 2027-2032 
 
Fiscal Year 
Current Law 
Proposed 
Difference 
% Difference 
2027 
$2.07 
$2.07 
$0.00 
0.0% 
2028 
2.07 
2.17 
0.10 
4.8% 
2029 
2.07 
2.28 
0.21 
10.1% 
2030 
2.07 
2.39 
0.32 
15.5% 
2031 
2.07 
2.51 
0.44 
21.3% 
2032 
2.07 
2.64 
0.57 
27.5% 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Current Law:  
 
State Library Network 
 
Since 1888, the State has provided funds to support public libraries throughout the State 
under what is now known as the State library network. The network consists of the 
Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library System in Baltimore City, three regional 
resource centers, and metropolitan cooperative service programs. All these systems receive 
State funding for operating expenses. 
 
The Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library operates as the designated SLRC. The 
funding level for SLRC is set at $2.07 per resident. The fiscal 2027 State budget as 
introduced includes $13.0 million in funding for SLRC.  
 
Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled 
 
The Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled (LBPD) provides 
comprehensive library services to eligible blind and physically disabled residents of 
Maryland, which includes individuals who are legally blind, visually or physically limited, 
or reading disabled. The library is part of the national network of the National Library 
Services for the Blind and Print Disabled through the Library of Congress. The National 
Library Services selects and produces recordings of full-length books and magazines for a 
network of libraries providing alternative format materials. LBPD supplements the 
National Library Service collection with large print books, descriptive videos, children’s 
braille books, and tactile materials such as maps, atlases, and art books. Books are lent on 
a wide range of subjects in braille, audio, and large type. The service is free, statewide, and 
can be provided to individuals via the U.S. mail. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 660/ Page 3 
LBPD must receive an amount equivalent to at least 25% of the general fund appropriation 
received by SLRC under the required per capita funding amount. Based on the current 
budgeted amount for SLRC, the minimum State funding level for LBPD totals 
approximately $3.2 million. However, the fiscal 2027 State budget as introduced includes  
$3.5 million in funding for LBPD ($3.1 million in general funds and $378,536 in 
federal funds), which exceeds the minimum statutory required amount.  
 
State Expenditures:  As shown in Exhibit 2, State formula aid for SLRC increases by 
$628,856 in fiscal 2028 and, based upon current projections for population growth, by 
$2.8 million in fiscal 2031. Fiscal year 2032 is the final year of the statutory phase-in of 
the State formula aid for SLRC under the bill; expenditures thereafter reflect the fully 
phased-in funding level, subject to population changes.  
 
Since the current State funding level for LBPD exceeds the minimum statutory required 
amount, the enhanced funding for SLRC is not projected to impact the level of State 
funding provided to LBPD. To the extent federal funding is reduced or unavailable in future 
years, additional general funds may be necessary to meet the funding requirement for 
LBPD.  
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Increase in Funding for SLRC under the Bill 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
 
$0 
$628,856  
$1,328,518  
$2,036,575  
$2,817,159  
 
SLRC:  State Library Resource Center 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 515 and HB 597 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 410 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 660/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Library Agency; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4