START OF PAGE 1
HB0638/373027/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 638
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Cardin” and substitute
“Delegates Cardin, Conaway, Simmons, and Woods”; in line 4, after
“circumstances” insert “; and establishing a mandatory retirement age for judges of the
Orphans’ Court”; in line 7, after “18B,” insert “40,”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 3, after line 35, insert:

“40.

(a) The qualified voters of the several Counties, except Howard County,
Montgomery County, and Harford County, shall elect three Judges of the Orphans’
Courts of Counties who shall be citizens of the State and residents, for the twelve
months preceding, in the County for which they may be elected.

(b) The qualified voters of the City of Baltimore shall elect three Judges of the
Orphans’ Court for Baltimore City who shall be citizens of the State and residents, for
the twelve months preceding, in Baltimore City and who have been admitted to practice
law in this State and are members in good standing of the Maryland Bar.

(c) The qualified voters of Prince George’s County shall elect three Judges of
the Orphans’ Court for Prince George’s County who shall be citizens of the State and
residents, for the twelve months preceding, in Prince George’s County and who have
been admitted to practice law in this State and are members in good standing of the
Maryland Bar.

(d) The qualified voters of Baltimore County shall elect three Judges of the
Orphans’ Court for Baltimore County who shall be citizens of the State and residents,
for the twelve months preceding, in Baltimore County and who have been admitted to
practice law in this State and are members in good standing of the Maryland Bar.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0638/373027/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 638
Page 2 of 2

(e) The Judges shall have all the powers now vested in the Orphans’ Courts of
the State, subject to such changes as the Legislature may prescribe.

(f) Each of the Judges shall be paid such compensation as may be regulated
by Law, to be paid by the City or Counties, respectively.

(g) In case of a vacancy in the office of Judge of the Orphans’ Court, the
Governor shall appoint, subject to confirmation or rejection by the Senate, some suitable
person to fill the vacancy for the residue of the term.

(H) IN NO EVENT SHALL A JUDGE OF THE ORPHANS’ COURT CONTINUE
IN OFFICE AFTER THE JUDGE’S SEVENTY–THIRD BIRTHDAY.”.
END OF PAGE 2