START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 642 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 642 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Electric Companies - Service Outages and Rate Increases - Report on Customer 
Impact 
 
 
This bill requires each electric company, by April 1 each year, to report to the Public 
Service Commission (PSC) geographic and demographic data on all customers impacted 
by service outages and rate increases for the immediately preceding year. With respect to 
service outages, the report must include geographic and demographic data on all customers 
impacted by (1) a service outage lasting two hours or longer; (2) a service outage for 
scheduled maintenance, regardless of duration; and (3) each service outage, regardless of 
duration, occurring during an inclement weather event, including the amount of time until 
service was restored.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
It is assumed that municipal electric utilities can report to PSC using existing resources. 
The five municipal electric utilities are located in Berlin (Worcester County),  
Easton (Talbot County), Hagerstown (Washington County), Thurmont (Frederick County), 
and Williamsport (Washington County). 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies, which includes 
electric companies, subject to its jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 642/ Page 2 
the public and (2) promote adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services 
in the State without unjust discrimination. 
 
Annual Performance Reports  
 
By April 1 each year, each electric company must submit to PSC an annual performance 
report that summarizes the actual electric service reliability results for the preceding year. 
Among other requirements, the annual performance report must include information PSC 
determines necessary to assess the electric company’s efforts to maintain reliable electric 
service to all customers in the electric company’s service territory, including: 
 
 
the number of outages by outage type and cause; 
 
the total number of customers that experienced an outage; 
 
the total customer minutes of outage time; and 
 
to the extent practicable, a breakdown, by the number of days each customer was 
without electric service, of the number of customers that experienced an outage. 
 
Additional Comments:  The annual performance reports submitted by electric companies 
are published on PSC’s website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2