START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 664 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 664 
(Cecil County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Cecil County - Alcoholic Beverages - Alteration of License Quota 
 
 
This bill alters the quota on the number of alcoholic beverages licenses that the 
Cecil County Board of License Commissioners may issue to apply only to Class A 
alcoholic beverages licenses. The board may not issue (1) in the aggregate, more than 
one Class A license for every 2,000 registered voters or major fraction in the county, as 
determined by the current registration of voters or (2) fewer than two Class A licenses in 
each election district of the county. The bill also specifies that no other class of license may 
be counted in the computation of the aggregate number of licenses. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Cecil County finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Cecil County, the board may not issue more than one license for every 
400 registered voters in the county, as determined by the current registration of voters. A 
Class BLX beer, wine, and liquor restaurant license, Class C club license, motel-restaurant 
complex license, hotel-restaurant complex license, or Class GC (golf course) beer, wine, 
and liquor (on-sale) license may not be counted in the computation of the aggregate number 
of licenses. The quota must be computed and applied separately for each election district 
of the county. Cecil County is divided into nine election districts. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 664/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 897 (Cecil County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Cecil County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
me/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2