START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 687 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 687 
(Delegate Amprey, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Evidence - Protecting Artists' Creative Expression (PACE 
Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits the “creative expression” of a defendant or respondent from being 
admitted against the defendant or respondent in a criminal or juvenile proceeding unless 
the court makes specified findings. The bill does not preclude the admission of creative 
expression in juvenile cases for the purposes of evaluating, recommending, or ordering 
referral to mental health services or diversion programs.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In any criminal or juvenile proceeding, the creative expression of a 
defendant or respondent is not admissible against the defendant or respondent unless the 
court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that:   
 
 
the defendant or respondent intended the creative expression to be literal, rather than 
figurative or fictional or if the creative expression is derivative, the defendant 
intended to adopt the literal meaning of the creative expression as their own; 
 
the creative expression refers to the specific facts of the alleged offense; and 
 
the creative expression is relevant to a disputed issue of fact. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 687/ Page 2 
“Creative expression” means the expression or application of creativity or imagination in 
the production or arrangement of forms, sounds, words, movements, or symbols that is 
eligible for federal copyright protection under 17 U.S.C. § 102. “Creative expression” 
includes music, dance, performance art, visual art, poetry, literature, and film. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Rules of Evidence generally follow the Federal Rules of 
Evidence. Except as otherwise specified, all relevant evidence is admissible. Relevant 
evidence is evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of 
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would 
be without the evidence. Although relevant, evidence may be excluded under 
Maryland Rule 5-403 if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of 
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of 
undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. Generally, 
evidence of a person’s character or character trait is not admissible to prove that a person 
acted in accordance with the character trait on a particular occasion. 
 
Subject Matter of Copyright – 17 U.S.C. § 102  
 
Copyright protection subsists in original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium 
of expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be perceived, 
reproduced, or otherwise communicated (either directly or with the aid of a machine or 
device). Works of authorship include the following categories: 
 
 
literary works; 
 
musical works, including any accompanying words; 
 
dramatic works, including any accompanying music; 
 
pantomimes and choreographic works; 
 
pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works; 
 
motion pictures and other audiovisual works; 
 
sound recordings; and 
 
architectural works. 
 
Copyright protection for an original work of authorship does not extend to any idea, 
procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, 
regardless of the form in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such 
work.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 687/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1346 and SB 1001 of 2025; HB 1429 and SB 662 of 2024; and HB 
940 of 2023.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 475 (Senator Sydnor, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3