START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 604 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 604 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Arbitration Reform for State Employees Act of 2026 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next general 
election, requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill the appropriations 
necessary to implement and fund all terms of memoranda of understanding (MOU) or 
binding arbitration involving the State, State institutions of higher education, and the 
Maryland Environmental Service (MES) and the exclusive representatives of their 
respective employees. Also, contingent on passage of the proposed constitutional 
amendment, and its ratification by the voters, the bill alters the statutory collective 
bargaining process for State employees by establishing binding arbitration in the event of 
an impasse in negotiations. In addition, it requires the selection of a neutral arbitrator to 
oversee all aspects of collective bargaining in specified circumstances, expands the matters 
subject to negotiation, and makes various conforming changes. However, matters requiring 
an appropriation are contingent on the General Assembly’s approval of the appropriation 
and an arbitrator’s decision related to wages is subject to limitations of the State budget. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the proposed constitutional amendment is approved by the voters, State 
expenditures (all funds) increase annually, likely by at least $500,000, if not significantly 
more, beginning in FY 2028 for arbitration services and additional labor relations/human 
resources personnel, as discussed below. State personnel and other expenditures (all funds) 
are affected, potentially significantly, as early as FY 2029, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not directly affected. This assessment does not reflect any potential alteration in MES’s 
nonbudgeted status as a result of the bill, as discussed below.  
 
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 604/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Statutory Provisions Contingent on the Constitutional Amendment 
 
 
Meeting Times and Conclusion of Negotiations 
 
The parties to collective bargaining must meet at reasonable times between  
July 1 and September 30. The parties must make a reasonable effort to begin negotiations 
on or near July 1, including the exchange of information necessary to responsibly conduct 
and conclude negotiations by September 30. The bill repeals current law requirements that  
(1) parties make every reasonable effort to conclude negotiations in a timely fashion for 
inclusion in agency budget requests to the Governor; (2) parties conclude negotiations by  
January 1 for items requiring an appropriation; and (3) the Governor include additional 
costs resulting from negotiations in principal units in the budget. 
 
 
Selection of a Neutral Arbitrator 
 
For each bargaining unit (excluding those in a bargaining unit for the uniformed fire 
employees of the Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport Fire and 
Rescue Department (BWI Fire/Rescue)), whenever an MOU is to be negotiated, reopened, 
or amended, either party may request a neutral arbitrator for the negotiations on or after 
July 1. If negotiations have not concluded by September 1, the parties must select a neutral 
arbitrator by September 15. The bill specifies the selection and acceptance process for an 
arbitrator. The selected arbitrator must be able and available to perform the duties and to 
hold hearings, both in person and through remote communication.  
 
 
Powers and Duties of a Neutral Arbitrator 
 
A neutral arbitrator selected under the bill may:   
 
 
mediate or aid in the resolution of any dispute between the parties regarding the 
conduct of negotiations; 
 
receive from the parties’ copies of information requests presented and responses 
received, to mediate or aid in the resolution of disputes that arise between the parties 
consistent with statute; and 
 
direct production of estimates of revenues and expenditures compiled by the 
State Board of Revenue Estimates, the Bureau of Revenue Estimates, or the 
Consensus Revenue Monitoring and Forecasting Group. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 604/ Page 3 
At this stage of the negotiations, the opinions and guidance issued by the neutral arbitrator 
are advisory on the parties and the Governor. The use of a neutral arbitrator does not 
diminish or limit the rights of any party to file and pursue a complaint of unfair labor 
practices before the board. 
 
 
Resolution of an Impasse 
 
If either party declares an impasse on or after October 1, arbitration must proceed in 
accordance with specified procedures set forth under the bill. On the fifth business day 
after the impasse is declared, each party must submit to the neutral arbitrator, in writing 
and with a copy to the other party, a last best and final offer, including (1) all provisions in 
the existing MOU not to be modified; (2) all new, amended, or modified MOU provisions 
agreed to by the parties before the impasse was declared that are to be included through 
written mutual agreement; and (3) detailed further provisions, subject to specified 
limitations, that a party is proposing for inclusion in an MOU. 
 
The neutral arbitrator acting as a mediator must attempt to resolve the impasse before a 
formal hearing on the impasse. Within 30 calendar days after a declared impasse, the 
neutral arbitrator must hold a formal hearing at which the parties may submit, in writing or 
oral testimony, all information or data supporting the final positions. Absent mutual 
agreement between the parties, or as otherwise ordered by the neutral arbitrator, the formal 
hearing must conclude within 45 calendar days after the impasse date. The arbitrator 
generally must conclude with a written award that sustains in its entirety the last, best, and 
final offer of one of the parties. Before a written award is issued, the parties may direct the 
neutral arbitrator to rule on specifically identified topics of bargaining, as specified. 
 
Preliminary and Final Written Awards:  The neutral arbitrator must issue a preliminary 
written award by December 5. The preliminary written award must address all provisions 
that each party proposed in its respective final position for inclusion in an MOU. Within 
five business days after receipt of the preliminary written award, the parties must review 
the award and may severally or mutually request changes or adjustments in the award. By 
December 15, the neutral arbitrator must issue a final written award in which the arbitrator 
(1) must order implementation of the last, best, and final offer of either party in its entirety, 
incorporating any voluntarily-agreed-to terms between the parties and (2) include any 
voluntarily-agreed-to terms between the parties and any prior term that, by agreement, is 
not to be changed for the next fiscal year. After December 15, if requested by either party, 
the neutral arbitrator must issue a statement of reasons for the final written award by 
January 20 of the immediately following year. The bill details the factors that the neutral 
arbitrator must consider when developing a written award. 
 
Specified deadlines within the bill may be modified based on good cause by mutual 
agreement of the parties or by order of the neutral arbitrator. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 604/ Page 4 
Effect of Final Written Award:  The decision of the neutral arbitrator is final and binding 
on the parties, though a decision requiring an appropriation is contingent on the  
General Assembly’s approval and a decision related to wages is subject to limitations of 
the State budget. The State, a State institution of higher education, MES, and the Governor 
must take all actions necessary to carry out and effectuate the final written award and place 
into effect the MOU. The parties at any time may amend or modify the final written award 
and, by consent, the amendments or modifications must be approved by the parties and 
placed in a supplemental written award by the neutral arbitrator that is final and binding. 
A supplemental written award must take effect on the date of the order of the neutral 
arbitrator and may not require ratification. 
 
 
Matters to Be Negotiated 
 
The bill specifies that collective bargaining must include all matters relating to fringe 
benefits and health benefits (in addition to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of 
employment, as specified under current law). 
 
 
Costs 
 
The costs of the services of the neutral arbitrator must be shared equally by the parties. All 
other costs incurred by either party as a result of arbitration under the bill are the 
responsibility of the party incurring the costs. 
 
 
Required Appropriations 
 
The bill modifies § 7-108 of the State Finance and Procurement Article to require the 
Governor to include in each annual budget bill the appropriations necessary to implement 
and fund all terms within each MOU between (1) the State and the exclusive 
representatives of State employees; (2) State institutions of higher education and each 
exclusive representative of their employees; and (3) MES and the exclusive representative 
of its employees. 
 
Proposed Constitutional Amendment 
 
In addition to the statutory changes discussed above, the bill proposes a 
constitutional amendment that, if approved by the voters at the next general election, 
requires the Governor’s budget to contain the appropriations necessary to implement all 
terms and conditions of employment in each MOU concluded with the State – whether 
reached through mutual agreement or arbitration that is binding on the parties, the 
Governor, State institutions of higher education, and MES – for the next ensuing fiscal year 
for State employees in the various branches and departments of State government, 
including higher education. Further, each budget must contain a statement showing 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 604/ Page 5 
changes in wages, hours, fringe benefits, health benefits, and other terms and conditions of 
employment for State employees included in each MOU covering State employees for the 
next ensuing fiscal year. 
 
In addition, the proposed constitutional amendment specifies that each budget must 
embrace an estimate of all appropriations for salaries and fringe benefits payable by the 
State and under the Constitution and laws of the State, including those salaries and benefits 
committed under each MOU covering State employees. 
 
Current Law:  For information on State employees and the collective bargaining process, 
please see Appendix – State Employees and Collective Bargaining. 
 
Article III, Section 52 of the Maryland Constitution 
 
Pursuant to Article III, Section 52 of the Maryland Constitution, on the third Wednesday 
in January each year, the Governor must submit to the General Assembly a budget for the 
next ensuing fiscal year. Each budget must contain a complete plan of proposed 
expenditures and estimated revenues for the fiscal year and must show the estimated 
surplus or deficit of revenues at the end of the preceding fiscal year. In addition, each 
budget must be accompanied by a statement showing (1) the revenues and expenditures for 
the preceding fiscal year; (2) the current assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus or deficit 
of the State; (3) the debts and funds of the State; (4) an estimate of the State’s financial 
condition as of the beginning and end of the preceding fiscal year; and (5) any explanation 
the Governor may desire to make as to the important features of the budget and any 
suggestions as to methods for reduction or increase of the State’s revenue. Section 52 
further specifies that each budget must embrace an estimate of all appropriations in such 
form and detail as the Governor determines or as may be prescribed by law for, among 
other things, the salaries payable by the State under the Constitution and laws of the State. 
 
In enacting a balanced budget bill, the General Assembly generally may reduce 
appropriations in the Governor’s proposed budget and may increase proposed 
appropriations relating to the General Assembly and the Judiciary. Chapter 645 of 2020, a 
constitutional amendment ratified by the voters in the 2020 general election, authorizes the 
General Assembly to increase or add appropriations in the Governor’s proposed budget 
relating to the Executive Department, beginning with the fiscal 2024 budget bill. The total 
appropriation for the Executive Department approved by the General Assembly may not 
exceed the total proposed appropriation for the Executive Department submitted by the 
Governor. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 604/ Page 6 
State Expenditures:   
 
Costs Related to the Collective Bargaining Process 
 
As discussed above and subject to approval of a constitutional amendment by the voters in 
the general election in November 2026, the bill requires the selection of a neutral arbitrator 
to oversee negotiations whenever an MOU is to be negotiated, reopened, or amended if 
negotiations have not concluded by September 1 or if requested by a party between  
July 1 and September 1. The cost of the services of a neutral arbitrator employed under the 
bill must be shared equally between the parties. Thus, State contractual expenditures  
(all funds) may increase annually beginning in fiscal 2028, which reflects the next round 
of negotiations commencing July 1, 2027, after the November 2026 election.  
 
For context, the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that the average 
hourly rate for a third-party arbitrator ranged from $225 to $437.50, with a median rate of 
$300 when it requested a list of 15 arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association 
for non-binding arbitration in 2023. The fee for providing the list of arbitrators from the 
American Arbitration Association is $200 per party, so if lists were requested from  
all six employee unions, it costs the State $1,200 for the lists of arbitrators. General fund 
expenditures for DBM may increase by at least $23,000 annually, assuming (1) an average 
hourly rate of $600, divided equally between the State and participating exclusive 
representatives; (2) a neutral arbitrator is required; and (3) that the arbitrator attends every 
bargaining session with the number of sessions consistent with recent experience. 
General fund expenditures could increase an additional $9,000 if an arbitrator requires 
either travel fees or a minimum number of hours per bargaining session. 
 
Likewise, the University System of Maryland (USM) estimates incurring $25,000 to 
$50,000 per collective bargaining agreement for arbitrator services for USM’s consolidated 
collective bargaining negotiations and 25 independently certified bargaining units, 
represented by three exclusive representatives, plus an additional $20,000 to $30,000 for 
each arbitration hearing requiring outside counsel. Based on those numbers, USM 
estimates $500,000 of higher education expenditures for arbitrator services. Additionally, 
the University of Maryland, College Park Campus estimates costs of at least $160,000 for 
any data analysis and expert testimony, if necessary, at arbitration proceedings. 
 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) estimates arbitration expenses of  
$1,500 to $3,000 or more for each day requiring arbitrator services, shared equally between 
the parties, in addition to attorney fees and costs of experts. 
 
However, actual annual expenses related to arbitration services cannot be reliably 
estimated, as they depend on whether a neutral arbitrator is necessary, the number and 
duration of bargaining sessions, the extent to which neutral arbitrators must hear and assist 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 604/ Page 7 
in resolving disputes between the parties, the number and complexity of the issues to be 
resolved, and the time and costs incurred by the neutral arbitrator to study and prepare 
written opinions and advice. The number and complexity of factors that a neutral arbitrator 
must consider when developing a written award, including specified economic factors, may 
require the assistance of additional experts, resulting in increased costs associated with 
arbitration. Further, to the extent that the arbitration process established under the bill 
significantly increases the workload demands on State agencies, some agencies may incur 
additional costs to hire consultants and/or additional human resources or labor relations 
personnel. For example, DBM estimates needing one human resource administrator and 
one employee and labor relations representative, and USM estimates needing 
nine additional labor relations employees. 
 
Effects on State Personnel and Other Expenditures 
 
Subject to approval of a constitutional amendment by the voters in the general election in 
November 2026, and as noted above, the bill provides for binding arbitration in the event 
of an impasse and the Governor must include in each annual budget bill the appropriations 
necessary to implement and fund all terms within each MOU (whether reached by mutual 
agreement or arbitration) between (1) the State and the exclusive representatives of State 
employees; (2) State institutions of higher education and each exclusive representative of 
their employees; and (3) MES and the exclusive representative of its employees. The bill 
further specifies that collective bargaining must include all matters relating to fringe 
benefits and health benefits (in addition to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of 
employment, as specified under current law).  
 
The bill’s impact on State personnel and other expenditures (all funds) cannot be reliably 
estimated or predicted, as it depends on the extent to which the terms of MOUs concluded 
as a result of the bill differ from the terms that would be negotiated in the absence of the 
bill, and the monetary value of those terms. However, the impact is potentially significant, 
particularly to the extent that matters are concluded through arbitration under the bill. This 
analysis assumes any such expenditures increase or decrease as early as fiscal 2029 (the 
first budget funded by the Governor after the November 2026 election and the next round 
of negotiations in July 2027) to the extent that the final decisions of neutral arbitrators 
appointed under the bill are unfavorable or favorable to State agencies and institutions of 
higher education. However, any such decisions requiring an appropriation are contingent 
on the General Assembly’s approval of the appropriation, so the net effect may be 
mitigated. 
 
MES advises that MES employees are not currently represented within a bargaining unit. 
Thus, personnel and other expenditures for MES employees are not directly affected unless 
and until MES employees elect to collectively bargain. However, the bill likely affects 
MES’s nonbudgeted status in the event that MES employees elect to participate in 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 604/ Page 8 
collective bargaining and successfully negotiate terms that have monetary value, as the bill 
expressly requires that the Governor include in the annual budget bill the appropriations 
necessary to implement and fund the terms within each MOU concluded between MES and 
the exclusive representatives of its employees. In such an event, it is assumed that the bill, 
in effect, subjects MES to the State budget process and makes the State responsible for 
funding its operations (currently, MES is funded entirely by fees it collects from its clients). 
However, this fiscal and policy note does not account for any impact on State finances 
should MES become subject to the State budget process as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 288 and HB 159 of 2025, SB 188 and HB 114 of 2024, and SB 218 
and HB 380 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 28 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Comptroller’s Office; 
Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Office of the Attorney General; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Public 
Employee 
Relations 
Board; 
Department 
of 
Budget 
and 
Management; 
Maryland Department 
of 
Transportation; 
Office 
of 
Administrative 
Hearings; 
Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 604/ Page 9 
Appendix – State Employees and Collective Bargaining 
 
 
Title 3 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article establishes statutory collective 
bargaining rights for a large number of State employees. Title 3 authorizes the State, State 
institutions of higher education, and the Maryland Environmental Service (MES) to meet 
and confer with exclusive employee representatives about negotiable terms. 
 
Except for the collective bargaining process for uniformed fire employees of the 
Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport Fire and Rescue 
Department (BWI Fire/Rescue), Title 3 does not provide for binding arbitration but does 
allow fact finding in the event of an impasse. Employees, employers, and exclusive 
representatives subject to Title 3 are also subject to the provisions of the Maryland Public 
Employee Relations Act. 
 
Maryland’s collective bargaining law generally applies to employees of the principal 
Executive Branch departments, the Maryland Insurance Administration, the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation, the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, 
the University System of Maryland (USM), the Office of the Comptroller, the Maryland 
Transportation Authority (MDTA) (for those who are not police officers), the State 
Retirement Agency, the Maryland State Department of Education, MES, the Office of 
Public Defender, the Maryland School for the Deaf, Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC), along with specified firefighters for the Martin State Airport and all full-time 
MDTA police officers at the rank of first sergeant and below. 
 
The State’s collective bargaining law does not apply to: 
 
 
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) employees; 
 
Legislative and Judicial Branch personnel; 
 
elected and appointed officials; 
 
the Governor’s and Lieutenant Governor’s staff; 
 
an employee assigned to, or with access to records of, the Public Employee 
Relations Board; 
 
special appointees and executive service personnel in the State Personnel 
Management System (SPMS); 
 
senior administrators, faculty members, student employees, and other designated 
employees of USM, MSU, SMCM, or BCCC; 
 
the chief, deputy, or assistant administrator of a unit with an independent personnel 
system; 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 604/ Page 10 
 
temporary or contractual employees in SPMS; 
 
temporary, contractual, or emergency employees in a unit of the Executive Branch 
with an independent personnel system; 
 
an employee who is entitled to participate in collective bargaining under another 
law; 
 
an employee whose participation in a labor organization is contrary to the State’s 
ethics laws; 
 
any managerial or confidential employee of specified units of State Government as 
defined by regulation; and 
 
any supervisory, managerial, or confidential employee of USM, MSU, SMCM, or 
BCCC. 
 
Bargaining Process 
 
The parties must meet at reasonable times and engage in collective bargaining in good 
faith, as specified. The parties must make every reasonable effort to conclude negotiations 
in a timely manner for inclusion by the principal unit in its budget request to the Governor, 
and they must conclude negotiations by January 1 for any item requiring an appropriation 
of funds for the fiscal year that begins on the following July 1. The Governor must include 
in the annual budget bill submitted to the General Assembly any amounts in the budgets of 
the principal units required to accommodate any additional cost resulting from the 
negotiations for the fiscal year beginning the following July 1, including the actuarial 
impact of any required legislative changes to any of the State pension or retirement 
systems, if the legislative changes have been negotiated to become effective in that 
fiscal year. 
 
Generally, if the parties do not conclude negotiations for the next fiscal year before 
October 25, either party may request that a fact finder be employed to resolve the issues. 
The fact finder must be employed no later than November 1 and must be a neutral party 
appointed by alternative striking from a list provided by the Federal Mediation Conciliation 
Service or under the Labor Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association. The 
fact finder may give notice and hold hearings in accordance with the Administrative 
Procedure Act, administer oaths and take testimony and other evidence, and issue 
subpoenas. Before November 20, the fact finder must make written recommendations 
regarding wages, hours, and working conditions and any other terms or conditions of 
employment that may be in dispute. The written recommendations of the fact finder must 
be delivered to the Governor, the exclusive representative, the President of the Senate, and 
the Speaker of the House of Delegates by December 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 604/ Page 11 
Memoranda of Understanding 
 
All matters of agreement reached by the parties must be incorporated into a memorandum 
of understanding (MOU). No MOU is valid if it extends for less than one year or longer 
than three years. An MOU is not effective until it is ratified by the Governor (or, in the 
case of a State higher education institution or MES, ratified by the higher education 
institution’s governing board or the Board of Directors of MES, respectively) and a 
majority of the votes cast by employees in the bargaining unit. Any matters in the MOU 
that require legislative changes are subject to the approval of the General Assembly. 
 
Matters to Be Negotiated 
 
Collective bargaining must include any matters relating to wages, hours, and terms and 
conditions of employment. The State is not required to negotiate any matter that is 
inconsistent with State law; however, the State may negotiate such matters as long as the 
parties understand that the item cannot become effective until the General Assembly takes 
action. The General Assembly, however, is not bound by the agreement. 
 
Binding Arbitration – Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport 
Fire and Rescue and Maryland Transit Administration 
 
Chapters 653 and 654 of 2025 altered the collective bargaining process for uniformed fire 
employees of BWI Fire/Rescue by establishing binding arbitration in the event of an 
impasse in negotiations, though an arbitrator’s decision related to wages is subject to the 
limitations of the State budget. 
 
Additionally, § 7-602 of the Transportation Article provides for binding arbitration in 
disputes between MTA and MTA employees relating to wages, salaries, hours, or other 
working conditions; benefits; grievances; or collective bargaining agreements, as specified. 
If a labor dispute between MTA and employees represented by an accredited representative 
does not result in agreement, MTA must submit the dispute to a three-member arbitration 
board. A majority determination of the board is final and binding on all disputed matters. 
 

END OF PAGE 11