START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 622 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 622 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Cannabis Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Cannabis - Licensees - Dispensary Licenses, Micro Dispensary Employees, and 
Cannabis Agent Training Programs 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the number of employees a micro dispensary licensee may 
employ from 10 to 20 and specifies that these employees are registered cannabis agents. 
The bill also extends – by one year – the authorization for a licensed dispensary to continue 
to deliver medical cannabis. Finally, the bill (1) renames the responsible vendor training 
program to be the cannabis agent training program; (2) repeals some elements of the core 
curriculum requirements for the program and requires the Maryland Cannabis 
Administration (MCA) to adopt regulations specifying the core curriculum elements;  
(3) requires cannabis agents and specified employees to complete the training at least every 
two years instead of annually; and (4) makes conforming changes. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MCA can implement the bill with existing resources. The bill does not 
materially affect State revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MCA has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 622/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use 
cannabis industry in the State by, among other things, establishing MCA as an independent 
unit of State government responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis. 
MCA’s responsibilities generally include promulgating cannabis industry regulations, 
licensing and registering cannabis businesses in the State, and enforcing the statutes and 
regulations related to the cannabis industry. For additional information and current law and 
information on the State’s cannabis industry, see the Appendix – Medical and Adult-use 
Cannabis. 
 
Micro Dispensary Licenses 
 
Under current law, a micro dispensary license authorizes the licensee to operate a delivery 
service that sells cannabis or cannabis products without a physical storefront, provided that 
the licensee employs no more than 10 employees. The bill increases the authorized number 
of employees to 20 and specifies that these employees are registered cannabis agents.  
 
Licensed Dispensaries – Deliveries  
 
Under current law, while it is generally prohibited for a cannabis licensee to deliver 
cannabis, the holder of a dispensary license that was issued by the Natalie M. LaPrade 
Medical Cannabis Commission and was converted to a cannabis business license issued by 
MCA may continue to deliver medical cannabis to qualifying patients until July 1, 2026. 
The bill extends this authorization by one year – to July 1, 2027. 
 
Responsible Vendor Training Program  
 
Under current law, MCA must adopt regulations establishing the responsible vendor 
training program (renamed to be the cannabis agent training program by the bill) and the 
minimum standards for the program. Under current law, before offering a specified 
responsible vendor training program, a person must submit an application that MCA must 
approve if the proposed training program meets specified minimum educational standards, 
including a core curriculum of relevant statutory and regulatory provisions. 
 
Under current law, a cannabis licensee must require each registered cannabis agent, and 
an on-site consumption establishment must require each employee, to complete the training 
program annually. Under the bill, the training program must be completed by registered 
cannabis agents and employees at least once every two years.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 622/ Page 3 
Current law establishes several required elements of the core curriculum. The bill requires 
MCA to adopt regulations specifying the elements of the core curriculum and alters the 
required elements as follows:   
 
 
the bill repeals the requirement for the core curriculum to include information on 
required licenses, age requirements, patient registry cards issued by MCA, 
maintenance of records, privacy issues, and unlawful acts;  
 
the bill repeals the requirement for the core curriculum to include the statutory and 
regulatory requirements related to cannabis sale, transfer, and delivery, as well as 
acceptable forms of identification;  
 
the bill repeals the requirement for the core curriculum to include information on 
serving size, THC and cannabinoid potency, and impairment; and  
 
the bill requires the core curriculum to include public health and safety standards 
relevant to each license type.  
 
The following existing required elements of the core curriculum are unchanged by the bill:   
 
 
the requirement for the core curriculum to include administrative and criminal 
liability, license and court sanctions, and statutory and regulatory requirements for 
employees and owners; and 
 
the requirement for the core curriculum to include State and local licensing and 
enforcement. 
 
Background:  MCA reports that it conducted listening sessions in 2025 for social equity 
licensees and conditionally licensed micro-dispensaries. These businesses requested that 
the State increase the statutory limit on the number of micro-dispensary employees 
allowed.  
 
According to MCA, the intended purpose of the responsible vendor training program is to 
ensure cannabis agents are trained on critical job aspects and State laws and regulations 
relevant to their work. The goal is to ensure licensee compliance and the safety of medical 
cannabis patients, adult-use consumers, and cannabis agents. However, the current focus 
of the minimum core curriculum topics is on point-of-sale requirements that are not 
relevant to grower and processor employees. MCA notes that it has received feedback from 
both conditional and operational licensees that the current training program is irrelevant 
and burdensome to non-retail businesses. The bill’s changes to the program are intended 
to improve the training program’s relevancy and to ensure adequate cannabis agent training 
on safety, health, and compliance procedures relevant to different licensees.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 622/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Cannabis Administration; Department of Social and 
Economic Mobility; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 622/ Page 5 
Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State by, 
among other things, (1) attributing cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission and renaming it the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) 
and (2) establishing the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) as an independent unit 
of State government responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis. 
MCA’s responsibilities generally include promulgating cannabis industry regulations, 
licensing and registering cannabis businesses in the State, and enforcing the statutes and 
regulations related to the cannabis industry. As required under Chapters 254 and 255, in 
June 2023, ATCC and MCA entered into a memorandum of understanding providing that 
both parties agree to collaborate on enforcing provisions regarding unlicensed cannabis 
operations in the State. 
 
Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The sale of adult-use cannabis began on July 1, 2023. A person at least age 21 may use and 
possess the personal use amount of cannabis, while the possession of the personal use 
amount of cannabis by a person younger than age 21, as well as the possession of the civil 
use amount of cannabis, are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use 
amount of cannabis by anyone is subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
MCA is responsible for the State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make 
medical cannabis available to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. There is a 
framework to certify health care providers, qualifying patients, and their caregivers to 
provide qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via written 
certification. 
 
Social Equity in the Cannabis Industry 
 
The Office of Social Equity (OSE), originally an independent office functioning within 
MCA, was redesignated as a unit within the Department of Social and Economic Mobility 
(DoSEM), which was established by Chapter 605 of 2025. OSE is responsible for 
promoting and encouraging full participation in the regulated cannabis industry by people 
from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on drugs in order 
to positively impact those communities. In this role, OSE is responsible for consulting with 
other agencies, providing recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting 
businesses to obtain financing through the Capital Access Program, and managing the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 622/ Page 6 
Social Equity Partnership Grant Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships 
between operational licensees and social equity licensees). OSE is also required to (1) with 
the assistance of the Comptroller, oversee the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
(CRRF); (2) oversee the appropriation of funds and the training of recipients of funds from 
CRRF; and (3) by October 1, 2025, adopt regulations to carry out the statutory provisions 
related to CRRF as modified by Chapter 195 of 2025; OSE has not yet promulgated the 
regulations. 
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
MCA. A license is valid for five years on initial licensure and five years upon renewal. 
MCA must issue licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, and incubator spaces. 
Additional licenses include micro licenses for growers, processors, and dispensaries, and 
on‑site consumption licenses. Licensing and renewal fees are established by MCA and 
range from $5,000 for social equity applicants for certain licenses to $50,000 for standard 
grower licenses. Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, medical licensees (growers, processors, 
and dispensaries) were required to pay a conversion fee based on the licensee’s gross 
revenues for calendar 2022 to convert to medical and adult-use cannabis business licensees 
of the same type. Essentially all medical licensees (18 grower, 23 processor, and 
96 dispensary licensees) converted to cannabis business licensees. 
 
First- and Second-round Social Equity Licenses:  Social equity applicants are those with 
at least 65% ownership and control held by one or more individuals who meet certain 
criteria, such as living in or attending a public school in a disproportionately impacted area 
(i.e., determined to have had above 150% of the State’s 10-year average for cannabis 
possession charges). MCA conducted its first-round lottery on March 14, 2024, and a 
second‑round lottery on June 28, 2024, awarding a total of 205 (174 in round one and  
31 in round two) social equity cannabis business licenses across the micro and standard 
grower, processor, and dispensary categories. 
 
Subsequent Licenses:  MCA may issue additional cannabis licenses up to the maximum 
limit authorized per statute based on the results of a market demand study. Future 
applications for licenses may be limited to social equity applicants and employ remedial 
measures based on the results of the disparity study. 
 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 also established the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult‑Use 
Cannabis. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by OSE, the 
Governor, MCA, or the General Assembly and (2) study and make recommendations on a 
number of issues related to the medical and adult-use cannabis industry in the State. The 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 622/ Page 7 
advisory board began meeting in May 2024, and has established three subcommittees:  
Federal, Medical Cannabis, and Adult-use Cannabis. 
 
Local Authority to Regulate Cannabis 
 
A “political subdivision,” defined as a county or municipality, is authorized to establish 
zoning requirements for cannabis businesses, allocate cannabis tax revenues, and adopt 
ordinances that reduce statutory requirements related to specified location restrictions for 
cannabis businesses. However, a political subdivision is prohibited from taking certain 
actions specific to cannabis businesses, including imposing a tax on cannabis and 
establishing restrictions related to transporting cannabis within the political subdivision or 
fees or requirements on cannabis businesses that are more burdensome than for other 
businesses. Statute also includes conditions for the operation of on-site consumption 
establishments; however, to date, MCA has not issued any on-site consumption licenses. 
 
Public Health Actions Related to Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council was established to study and report its 
findings and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public health impacts 
of cannabis legalization. The Cannabis Public Health Fund (CPHF) was also established to 
generally support the council’s work. The fund receives 5% of the sales and use tax 
revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis, which is discussed in more detail below. 
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 established a 9% sales and use tax on the retail sale of adult‑use 
cannabis, and the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 (Chapter 604) 
increased the tax rate to 12% beginning in fiscal 2026. In the second year of adult‑use 
cannabis sales (July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025), retail sales generated approximately 
$71.8 million in sales and use tax revenues. Adult-use cannabis sales and use tax 
collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2026, when the 12% sales and use tax rate went 
into effect, totaled $26.9 million. 
 
Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
Per statute, as amended by the BRFA of 2025, the Comptroller must distribute the first 
25% of sales and use tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis to the general fund. 
Of the remaining 75% of the sales and use tax revenues, the Comptroller must first 
distribute to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) and the DoSEM Fund 
an amount sufficient to defray the operating and administrative costs of MCA and OSE, 
respectively. Revenues remaining after those distributions to CREF and DoSEM are then 
distributed as follows:  50% to the State’s general fund (through fiscal 2028, after which 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 622/ Page 8 
the general fund distribution increases to 55%); 35% to CRRF (through fiscal 2033 only), 
which is administered by the Comptroller with oversight assistance from OSE; 5% to 
CPHF, which is administered by the Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis 
Business Assistance Fund (through fiscal 2028 only), which is administered by the 
Department of Commerce; and 5% as a separate direct allocation to counties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 622/ Page 9 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Cannabis - Licensees - Micro Dispensary Employees and Cannabis 
Agent Training Programs 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 622 
 
PREPARED BY: Selena Rawlley, Senior Policy Analyst 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill will have a POSITIVE impact on small businesses. Both amendments will 
enable these small, social-equity businesses to be more operationally efficient, thus 
increasing their sales revenue. 
 
MCA conducted two listening sessions specifically for social equity, conditionally 
licensed micro-dispensaries over summer 2025, and these businesses ubiquitously 
requested that the State increase the statutory limit on the number of micro-dispensary 
employees allowed. Additionally, as MCA continues to engage with its conditional and 
operational licensees, a recurring piece of feedback received is that the current RVT 
requirements in statute are irrelevant and burdensome to non-retail businesses; however, 
MCA still wants to ensure non-retail businesses and their employees are adequately 
trained on safety, health, and compliance procedures relevant to their license type. 
 

END OF PAGE 9