START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 646 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 646 
(Delegates Guyton and Korman) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Driver Licensing – Self–Reporting of Medical Conditions 
 
 
This bill establishes that, for driver’s license holders or applicants who self-report a 
diagnosis of certain medical conditions (as already required), a medical provider’s report 
or physician referral (as needed) must be the primary factor in the Motor Vehicle 
Administration’s (MVA) decision on whether to issue, refuse, or cancel the driver’s license 
– except when law enforcement files a request for reexamination of the licensee or 
applicant. Also, in its discretion, MVA may require additional testing of a licensee or an 
applicant who provides notice of such a diagnosis. However, MVA has to establish an 
expedited process for the issuance of a learner’s instructional permit to an individual 
(1) whose license has been suspended or canceled due to a diagnosis of a medical 
condition; (2) whose medical condition has improved such that the individual is medically 
qualified to obtain a driver’s license; and (3) who is required to complete a driver education 
program or take a driver knowledge or skills examination. A learner’s instructional permit 
issued under the expedited process must be valid for a reasonable period – affording 
sufficient time for the individual to complete the necessary driver education program or 
take the necessary driver knowledge or skills examination.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 646/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MVA may appoint a Medical Advisory Board of qualified physicians and 
optometrists to enable it to comply properly with the relevant provisions of the 
Transportation Article regarding the physical and mental condition of individuals who seek 
to drive on highways in the State. MVA may refer to the board, for an advisory opinion, 
the case of any licensee or applicant for a license, if MVA has good cause to believe that 
the driving of a vehicle by the individual would be contrary to public safety and welfare 
because of an existing or suspected mental or physical disability. 
 
Generally, the records of the Medical Advisory Board (1) are confidential; (2) may be 
disclosed only on court order; and (3) may be used only to determine the qualifications of 
an individual to drive. However, MVA may use information in its records for the purpose 
of driver safety research, provided that personal information is not published or disclosed. 
MVA may contract with third parties to assist with driver safety research. A person may 
not use these records for any other purpose. 
 
Learner’s Instructional Permits  
 
A learner’s instructional permit must be held for a certain amount of time depending on 
the characteristics of the credential holder. For example, an adult age 25 or older who holds 
a learner’s permit must wait at least 45 days before a provisional license can be issued.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2