START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 624 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 624 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Hospitals - Clinical Staffing Committees and Plans - Establishment (Safe Staffing 
Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill requires each hospital to establish and maintain a clinical staffing committee that 
has equal membership from management and employees. Each clinical staffing committee 
must develop a clinical staffing plan that meets patient needs. By January 1 each year, each 
hospital must implement the plan, assign personnel to each patient care unit in accordance 
with the plan, and post specified information about the plan. By July 1 each year, each 
clinical staffing committee must conduct a review of the plan to (1) evaluate its 
effectiveness during the immediately preceding year; (2) update the plan to ensure that it 
continues to be appropriate and effective; and (3) develop a process for receiving, 
resolving, and tracking complaints related to the plan. Specified individuals may submit a 
complaint and the committee must determine by a majority vote whether a complaint has 
been resolved. By July 1, 2030, and annually thereafter, each hospital must submit a 
specified report to the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), which must compile 
and make the reports available on its website. The bill does not apply to State hospitals. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHCC can compile and post the reports on its website using existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Ancillary member of the frontline team” means an individual whose 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 624/ Page 2 
primary duties include supporting individuals who provide direct patient care. “Ancillary 
member of the frontline team” includes a dietary worker, a patient care technician, and any 
other nonlicensed staff assisting with patient care. 
 
Clinical Staffing Committee 
 
Each clinical staffing committee must include at least one the following individuals:  (1) a 
certified nursing assistant; (2) a dietary aide; (3) an emergency room nurse; (4) an 
environmental service worker; (5) a resident, if the committee is in a teaching hospital 
(6) a staff physician who is not a hospital employee or administrator; and (7) a technician. 
A clinical staffing committee may include a patient advocate. 
 
Clinical Staffing Plan 
 
When developing a clinical staffing plan, the clinical staffing committee must consider 
(1) existing staffing levels; (2) methods to secure coverage needs as necessary; (3) existing 
gaps in staffing and how to address the gaps; (4) any available evidence-based staffing 
standards; and (5) a schedule for periodic review of the staffing plan.  
 
In developing the plan, the clinical staffing committee must also consider (1) the average 
number of patients on each unit on each shift during the immediately preceding year and 
relevant information regarding patient discharges, potential admissions, and transfers; 
(2) the average level of acuity for patients on each unit on each shift during the immediately 
preceding year and the corresponding level of nursing care required; and (3) an estimate of 
the appropriate combination of skill, experience level, and specialty certification or training 
of staff for each unit on each shift that is required to adequately provide care. 
 
Implementation of the Clinical Staffing Plan 
 
By January 1, 2028, and annually thereafter, each hospital must implement the adopted 
clinical staffing plan and assign personnel to each patient care unit in accordance with the 
plan. Each hospital must also (1) post in a publicly accessible and conspicuous area on each 
patient unit the plan for the unit and the actual daily staffing for each shift on the unit and 
(2) ensure that a copy of the plan is available, on request, on each patient unit. If a plan for 
a unit is amended, the hospital must post or provide the amended plan for the unit in a 
timely manner. 
 
Clinical Staffing Plan Complaints 
 
A registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, ancillary member of the frontline team, or 
applicable exclusive representative may submit a complaint to the clinical staffing 
committee regarding any variation where personnel assignment in a patient care unit it not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 624/ Page 3 
in accordance with the adopted clinical staffing plan. The clinical staffing committee must 
determine by a majority vote whether a complaint has been adequately resolved. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
By July 1, 2030, and annually thereafter, each hospital must submit a report to MHCC that 
summarizes how the hospital’s clinical staffing committee has addressed safe hospital 
staffing through the hospital’s clinical staffing plan during the immediately preceding year. 
MHCC must make the compiled report publicly available by publishing the compilation 
on the main page of its website.  
 
Current Law:  “Hospital” means an institution that (1) has a group of at least 
five physicians who are organized as medical staff for the institution; (2) maintains 
facilities to provide, under the supervision of medical staff, diagnostic and treatment 
services for two or more unrelated individuals; and (3) admits or retains the individuals for 
overnight care. 
 
Additional Comments:  Uncodified language specifies that each hospital must establish a 
clinical staffing committee by January 1, 2027, and each clinical staffing committee must 
develop a clinical staffing plan by July 1, 2027. Each hospital must implement the adopted 
clinical staffing plan and assign personnel in accordance with the plan by January 1 each 
year, beginning in 2028. Each hospital must also post specified information about the plan 
by January 1 each year and conduct a review of the plan by July 1 each year. Thus, this 
analysis assumes that each hospital will post specified information by January 1, 2028, and 
the first review of clinical staffing plans occurs by July 1, 2028. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 905 and SB 720 of 2025 and HB 1194 and SB 1020 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 411 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 624/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4