START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 661 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 661 
(Delegates Wolek and Solomon) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
General Provisions - Commemorative Months - Muslim American Heritage and 
Jewish American Heritage Months 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to annually proclaim the month of January as  
Muslim American Heritage Month in recognition of the contributions that 
Muslim Americans have made to the State and the month of May as Jewish American 
Heritage Month in recognition of the contributions that Jewish Americans have made to 
the State. The proclamations must urge educational and cultural organizations to observe 
Muslim American Heritage Month and Jewish American Heritage Month with appropriate 
programs, ceremonies, and activities. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Commemorating Muslim American Heritage Month and  
Jewish American Heritage Month does not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Twenty official commemorative days, seven months, and one week are 
recognized in State law, as shown in Appendix – Official Commemorative Days and 
Months in Maryland. The Governor also must issue a proclamation each year 
encouraging citizens and other individuals to observe a moment of silence at 3:00 p.m. on 
Memorial Day to unite in remembrance and commemorate the heroic acts and efforts of 
Marylanders who have served and died in the U.S. Armed Forces. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 661/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 899 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 308 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 661/ Page 3 
Appendix – Official Commemorative Days and Months in 
Maryland 
 
 
Asian Lunar New Year Day1 
January/February 
Maryland Holocaust Remembrance Day  
January 27 
Black History Month 
February 
Irish-American Heritage Month 
March 
Tuskegee Airmen Commemoration Day2 
March 
Women’s History Month 
March 
6888th Central Postal Directory Battalion Day 
March 9 
Welcome Home Vietnam Veterans Day 
March 30 
Crime Victim and Advocate Commemorative Day 
April 3 
John Hanson’s Birthday3 
April 13 
National Healthcare Decisions Day 
April 16 
Maryland Centenarians Day4 
May 
Negro Baseball League Day5 
May 
Law Day U.S.A. 
May 1 
Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Services Workers Day6 
June 
Chesapeake Bay Awareness Week7 
June 
Maryland Charter Day 
June 20 
Thurgood Marshall Day 
July 2 
Caribbean Heritage Month 
August  
Hispanic Heritage Month8 
September/October 
Maryland Veterans Suicide Prevention Day  
September 30 
German-American Heritage Month 
October 
South Asian American Heritage Day 
October 2 
Dashain Day 
October 5 
Poetry Day 
October 15 
American Indian Heritage Month 
November 
Maryland Emancipation Day 
November 1 
Annapolis Charter Day 
December 17 
 
1Day designated as new year on the Asian lunar calendar. 
2Commemorated on the fourth Thursday in March. 
3John Hanson served as the first president of the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation 
from 1781 to 1782. 
4Commemorated on the second Thursday in May. 
5Commemorated on the second Saturday in May. 
6Commemorated on the first Sunday in June. 
7Commemorated during the second week in June. 
8Commemorated from September 15 to October 15. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3