START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 627 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 627 
(Delegate Acevero, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Commission on History, Culture, and Civics in Education - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Commission on History, Culture, and Civics in Education to make 
recommendations to the State Board of Education (SBE) and the Maryland State Department 
of Education (MSDE) to further the discovery, interpretation, and learning of the history, 
culture, and civics of the United States and Maryland and provide equitable learning 
outcomes consistent the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint). MSDE must staff the 
commission; members of the commission may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses as provided in the State budget. By December 30 each year, 
beginning in 2026, the commission must report its findings and recommendations to SBE, 
the Governor, and the General Assembly. By July 1 each year, SBE must review the 
commission’s findings and recommendations and make any appropriate changes to the 
educational standards for prekindergarten through grade 12. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $56,400 in FY 2027 for staffing. 
Future years reflect ongoing costs and inflation. Revenues are not affected.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
56,400 
63,900 
67,100 
70,200 
73,300 
Net Effect 
($56,400) 
($63,900) 
($67,100) 
($70,200) 
($73,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures may increase due to future curriculum or 
instructional changes adopted in response to the commission’s recommendations; however, 
such costs are expected to be aligned with regular curriculum review cycles, and the 
magnitude and timing cannot be reliably estimated. Revenues are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 627/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes the membership of the commission, which, to the 
extent practicable, must reflect the gender, racial, ethic, and geographic diversity of the 
State. In addition, a majority of the members must have classroom experience or experience 
in developing educational content standards. Members serve for four-year terms, staggered 
as specified. The commission must elect a chair from among the members.  
 
The commission must:   
 
 
examine the history, culture, and civics of the United States and Maryland including 
the contributions of specified minority groups; and 
 
make recommendations to SBE regarding the adoption of standards and programs 
that accurately reflect the discovery, interpretation, and learning of the history, 
culture, and civics of the United States and Maryland.  
 
The commission must make all of its activities and material available on MSDE’s website, 
as specified. Further, the commission must use multiple communication methods to 
provide updates and announcements related to the commission.  
 
Current Law:   
 
General Requirements for Instruction 
 
With the advice of the State Superintendent of Schools, SBE establishes basic policy and 
guidelines for the program of instruction for public schools. Subject to State law and the 
regulations, bylaws, policies, and guidelines established by SBE, each local board of 
education must establish the curriculum guides and courses of study for schools in its 
jurisdiction. Policies, rules, and regulations for the graduation of students from 
Maryland public schools are established by local boards of education and SBE.  
 
SBE and the State Superintendent of Schools must assist each local board of education to 
establish educational goals and objectives that conform to statewide educational objectives 
for subject areas, including reading, writing, mathematics, science, and social studies. With 
the assistance of its local board, each public school must survey current student 
achievement in reading, language, mathematics, science, social studies, and other areas to 
assess its needs.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 627/ Page 3 
Social Studies Instruction and Topics 
 
According to regulations, each local school system must provide an instructional program 
in social studies each year for all students, prekindergarten through grade 8, and a program 
that enables students to meet graduation requirements and to select social studies electives 
in grades 9 through 12. These programs must at least meet the content standards in the 
regulations. In Maryland, among other required topics, regulations require that the 
social studies instructional program teach students about the peoples of the nation and the 
world. Specifically, students must inquire about the people of the United States and the 
world using a historically grounded, multidisciplinary approach in order to recognize 
multiple narratives and acknowledge the diversity and commonality of the human 
experience. Every five years, each local superintendent of schools must certify to the 
State Superintendent of Schools that the instructional programming for prekindergarten 
through grade 12 meets, at a minimum, all the requirements set forth in the regulations.  
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future legislation, including Chapter 771 of 2019; Chapters 36 
and 55 of 2021; and Chapter 33 of 2022 established new programs and updated education 
funding formulas to, among other provisions, provide additional support for schools 
serving high concentrations of students living in poverty, including community schools 
and wraparound services, and increased support for students learning English and students 
with disabilities.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that the agency requires a full-time permanent 
education program specialist to staff the commission as well as $10,000 in annual travel 
costs. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the work of the 
commission likely can be accomplished by a half-time permanent position.  
 
Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $56,403 in fiscal 2027 for MSDE to hire a 
half‑time educational program specialist to staff the commission, facilitate the reports, and 
oversee changes to standards. The estimate assumes a 90-day start-up delay following the 
bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date (during which commission members are appointed). It 
includes a half-time salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$48,304 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$56,403 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 627/ Page 4 
As the commission is a permanent entity with ongoing review and recommendation duties, 
future year expenditures reflect a half-time salary with an annual increase and employee 
turnover and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Many of the State Standards and Frameworks in Social Studies have been revised to 
address the contributions of specified minority groups. Thus, to the extent that the 
commission’s recommendations align with existing revisions to the State Standards and 
Frameworks, the bill’s requirements may be met with existing resources. However, any 
alignment cannot be determined until the commission is appointed and makes 
recommendations.  
 
Any expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill does not impose direct requirements on local school 
systems. However, if SBE adopts new or revised standards or guidance based on the 
commission’s recommendations, local school systems may incur costs to update 
curriculum materials, instructional resources, or professional development. Any such costs 
are expected to be highly variable and are likely incurred as part of existing curriculum 
review and update cycles; therefore, the magnitude and timing of potential local 
expenditures cannot be reliably estimated, and in some cases may already be factored into 
local school system budgets. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 875 of 2025; HB 50 of 2024; and HB 890 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; University System of 
Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4