START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 688 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 688 
(Delegate Simpson) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Intercepted Communications - Penalty 
 
 
This bill reclassifies a violation of § 10-402(a) of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article (intercepted communications) from a felony to a misdemeanor.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, except as otherwise provided in statute, 
it is unlawful for a person to: 
 
 
willfully intercept, endeavor to intercept, or procure any other person to intercept or 
endeavor to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication; 
 
willfully disclose, or endeavor to disclose, to any other person the contents of a wire, 
oral, or electronic communication, knowing or having reason to know that the 
information was obtained through an illegal intercept; or 
 
willfully use, or endeavor to use, the contents of a wire, oral, or electronic 
communication, knowing or having reason to know that the information was 
obtained through an illegal intercept. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 688/ Page 2 
Under current law, violators are guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a $10,000 maximum fine. The bill reclassifies this offense as a 
misdemeanor but does not otherwise alter the maximum term of imprisonment or monetary 
penalty. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Judiciary advises that, in fiscal 2025, there were 25 violations 
(charges) and 0 guilty dispositions (convictions) under § 10-402 of the Courts and Judicial 
Proceedings Article in the District Court and 6 violations and 13 guilty dispositions in the 
State’s circuit courts. In fiscal 2024, there were 55 violations and 0 guilty dispositions in 
the District Court and 15 violations and 0 guilty dispositions in the circuit courts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 38 and HB 130 (first reader) of 2025; HB 274 of 2024; and HB 362 
of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 680 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2