START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 605 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 605 
(Delegate Addison, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes (1) the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program within the Victim 
Services Unit (VSU) of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) 
to assist in the relocation of victims of gun violence in the State to ensure the safety and 
well-being of victims and victims’ families. The bill establishes a related special fund – the 
Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program Fund – administered by VSU. For fiscal 2028 
only, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of  
$10.0 million to the fund. VSU must also establish an oversight commission to ensure that 
the program is administered properly and that the fund is used appropriately. By  
December 1 each year, beginning in 2028, VSU must report specified information relating 
to the status of the program to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million 
in FY 2028 and FY 2031 to capitalize the fund, although funding is only mandated in 
FY 2028; special fund revenues increase correspondingly in those years. Special fund 
expenditures increase by approximately $2.8 million annually beginning in FY 2028. This 
bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028 only.  
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$10.0 
$0 
$0 
$10.0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$10.0 
$0 
$0 
$10.0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$2.8 
$2.8 
$2.8 
$2.8 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($2.8) 
($2.8) 
($2.8) 
($2.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local government expenditures and revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 605/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program:  An individual may request participation in the 
program through VSU. An individual is eligible for assistance through the program if the 
individual (1) is a victim of gun violence in the State; (2) experienced the violence within 
close proximity to the individual’s home or lives in close proximity to a person who is 
suspected to have caused the violence; and (3) demonstrates a need to be relocated for the 
safety of the individual or the individual’s family. VSU must accept any eligible individual 
into the program except for an individual suspected to have perpetrated the violence. 
 
VSU must keep the personal information of applicants confidential, as specified. In 
addition, VSU must establish an appeal process for an individual determined to be 
ineligible and denied assistance under the program. 
 
VSU must (1) collaborate with other State and local agencies, including law enforcement, 
housing authorities, and social services, to provide comprehensive services to victims 
under the program; (2) conduct community outreach in order to educate the public about 
the program and to encourage victims of gun violence to seek assistance under the program; 
and (3) work to ensure that victims under the program who are renters are protected from 
eviction or from being denied rental housing based on the victim’s status in the program.  
 
VSU must assist an eligible victim accepted into the program by:   
 
 
relocating the victim and the victim’s family to a safe location; 
 
providing the victim with financial assistance for moving expenses, security deposit, 
and rent; and 
 
providing other support services, including counseling, legal assistance, job 
training, and resources and services for individuals with disabilities. 
 
VSU must adopt rules and regulations necessary to carry out the bill’s provisions.  
 
Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program Fund:  The purpose of the fund is to carry out 
the bill’s provisions, and the fund may only be used for carrying out that purpose. The fund 
consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, private donations, interest 
earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund. 
 
The fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA).  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 605/ Page 3 
Current Law:  The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB) awards grants to 
innocent victims of crime who incur financial hardship as a result of crime. Those eligible 
for awards include (1) a victim; (2) a dependent of a victim who died as a result of a crime 
or delinquent act, trying to prevent a crime or specified acts, or helping a law enforcement 
officer perform the officer’s duties or specified emergency services personnel who is 
obstructed in their duties; (3) any person who paid or assumed responsibility for the funeral 
expenses of a victim who died as a result of specified acts; and (4) family members of a 
victim, as specified. Awards may be made for lost wages, medical expenses, counseling, 
crime scene cleanup, and, for homicide victims, funeral expenses. CICB may make an 
award only if the claimant, as a result of the injury on which the claim is based, has  
(1) incurred at least $100 in unreimbursed and unreimbursable expenses or indebtedness 
reasonably incurred or claimed for specified necessary expenses or (2) lost at least $100 in 
earnings or support. Compensation awarded may not exceed specified limitations, and 
funding for these awards is provided by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund (CICF), 
which receives funding from fees assessed by circuit courts and the District Court. The 
fund is also supplemented by federal funds. 
 
The Victim and Witness Protection and Relocation Fund (VWPRF) is a special fund used 
to carry out the Victim and Witness Protection and Relocation Program, which is 
administered by the States’ Attorneys’ coordinator. The fund consists of court costs 
imposed on defendants convicted of crimes. The Comptroller deposits $2.50 from each fee 
collected in circuit courts and the District Court (excluding fees from motor vehicle cases 
that are not punishable by imprisonment) to VWPRF.  
 
Court costs are imposed on a defendant convicted of a crime in the amount of $45 for the 
circuit court and $35 for the District Court. Court costs, in the amount of $3, are imposed 
on a defendant convicted of certain motor vehicle offenses in the District Court. The 
Comptroller deposits $22.50 from each fee collected in circuit court and $12.50 from each 
fee collected in District Court (excluding fees from motor vehicle cases that are not 
punishable by imprisonment) into the State Victims of Crime Fund (SVCF), a special fund 
used for carrying out statutory guidelines for treatment and assistance to victims of crime 
and delinquent acts. The State Board of Victims Services in GOCPP is responsible for 
administering the fund. All other monies from these fees are deposited into CICF.  
 
CICF and SVCF share the first $500,000 attained from the $3 assessed in the District Court 
for motor vehicle cases that are not punishable by imprisonment. After the 
$500,000 threshold is reached and each fund has acquired $250,000, CICF receives the 
remainder of funding from these fees.  
 
In addition to monies transferred to CICF under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, 
the Comptroller is required to annually transfer $500,000 to CICF and $125,000 to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 605/ Page 4 
VWPRF, which must be in addition to the transfers cited above and which is also drawn 
from court costs in criminal and traffic cases in the District Court. 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $300,368 in special funds for VWPRF. In 
addition, the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $2.0 million in federal funds,  
$1.9 million in special funds, and $1.1 million in general funds for CICB and 
approximately $3.9 million in special funds for CICF.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Capitalization of the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Fund 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2028 to initially capitalize 
the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Fund, as mandated by the bill. Based on the 
anticipated costs of the program, as discussed below, it is assumed that an additional  
$10.0 million in general funds is needed to recapitalize the fund in fiscal 2031, although 
funding in that year (and at that level) is not mandated. Because the program is ongoing, 
additional capitalization funds will continue to be needed in the future, but any such impact 
falls outside the five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note. 
 
Special fund revenues to the fund increase correspondingly in fiscal 2028 and 2031, 
reflecting receipt of the general funds. 
 
Spending from the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Fund 
 
Assistance to Eligible Victims:  This analysis assumes that special fund expenditures 
increase by an estimated $2.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2028 to provide 
assistance to eligible victims as required by the bill.  
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy Administrative Costs:  Because the bill 
states that the fund is to be used to carry out the purpose of the bill, it is assumed that the 
special fund can be used to cover costs incurred by GOCPP to administer the program. 
GOCPP administrative expenditures increase by at least $614,687 in fiscal 2028, which 
assumes that the program is implemented at the start of fiscal 2028 (consistent with the 
timing of the mandated appropriation). This estimate reflects costs for VSU to hire 
seven employees (two administrative aides, one administrative officer, three administrative 
assistants, and one fiscal clerk) to manage the program and fund, work with the oversight 
commission, work with other entities to provide assistance to eligible victims, and 
generally implement the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 605/ Page 5 
Positions 
7.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$545,648 
Other Operating Expenses 
    69,039 
Minimum FY 2028 GOCPP Admin. Expenditures $614,687 
 
Future year administrative expenditures for GOCPP, which range from at least $592,076 
in fiscal 2029 to at least $646,138 by fiscal 2031, reflect salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
The bill states that the requirements relating to the program must be liberally construed and 
applied to promote the underlying purpose of the program. As VSU does not currently 
operate any type of victim relocation program, VSU likely needs to collaborate with other 
State and local agencies with experience operating victim relocation programs to provide 
assistance to eligible victims. Without actual experience under the bill, it is not possible to 
estimate the extent to which such collaboration will cover the full assistance needs of 
eligible victims under the program. To the extent that VSU is unable to utilize services 
through collaboration with other entities and must directly provide required services, the 
need for staff – and the resulting administrative costs – could be significantly higher. 
 
Office of the Attorney General Administrative Costs:  It is assumed that the special fund 
can also be used to cover costs incurred by the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) as a 
result of the program, which are expected to be incurred beginning in fiscal 2028, 
consistent with the implementation of the program. Accordingly, OAG administrative 
expenditures increase by $170,698 in fiscal 2028. This estimate reflects the costs for OAG 
to hire one assistant Attorney General to provide legal support for the program. It includes 
a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
 $160,835 
Other Operating Expenses 
 
     9,863 
FY 2028 OAG Admin. Expenditures  $170,698 
 
Future year administrative expenditures for OAG, which range from $171,067 in 
fiscal 2029 to $186,486 by fiscal 2031, reflect a salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Other Agencies 
 
OLA, the Department of State Police, the Department of Housing and Community 
Development, the Maryland Department of Health, and the Department of Human Services 
can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 605/ Page 6 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase minimally for local 
agencies, including law enforcement agencies, housing authorities, and social services 
agencies, to provide comprehensive services to victims in the program in collaboration 
with VSU. Local government revenues may increase minimally to the extent any funds are 
provided for those services from the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program Fund. 
 
Small Business Effect:  There is a potential meaningful impact for small businesses to the 
extent that victims use funding received from the program for the services of small 
businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 180 of 2025 and HB 974 and SB 921 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; cities of 
College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Human Services; Department of State Police; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6