START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 606 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 606 
(Delegate Nkongolo, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Anne Arundel County - Residential Property Tax Payment Deferrals - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for a property tax deferral program in Anne Arundel County 
by including members of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
and Public Health Service (PHS). The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in Anne Arundel County property tax revenues 
during any deferral period. The amount of any revenue decrease depends on the number of 
participants in the deferral program in a given year. Revenues will increase upon 
repayment.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Counties and municipalities are authorized to defer the payment of the 
increase in county and municipal property taxes for owner‑occupied residential real 
property of an elderly or disabled homeowner, for property that is the principal residence 
of the individual. 
 
Statute provides specified age and eligibility requirements (at least age 65, living in the 
home for at least five years, and/or permanently or totally disabled). The law also provides 
for the procedures that local governments must follow when implementing a property tax 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 606/ Page 2 
deferral program, including payment dates, amounts of deferral and interest to be reported 
on annual tax bills, lien provisions, and penalties. 
 
Specific County Authorization  
 
Chapters 162 and 163 of 2012 authorized Anne Arundel County to provide, by law, a 
property tax payment deferral for residential real property occupied as the principal 
residence of the owner. To be eligible, the property owner must have lived in the dwelling 
for the previous five years; be at least age 62, or be permanently and totally disabled; and 
meet specified income requirements. The amount of the deferral is limited to the increase 
in county property taxes from the date of deferral. 
 
The Anne Arundel County Council must specify the following criteria if a deferral program 
is authorized:  (1) the amount of tax that may be deferred and the duration of the deferral; 
(2) restrictions on the amount of real property eligible for a payment deferral; (3) the 
interest rate; (4) a requirement that any mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust 
receive specified notification; and (5) income eligibility. Deferred county property taxes 
are due when the deferral ends, the eligible owner dies, or immediately on transfer of 
ownership of the property. 
 
Chapters 162 and 163 also provide for other requirements and criteria related to the 
administration of property tax deferral payments in Anne Arundel County, including (1) a 
requirement that the cumulative amount of the tax deferral and interest be included in the 
taxpayer’s annual property tax bill; (2) a lien must be attached to the property in the amount 
of all deferred taxes and interest and must remain until all deferred taxes and interest are 
paid; and (3) the deferral must be authorized by a written agreement reflecting the terms 
and conditions of the deferral. Finally, Chapters 162 and 163 provide that penalties may 
not be charged during the deferral period on deferred taxes. 
 
Chapters 327 and 328 of 2016 altered the conditions under which payment becomes due 
for deferred county property taxes. 
 
Tax Deferral Program in Anne Arundel County 
 
Anne Arundel County provides a property tax deferral program for owner-occupied homes 
where homeowners may defer the increase in county property taxes for up to 50 years. 
Deferred amounts, plus interest are a lien on the property due upon sale or death of the 
homeowner. Homeowners must be:  (1) at least age 62, or (2) permanently and totally 
disabled and qualifying for specified federal benefits (Social Security, Railroad 
Retirement, member of United States Armed Forces, or federal retirement system), or  
(3) certified as permanently or totally disabled by a county health officer. Homeowners 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 606/ Page 3 
must have lived in the property for at least five years as a primary residence. Homeowners 
must apply for the program annually. 
 
Definitions 
 
Uniformed services, as defined by 37 U.S.C. § 101, include the Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Marine Corps, Space Force, Coast Guard, NOAA, and PHS. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel County property tax revenues may decrease as a result 
of the expansion of the deferral program under the bill. The amount of any decrease cannot 
be reliably estimated and depends on the number of additional participants in a given year. 
However, due to the limited participation in the county deferral program, any associated 
revenue decrease is likely to be minimal. Revenues increase in the years that any deferred 
payments are paid back. 
 
Anne Arundel County reports that for fiscal 2026, there are currently 14 properties that 
participate in the tax deferral tax program. For these 14 properties, the taxes are deferred 
and applied to a specified account. The current balance of this account is approximately 
$99,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:   Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 109 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3