START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 663 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 663 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of the Environment - Federal Environmental Policy - Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to report to the 
General Assembly, by July 1, 2026, and every six months thereafter, on any legally valid 
changes in federal environmental policy, as specified, and any steps the State is taking to 
respond to such changes. The initial report must describe federal environmental policy 
changes that have occurred since January 1, 2024, and subsequent reports must describe 
federal environmental policy changes that have occurred during the immediately preceding 
six-month period. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and terminates May 31, 2029.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can fulfill the bill’s reporting requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. State revenues are not affected.     
 
Local Effect:  None.    
 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDE must report on any changes in federal environmental policy that 
have been deemed legally valid by a final decision of a federal court, including any change 
that (1) rescinds a finding that greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from new motor vehicles 
and engines cause air pollution that may endanger public health or welfare; (2) repeals 
GHG emissions standards for motor vehicles and engines; (3) repeals GHG emissions 
standards for stationary sources; or (4) impacts MDE’s administration of any federally 
delegated authority. If there has been a change in federal environmental policy that is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 663/ Page 2 
required to be reported under the bill, MDE must also report the steps the State is taking in 
response to the change. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Federal Clean Air Act and State Implementation  
 
The federal Clean Air Act (CAA) regulates air emissions from stationary and mobile 
sources and authorizes the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to establish 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards to limit levels of “criteria pollutants” to protect 
public health and public welfare and to regulate emissions of hazardous pollutants. MDE’s 
Air and Radiation Administration operates the State’s air pollution control programs. 
Among other things, the administration monitors ambient air pollution levels, develops 
plans to maintain air quality standards, develops and enforces regulations to control air 
emissions, and provides technical assistance to businesses attempting to comply with CAA 
requirements. The administration also publishes annual Clean Air Progress Reports.  
 
Vehicle Certification under the Federal Clean Air Act and Maryland Adoption of 
California Regulations  
 
CAA generally preempts state governments from adopting their own air pollutant 
emissions standards for new motor vehicles and new motor vehicle engines. However, 
under CAA Section 209, California is authorized to apply to EPA for a waiver from the 
federal preemption, and EPA is to grant this waiver absent certain disqualifying conditions. 
As of 2025, California has used this authority to receive more than 100 federal preemption 
waivers for new and amended state-level vehicle emissions standards. 
 
Pursuant to CAA, vehicles sold in the United States must be certified under one of two 
certification programs:  (1) the federal program (Tier 2); or (2) the California program (the 
Clean Car Program). Section 177 of the CAA Amendments of 1990 provides states the 
ability to adopt the California program in lieu of the federal program as long as the adopted 
state program is identical to the California program and the state allows two model years 
lead time from adoption to implementation.  
 
Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007:  The Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007 (Chapters 111 
and 112) requires MDE to adopt regulations implementing the California Clean Car 
Program (also referred to as the California Low Emissions Vehicle Program, or CAL LEV) 
in Maryland. Maryland’s implementing regulations adopted, through incorporation by 
reference in COMAR 26.11.34.02, the applicable California regulations. The CAL LEV 
Program is a dynamic, changing program in which many of the relevant California 
regulations are continuously updated. To retain California’s standards, Maryland must 
remain consistent with its regulations, which means when California updates its 
regulations, Maryland must reflect those changes by amending State regulations. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 663/ Page 3 
The most recent California regulations adopted pursuant to the requirements of the 
Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007 were California’s Advanced Clean Cars II (ACC II) 
regulations (effective September 18, 2023). Maryland’s implementation of the ACC II 
Program is scheduled to begin with the 2027 model year.  
 
Maryland Clean Trucks Act of 2023:  The Clean Trucks Act of 2023 (Chapters 96 and 97) 
required MDE, by December 1, 2023, to adopt regulations that, among other things  
(1) establish requirements for the sale of new zero-emission medium- and heavy-duty 
vehicles in the State; (2) incorporate by reference the California Air Resources Board’s 
Advanced Clean Trucks (ACT) regulations, as revised and updated; and (3) take effect 
starting with model year 2027 (unless delayed by MDE, as authorized under specified 
conditions). MDE adopted the required regulations, which went into effect in December 
2023.  
 
Congressional Review Act and Federal Joint Resolutions Withdrawing California Waiver 
Authority for Certain Regulations:  In April 2025, Congressional Review Act resolutions 
were introduced disapproving EPA’s decisions to grant waivers for several CAL LEV 
regulations. The resolutions affected EPA waiver approval for both ACC II and ACT 
regulations, which, as mentioned above, have been incorporated by reference into 
Maryland regulations. These joint resolutions were adopted and signed into law by 
President Trump in June 2025. There is current litigation challenging the EPA withdrawal 
of approval for the waiver for these regulations.   
 
Federally Delegated Authority   
 
MDE has delegated authority to implement a broad array of federal standards and programs 
under several federal environmental laws, including the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act, the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability 
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Clean Water Act, the Surface Mining Control 
and Reclamation Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the Clean Air Act.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; U.S. Congressional Research Service; Department of Legislative 
Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 663/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4