START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 682 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 682 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages – Golf Course License and Sports 
Activity Venue Licenses 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class C (golf course) license; a sports activity venue beer and wine 
license; and a sports activity venue beer, wine, and liquor license in Anne Arundel County. 
The Class C (golf course) license may be issued to a golf course with at least nine holes, 
and the sports activity venue licenses may be issued to a commercial recreational facility 
that offers specified sports activities. A license authorizes the license holder to sell 
specified alcoholic beverages at retail at the place described in the license for on-premises 
consumption. A license holder may sell alcoholic beverages as licensed Monday through 
Sunday from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day and does not need a Sunday permit to sell 
on Sundays. The annual license for a Class C (golf course) license and a sports activity 
venue beer, wine, and liquor license is $1,200. The annual license fee for a sports activity 
venue beer and wine license is $740. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2027, to the 
extent new licenses are issued. Anne Arundel County expenditures are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 682/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Class C (Golf Course) License 
 
A Class C (golf course) license authorizes the sale of beer, wine, and liquor. The 
Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners may (1) place conditions on the 
location of sale and consumption, including prohibiting the sale or consumption of alcohol 
in certain areas of the premises and (2) reduce the hours and days of sale for all or part of 
the licensed premises. 
 
Sports Activity Venue Licenses 
 
The board may issue a sports activity venue license to the owner or operator of a 
commercial recreational facility that offers bowling, golf or multisport stimulators, 
pickleball courts, indoor gymnasiums or training centers, or any similar sport activity or 
venue. The license authorizes sales to a customer who is at least 21 years old and is either 
(1) actively participating in the venue’s dining or recreational services, or (2) on the 
licensed premises as a guest of a participant. 
 
A sports activity venue license holder may sell alcoholic beverages authorized by the 
license at retail for on-premises consumption at the licensed location. The license holder 
may sell or serve alcohol only in certain areas designated for activity, seating, bar service, 
and dining, such as private party rooms. 
 
The license holder must (1) offer food items for sale during all hours that alcoholic 
beverages are for sale; (2) require employees serving alcohol to be certified by an approved 
alcohol awareness training program; (3) implement a written policy for employees to 
monitor and limit service to customers participating in physical activities; and (4) obtain a 
crowd control training certificate where the occupant load exceeds 50 people. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner. Class C licenses authorize the sale of alcohol to 
members and guests at a club, for on-site consumption only. 
 
Class C license holders in Anne Arundel County may sell beer, wine, and liquor 
Monday through Saturday from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day. They may not sell beer, 
wine, or liquor after 2 a.m. on Sundays without a Sunday license. The board may issue a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 682/ Page 3 
Sunday license to a Class C license holder, authorizing the sale of beer, wine, and liquor 
on Sunday according to the terms of that license.  
 
The Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners issues several licenses for 
specific types of organizations and venues, including country club licenses, yacht club 
licenses, and country and golf club licenses, among others. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 441 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3