START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 645 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 645 
(Delegate Allen, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Fraud - Assisted Reproductive Treatment 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from intentionally or knowingly providing “assisted 
reproductive treatment” to another person using the person’s own sperm or ovum, unless 
the recipient consented, in writing, to treatment using that sperm or ovum. A violator is 
guilty of a felony and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a 
maximum fine of $5,000. If a woman gives birth to a child after receiving assisted 
reproductive treatment from a violator, the woman, the woman’s spouse or domestic 
partner, or the child may bring a civil action against the violator to recover specified 
damages. Additionally, the child is entitled to a qualified protective order granting access 
to the violator’s medical records and health history. Nothing in the bill may be construed 
to limit the availability of any other remedy provided by law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $8,400 in FY 2027 
only for one‐time programming costs. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially 
affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Assisted reproductive treatment” means a method of causing pregnancy 
other than through sexual intercourse, including (1) donation of eggs or sperm; (2) donation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 645/ Page 2 
of embryos; (3) intracytoplasmic sperm injection; (4) intrauterine or intracervical 
insemination; and (5) in vitro fertilization (IVF) and embryo transfers. 
 
A civil action brought under the bill must be filed within 10 years after the child who was 
born as a result of the assisted reproductive treatment reaches age 18, within 20 years after 
the day the treatment was provided, or within 2 years after the day on which an individual 
first discovers sufficient evidence through DNA analysis that the individual has a cause of 
action. A plaintiff who prevails is entitled to the costs of the treatment, economic and 
noneconomic compensatory damages, and reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.  
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that certain carriers must provide to their enrollees, including coverage for IVF. 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires nongrandfathered health 
plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services in the 
following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services.  
 
Under § 31-116 of the Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State benchmark 
plan and, notwithstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be the benefits 
required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans offered to small 
employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the Maryland Health 
Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in MHBE.  
 
Carriers that provide pregnancy-related benefits are required to cover outpatient expenses 
arising from IVF performed on a policyholder or subscriber or the dependent spouse of the 
policyholder or subscriber. IVF benefits may be limited to three IVF attempts per live birth, 
not to exceed a maximum lifetime benefit of $100,000. Carriers are not responsible for any 
costs incurred by a policyholder or subscriber to obtain donor sperm.  
 
To qualify for IVF benefits, a married patient and the patient’s spouse must have a history 
of involuntary infertility of at least one year’s duration or infertility associated with 
endometriosis, diethylstilbestrol exposure, blockage or removal of one or both fallopian 
tubes, or abnormal male factors. An unmarried patient must have (1) had three attempts of 
artificial insemination over the course of one year failing to result in pregnancy or 
(2) infertility associated with endometriosis, diethylstilbestrol exposure, blockage or 
removal of one or both fallopian tubes, or abnormal male factors. The patient must have 
been unable to attain a successful pregnancy through a less costly infertility treatment 
available under the policy or contract, and IVF must be performed at specified medical 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 645/ Page 3 
facilities. In addition, for a married patient whose spouse is of the opposite sex, the patient’s 
eggs must be fertilized with the spouse’s sperm unless (1) the spouse is unable to produce 
and deliver functional sperm and (2) the inability does not result from a vasectomy or other 
method of voluntary sterilization.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
HB 95 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Health Care Alternative Dispute 
Resolution Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3