START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 644 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 644 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Tax - Exemption for Dwellings of Surviving Spouses of Disabled 
Veterans - Application 
 
 
This bill alters the application requirements for a specified property tax exemption for a 
dwelling house owned by the surviving spouse of a disabled veteran. Specifically, the bill 
authorizes the use of Dependency and Indemnity Compensation documentation from the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) as a means of verifying the veteran’s disability 
instead of a certification of disability from the VA. As a result, the bill increases the number 
of surviving spouses who are eligible for the property tax exemption. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues decrease by a significant amount 
beginning in FY 2027. Under one set of assumptions, special fund revenues may decrease 
by approximately $1.7 million annually beginning in FY 2027. This decrease may require 
either (1) an increase in the State property tax rate or (2) a general fund appropriation to 
cover debt service on the State’s general obligation (GO) bonds. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease by a significant amount beginning in 
FY 2027. Under one set of assumptions, local property tax revenues may decrease by 
approximately $20 million annually beginning in FY 2027. This bill imposes a mandate 
on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 644/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The real property owned by disabled veterans, as their legal residence, is 
exempt from taxation if specified requirements are met. A disabled veteran is an individual 
who is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active 
service in any branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. To qualify for the tax exemption, the 
disabled veteran must have a 100% service-connected disability rating. Real property 
owned by the surviving spouse of a disabled veteran and the surviving spouse of an 
individual who died in the line of duty while in active military, naval, or air service of the 
United States is exempt from taxation. In addition, a home owned by the surviving spouse 
of a veteran of the U.S. Armed Forces who receives Dependency and Indemnity 
Compensation from the VA is eligible for a property tax exemption under specified 
circumstances. 
 
A disabled veteran or a surviving spouse of a disabled veteran must apply for a property 
tax exemption by providing to the Supervisor of Assessments (1) a copy of the disabled 
veteran’s discharge certificate from active military, naval, or air service and (2) on the form 
provided by the department, a certification of the disabled veteran’s disability from the VA 
or a rating decision of the disabled veteran’s disability from the VA that includes the 
effective date of the rating decision. The disabled veteran’s certificate of disability may not 
be inspected by individuals other than (1) the disabled veteran or (2) appropriate employees 
of the State, a county, or a municipality. 
 
Chapters 195 and 196 of 2022 authorize an individual to submit an application to the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) for a specified property tax exemption 
for disabled veterans and surviving spouses for a specific dwelling house the individual 
intends to purchase before purchasing the dwelling house. Following receipt of the 
application, SDAT must process the application and send the applicant a letter stating 
(1) that the application is preliminarily approved or preliminarily denied and (2) if the 
application is preliminarily approved, the amount of the tax exemption for the dwelling the 
individual intends to purchase. An individual who is issued a letter preliminarily approving 
the exemption must receive the exemption for the dwelling referenced in the letter after 
becoming the owner of the dwelling without having to file another application. 
 
Fiscal Impact of Current Exemption 
 
For fiscal 2026, 32,299 property owners are receiving a property tax exemption for being 
a disabled veteran (30,697), a surviving spouse (1,556), or a disabled active-duty service 
member (46), and the assessment for these properties is approximately $15.3 billion. The 
average exemption is $400,315, and the associated State revenue loss from these 
exemptions totaled approximately $17.2 million, based on a $0.112 State property tax rate. 
All State property tax revenues are credited to a special fund, the ABF, dedicated 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 644/ Page 3 
exclusively to paying the debt service on State GO bonds. Local governments generally 
have the authority to set their own property tax rates. Based on the average combined 
county-municipal property tax rate, the projected local revenue loss from the current 
exemption could total approximately $190 million. 
 
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation 
 
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation is a monthly benefit that is paid to eligible 
survivors of: 
 
 
service members who died while on active duty, active duty for training or inactive 
duty training; or 
 
veterans who died as a result of a service-connected injury or disease; or 
 
veterans who did not die as a result of a service-connected injury or disease, but 
were totally disabled by a service-connected disability (1) for at least 10 years before 
death; or (2) since their release from active duty and for at least 5 years before death; 
or (3) for at least 1 year before death, if they were a former prisoner of war and died 
after September 30, 1999. 
 
A surviving spouse is eligible for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation benefits if 
they are the surviving spouse who: 
 
 
married a service member who died on active duty, active duty for training or 
inactive duty training; or 
 
married the deceased veteran before Jan. 1, 1957; or 
 
married a veteran who died from a service-connected injury or disease, if the 
marriage began within 15 years of discharge; or  
 
married the deceased veteran for at least 1 year; or 
 
had a child with the veteran and cohabitated with the veteran until their death. 
 
A surviving spouse who has remarried after the veteran’s death may still be eligible for 
benefits under specified circumstances. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues will decrease by a significant amount beginning in 
fiscal 2027 as a result of the expanded eligibility for the property tax exemption for 
surviving spouses. The amount of the revenue decrease depends on the number of eligible 
surviving spouses who receive Dependency and Indemnity Compensation benefits and 
who do not currently receive the property tax exemption and the assessed value of each 
residential property. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 644/ Page 4 
For illustrative purposes only, ABF revenues may decrease by approximately $1.7 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2027 as a result of the property tax exemption required by the 
bill. The estimate is based on the following: 
 
 
7,310 Dependency and Indemnity Compensation recipients in Maryland (2023); 
 
1,556 surviving spouses receiving the current property tax exemption; 
 
the average taxable assessment for exemption recipients totals $400,315; and 
 
67.6% of properties in Maryland are owner-occupied. 
 
Impact on Debt Service Payments 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s GO bonds are paid from the ABF. Revenue sources 
for the fund include State property taxes, premium from bond sales, and repayments from 
certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General funds may be 
appropriated directly to the ABF to make up any differences between the debt service 
payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. The fiscal 2027 
budget assumes $1.3 billion in State property tax revenues to the ABF. In addition, 
$177.7 million in general funds and $0.8 million in federal funds are budgeted to the ABF, 
since the State property tax rate is not set high enough to cover the full cost of the debt 
service payments on the State’s GO bonds. 
 
To offset the reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could 
increase in an amount equal to the decrease in the ABF revenues, or the State property tax 
rate would have to be increased to meet debt service payments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Based on the assumptions and data used above and using an average 
local property tax rate of $1.20 per $100 of assessment, local property tax revenues may 
decrease by approximately $20 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027. The impact on 
local revenues may vary depending on the actual number of property tax exemption 
recipients, where each recipient resides, and the assessed value of each property. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 443 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 644/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5