START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 680 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 680 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Children's Cabinet Fund - Renaming and Funding for Grants to Local 
Management Boards 
 
   
This bill requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation to the 
Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund (CCIF) of:  (1) for fiscal 2028, $3.0 million above 
the appropriation in fiscal 2027; (2) for fiscal 2029, $2.0 million above the appropriation 
in fiscal 2028; (3) for fiscal 2030, $2.0 million above the appropriation in fiscal 2029; and 
(4) for fiscal 2031, $2.0 million above the appropriation in fiscal 2030. The mandated funds 
must be used for grants to eligible local management boards (LMBs) and are supplemental 
to funding that otherwise would be expended for such grants. The bill also renames the 
Children’s Cabinet Fund to be CCIF. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $3.0 million 
in FY 2028, increasing to $9.0 million in FY 2031, to reflect the bill’s mandated 
appropriations to CCIF. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028 
through 2031. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
3.0 
5.0 
7.0 
9.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($3.0) 
($5.0) 
($7.0) 
($9.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase by $3.0 million in FY 2028, 
increasing to $9.0 million in FY 2031, to reflect additional grant funding for LMBs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 680/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Governor’s Office for Children (GOC) provides a coordinated, 
comprehensive, interagency approach to (1) promoting the well-being of children and 
families through a network of supports, programs, and services that are family- and 
child-oriented and (2) reducing the number of children living in poverty. Led by a 
Special Secretary, GOC activities include staffing the Children’s Cabinet, administering 
CCIF, and providing technical assistance to LMBs. 
 
CCIF consists of money appropriated, transferred, credited, or paid into the fund from any 
source and includes money for out-of-home care and services to prevent out-of-home 
placements. Expenditures from CCIF must be made to reflect the priorities, policies, and 
procedures that the Children’s Cabinet adopts. Any unspent funds revert to the 
general fund. 
 
LMBs must apply for funds from CCIF in accordance with procedures established by the 
Children’s Cabinet and submit a specified community partnership agreement. The 
Children’s Cabinet may disburse funds to LMBs subject to terms, conditions, performance 
measures, or outcome evaluations. LMBs must use the funds to implement:  (1) a local 
interagency services delivery system for children, youth, and families in accordance with 
the community partnership agreement; and (2) any terms, conditions, and performance 
measures that the Children’s Cabinet requires. 
 
Each county must establish and maintain an LMB to ensure the implementation of a local 
interagency service delivery system for children, youth, and families. LMBs must:  
(1) strengthen the decision-making capacity at the local level; (2) design and implement 
strategies that achieve clearly defined results for children, youth, and families; (3) maintain 
standards of accountability for locally agreed upon results for children, youth, and families; 
(4) influence the allocation of resources across systems as necessary to accomplish the 
desired results; (5) build local partnerships to coordinate children, youth, and family 
services within the county to eliminate fragmentation and duplication of services; and 
(6) create an effective system of services, supports, and opportunities that improve 
outcomes for all children, youth, and families.  
 
LMBs are generally funded through CCIF and the Engaging Neighborhoods, 
Organizations, Unions, Governments, and Households (ENOUGH) Grant Program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation to CCIF of: 
 
 
for fiscal 2028, $3.0 million above the appropriation in fiscal 2027; 
 
for fiscal 2029, $2.0 million above the appropriation in fiscal 2028; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 680/ Page 3 
 
for fiscal 2030, $2.0 million above the appropriation in fiscal 2029; and 
 
for fiscal 2031, $2.0 million above the appropriation in fiscal 2030. 
 
To reflect the mandated appropriations in the bill, general fund expenditures to CCIF 
increase by (1) $3.0 million in fiscal 2028; (2) $5.0 million in fiscal 2029; (3) $7.0 million 
in fiscal 2030; and (4) $9.0 million in fiscal 2031.  
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $20.3 million for CCIF to support LMBs. 
The Department of Legislative advises that funding to CCIF is anticipated to continue at 
current levels through fiscal 2031. Therefore, under the bill, the following amount is 
available from CCIF for the Children’s Cabinet to make grants to LMBs:  (1) $23.3 million 
in fiscal 2028; (2) $25.3 million in fiscal 2029; (3) $27.3 million in fiscal 2030; and 
(4) $29.3 million in fiscal 2031. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 668 (Senators Harris and King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3