START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 636 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 636 
(Delegate Harrison, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Ethics - Members of the General Assembly - State and Local Government 
Employment Exemption 
 
 
This bill allows a member, candidate for election to, or member-elect of the 
General Assembly to receive earned income from an Executive Branch unit or political 
subdivision of the State if the compensation is derived from a transaction or relationship 
that the individual (1) entered into after having served at least one full elected term in the 
General Assembly and (2) has objectively satisfied the minimum education, licensure, and 
experience requirements needed for an exemption. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State governmental operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local governmental operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Public Ethics Law sets out requirements, prohibitions, and 
procedures that affect State officials in the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial branches of 
government for the purpose of maintaining people’s trust in government and protecting 
against the improper influence and appearance of improper influence of government. The 
Maryland Public Ethics Law is administered by the State Ethics Commission with the 
Joint Committee on Legislative Ethics and the Commission on Judicial Disabilities. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 636/ Page 2 
Among the requirements, prohibitions, and procedures of the Maryland Public Ethics Law 
are provisions regarding conflicts of interest for a member, candidate for election to, or 
member‑elect of the General Assembly. 
 
Generally, a member, candidate, or member‑elect of the General Assembly is prohibited 
from receiving earned income from an Executive Branch unit or a political subdivision of 
the State. However, a member, candidate, or member‑elect of the General Assembly may 
receive an exemption from the Joint Ethics Committee if the earned income is for:  
(1) educational instruction provided by the member, candidate, or member‑elect; (2) a 
position that is subject to a merit system hiring process; (3) a human services position; or 
(4) a career promotion, change, or progression that is a logical transition from a pre‑existing 
relationship, as specified. The prohibition does not apply to compensation derived from 
(1) employment as a nonelected law enforcement officer or a fire or rescue squad worker 
or (2) a transaction or relationship that existed before the individual filed a certificate of 
candidacy for election to the General Assembly (as a nonincumbent) or was not appointed 
to fill a vacancy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 618 (Senators Watson and Salling) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2