START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 617 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 617 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
City of Frederick - Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes the use of noise abatement monitoring systems in the City of Frederick 
to record violations of State law governing maximum sound limits of motor vehicles. 
Existing penalties, requirements, and limitations that apply to the systems used by 
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties under current law also apply to the systems 
used by the City of Frederick under the bill. The City of Frederick must report – by 
December 1, 2027 – to the Governor and General Assembly on its implementation of the 
systems, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates on the 
termination of Chapters 624 and 625 of 2024 (currently set for June 30, 2028).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues from contested cases in the District Court may 
increase minimally in FY 2027 through 2029 to the extent that additional noise abatement 
monitoring systems are installed, as discussed below. General fund expenditures are not 
anticipated to be materially affected, as discussed below.      
 
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for the City of Frederick may increase in 
FY 2027 through 2029 to the extent that any noise abatement monitoring systems are 
installed pursuant to the bill’s authority, as discussed below.      
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.     
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 617/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By December 1, 2027, the City of Frederick must report to the Governor 
and General Assembly on: 
 
 
through October 1, 2027, (1) the time period during which noise abatement 
monitoring systems authorized under the bill were used in the city and (2) the 
number of warnings and citations issued as a result of violations recorded by noise 
abatement monitoring systems in the city over the reported time period, by location 
and date;  
 
the costs associated with implementing and operating noise abatement monitoring 
systems and the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations 
recorded by the systems;  
 
appropriate locations for the deployment of noise abatement monitoring systems; 
 
the performance and reliability of noise abatement monitoring systems used by the 
city; and  
 
the effectiveness of noise abatement monitoring systems in reducing noise produced 
by motor vehicles in the city and in areas where the systems were implemented and 
used.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems 
 
Chapters 624 and 625 of 2024 authorized the use of noise abatement monitoring systems 
in both Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. Under the Acts, any such system may 
only be implemented if its use is authorized by the governing body of the county by local 
law enacted after reasonable notice and a public hearing. Originally, Chapters 624 and 625 
terminated June 30, 2026; however, the termination date was extended to June 30, 2028, 
by Chapter 712 of 2025 and Chapter 11 of the special session of 2025.  
 
A person liable for a violation enforced by a noise abatement monitoring system is subject 
to a warning notice for a first offense and a civil penalty not exceeding $75 for a second or 
subsequent offense. The Acts include additional requirements and specifications for the 
use of the systems, including: 
 
 
requiring fine revenues to be paid directly to the appropriate political subdivision, 
unless a case is contested in the District Court (in which case the fine revenues are 
paid to the District Court);  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 617/ Page 3 
 
authorizing the counties to recover the costs of implementing and administering the 
systems from the fines collected and requiring any balance to be used solely for 
public safety purposes, as specified;  
 
requiring the counties to provide specified notice to the general public before 
activating a system;  
 
requiring the counties to designate an official or employee to respond to questions 
and concerns about the systems;  
 
requiring system operators to receive training and be certified by the system 
manufacturer, as specified;  
 
requiring operators to complete daily logs, as specified;  
 
requiring the systems to undergo annual calibration checks, as specified;  
 
establishing penalty amounts and requiring the District Court to prescribe a uniform 
citation form;  
 
establishing other requirements related to violations, administration of the penalties, 
the processing of citations, the admissibility of the recordings as evidence, and 
information the District Court may consider in defense of a violation; and  
 
establishing reporting requirements.  
 
Sound Limits 
 
A person is prohibited from driving (or permitting to be driven) a motor vehicle on a 
highway in violation of maximum sound limits established under State law. A violation is 
a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The prepayment penalty is $60. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Assuming that noise abatement monitoring systems are installed by 
the City of Frederick pursuant to the bill’s authority, the total number of citations issued 
may increase in fiscal 2027 and 2028. As a result of this potential increase in citations, the 
number of individuals opting for a trial in District Court may increase. Accordingly, 
general fund revenues may increase minimally as fine revenues paid by individuals 
convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. Any increase in revenues likely 
only occurs through fiscal 2029 (although the bill terminates June 30, 2028, consistent with 
the current termination date for Chapters 624 and 625, it is assumed that associated impacts 
continue for a brief period as any issued citations are processed and paid).  
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court.  
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 617/ Page 4 
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an information technology upgrade to 
automate the process at approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be 
incurred.  
 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that the City of Frederick chooses to implement a noise 
abatement monitoring system program pursuant to the authority granted by the bill:  
 
 
expenditures increase to install the devices and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the program 
(e.g., mailing or contractual costs);  
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the city; 
and  
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
As noted above, because Chapters 624 and 625 terminate June 30, 2028, any fiscal impacts 
for the city are likely experienced only through fiscal 2029 (under the assumption above).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4