START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 608 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 608 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Judicial Compensation 
Commission) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Judicial and Quasi-Judicial Employees - Compensation 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Chief Judge of the Appellate Court of Maryland and a judge who 
serves as an administrative judge for a circuit court or the District Court to receive an 
annual stipend in addition to the judge’s annual salary. The bill also modifies the annual 
salary of the chairman of the Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) to be at least 
equal the salary of the Chief Judge of the District Court. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for WCC increase by $22,300 annually beginning 
in FY 2027, as discussed below. Although the bill also explicitly authorizes annual stipends 
for judges serving in administrative roles, the resulting impact is accounted for under 
separate enacted legislation (Senate Joint Resolution 2 and House Joint Resolution 6 
of 2026) that specifies the amount of such stipends, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
22,300 
22,300 
22,300 
22,300 
22,300 
Net Effect 
($22,300) 
($22,300) 
($22,300) 
($22,300) 
($22,300) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 608/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
Judicial Compensation Commission 
 
The Judicial Compensation Commission is required to review judicial salaries and make 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly once every four years with 
respect to all aspects of judicial compensation. The judicial compensation structure is 
intended to be adequate to assure that highly qualified persons will be attracted to  
the bench and will continue to serve there without unreasonable economic hardship. The 
General Assembly may amend a joint resolution from the commission to decrease, but not 
increase, any of the commission’s salary recommendations. Failure to adopt or amend the 
joint resolution within 50 calendar days of its introduction results in adoption of the salaries 
recommended by the commission. 
 
Based on recommendations from the Judicial Compensation Commission, legislation 
(Senate Joint Resolution 2 and House Joint Resolution 6) proposing increases in judicial 
salaries from fiscal 2027 through 2030 was introduced this session. In addition to proposed 
salary increases for all judges, the resolution also recommends an annual stipend of $7,500 
for the Chief Judge of the Appellate Court of Maryland and for any judge who serves as an 
administrative judge for a circuit court or District Court. Statute specifies that if the 
General Assembly fails to adopt or amend the joint resolution within 50 days after its 
introduction, the salaries recommended by the Judicial Compensation Commission must 
be implemented. Since the General Assembly did not act on the joint resolutions during 
the applicable time period, Senate Joint Resolution 2 and House Joint Resolution 6 have 
effectively been enacted. The Chief Judge of the District Court is therefore set to receive 
an annual salary of $229,533 in fiscal 2027; the amount increases by $5,900 annually 
through fiscal 2030. 
 
The Judiciary advises that authorizing an annual stipend – in addition to recognizing the 
additional responsibilities these judges perform beyond the regular duties of a judge – may 
assist recruitment and retention of judges in these leadership positions of court 
administration. The bill, introduced as companion legislation to the aforementioned joint 
resolutions by request of the Judicial Compensation Commission, is intended to explicitly 
authorize judges to receive these annual stipends. 
 
Maryland Rules – Court Administration 
 
The duties and responsibilities of the Chief Judge of the Appellate Court and the 
administrative judges of the circuit court and District Court are specified in the 
Maryland Rules. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 608/ Page 3 
Chief Judge of the Appellate Court:  Generally, Maryland Rule 16‐103 specifies that, at 
the direction of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland, the Chief Judge of the 
Appellate Court is responsible for the administration of the Appellate Court, and generally 
has the authority of a county administrative judge. 
 
Administrative Judge of a Circuit Court:  Administrative judges for each circuit court 
(specified as “county administrative judges” in Maryland Rule 16‐105) are designated by 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court (and serve at the Chief Justice’s pleasure), after 
consideration of the recommendation of the Circuit Administrative Judge. Generally, the 
county administrative judge must be a judge of that circuit court, and is responsible for the 
administration of the circuit court. This includes numerous duties such as supervision of 
the judges, officials, and employees of the court; assignment of judges within the court, as 
specified; preparation of the court’s budget; and plans related to case management, 
continuity of operations, and the jury plan. 
 
Administrative Judge of the District Court:  The District Court operates in 12 districts 
across the State. Subject to the approval of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the 
Chief Judge of the District Court must designate a District Court judge in each district as 
the administrative judge for that district. Subject to the direction of the Chief Judge of the 
District Court, the administrative judges are generally responsible for, among other things, 
the administration, operation, and maintenance of the court and the conduct and scheduling 
of the court’s business. 
 
Chairman of the Workers’ Compensation Commission 
 
Statute specifies that among the members of WCC, the Governor must appoint a chairman, 
who is the administrative and executive head of WCC, and generally has final authority 
over (1) the administrative work of WCC and its employees and (2) the assignment of cases 
for hearing. Also, the chairman must conduct hearings unless the hearings interfere with 
the performance of the chairman’s administrative and executive functions. The annual 
salary of the chairman must be at least $1,500 more than the salary of the other members; 
the annual salary of a WCC member must at least equal the salary provided in the State 
budget for a judge of the District Court. Based on the salary structure to be implemented 
under the aforementioned resolutions (and not accounting for the alteration in salary 
proposed under the bill), the fiscal 2027 salary of the Chair is estimated at $208,733, 
reflecting $1,500 over the fiscal 2027 salary of a WCC member/judge of the District Court. 
 
State Expenditures:  As referenced above, Senate Joint Resolution 2 and House Joint 
Resolution 6 set forth a proposed salary plan for judges over the next four years, whereby 
all judges receive a salary increase of $5,900 annually. Judges serving in an administrative 
role further receive an annual stipend of $7,500. Due to the failure of the General Assembly 
to take further action within the required time periods, the resolutions have effectively been 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 608/ Page 4 
enacted and the recommendations within the resolutions are to be implemented over the 
next four years. The fiscal impact of the salary increases and the stipend amounts contained 
within the resolutions are fully accounted for in the analysis prepared for Senate Joint 
Resolution 2/House Joint Resolution 6. 
 
Special fund expenditures for WCC increase by $22,325 in fiscal 2027 to increase the 
salary of the WCC Chair to that of the Chief Judge of the District Court. This estimate 
accounts for the difference in salary (and fringe benefits) associated with increasing the 
estimated fiscal 2027 salary of the WCC Chair based on the resolutions ($208,733) to the 
annual salary of the Chief Judge of the District Court set forth in the resolutions ($229,533). 
Special fund expenditures also increase by similar amounts annually thereafter. Although 
the Judicial Compensation Commission may again make recommendations for salary 
increases in fiscal 2031, this analysis does not reflect potential additional increases beyond 
fiscal 2030. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced during the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 313 (The President)(By Request - Judicial Compensation 
Commission) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4