START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 659 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 659 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Board of Education - Membership - Early Childhood Development 
Professional 
 
 
This bill requires that one member of the State Board of Education (SBE) must be an early 
childhood development professional. The individual must have extensive experience in the 
operations of a child care business and early childhood curriculum and development, as 
determined by the Office of Child Care Advisory Council. The Governor must appoint the 
early childhood development member with the advice and consent of the Senate from a list 
of three qualified individuals submitted to the Governor from the Office of Child Care 
Advisory Council. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must provide 
notice of the initial early childhood development member vacancy and any subsequent 
vacancy to all licensed child care providers in the State. The early childhood development 
member may attend and participate in an executive session of the board. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SBE consists of 13 regular members and 1 student member appointed by 
the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. In making appointments to the 
State board, the Governor must consider representation from all parts of the State and areas 
of the State with concentrations of population or unique needs. Members of the board must 
be appointed from the general public. Except for the teacher and student members, any 
individual who is subject to the authority of the State board may not be appointed to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 659/ Page 2 
State board. In addition, the Governor and the State Superintendent of Schools may not be 
appointed to the State board. 
 
Each regular member serves for a staggered four-year term and until a successor is 
appointed and qualifies. The Governor must appoint a new member to fill any vacancy on 
the State board for the remainder of that term and until a successor is appointed and 
qualifies. A member is eligible for reappointment but may not serve for more than two full 
four-year terms. The student member serves for a term of one-year. A student member is 
eligible for reappointment but may not serve more than two full one-year terms. 
 
Among the regular members, the Governor must appoint one teacher and one parent 
member with the advice and consent of the Senate. The teacher member who received the 
highest number of votes after an election by teachers in the State must be appointed by the 
Governor. For the parent member, the Governor must appoint the parent member from a 
list of three qualified individuals submitted by the Maryland Parent Teacher Association 
(PTA). MSDE must provide notice of a teacher member vacancy to (1) all certified teachers 
who are actively teaching in the State and (2) all teachers’ organizations representing 
teachers in the State for purposes of collective bargaining. The elections must be conducted 
under regulations adopted by MSDE. MSDE may consult with the State Retirement 
Agency of the Maryland State Retirement and Pension System to conduct the election. 
MSDE must provide notice of a parent member vacancy to the Maryland PTA. 
 
A teacher or parent member may attend and participate in an executive session of the 
State board; however, a teacher member may not vote on any matter that relates to appeals 
to the State board related to the suspension or dismissal of teachers, principals, and other 
professional personnel. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 462 and HB 524 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2