START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 613 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 613 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of the Environment - Waivers for Living Shorelines and 
Nonstructural Shoreline Stabilization Measures - Regulations and Scoring 
System 
 
 
This bill makes existing provisions – requiring improvements to protect the shoreline 
against erosion to generally consist of nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures – to 
also expressly apply to “living shorelines,” which, as defined by the bill, include the use of 
natural 
elements 
and 
certain 
structural 
elements, 
as 
specified. 
Existing  
provisions related to the adoption of regulations by the Maryland Department of the  
Environment (MDE) – regarding the waiver process that exempts a person from those 
requirements – are altered. In addition, MDE must (1) develop a scoring system to evaluate 
waiver requests, as specified, and publish the scoring system on its website; (2) work with 
stakeholders on further alterations to the waiver process; and (3) by December 1, 2026, 
report to specified committees of the General Assembly on the progress of the required 
stakeholder engagement. Finally, the bill standardizes provisions related to the approval of 
erosion control measures that apply statewide. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources, as discussed 
below. State expenditures (multiple fund types) for State agencies that undertake shoreline 
stabilization projects may increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Special fund 
revenues for MDE may increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 613/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Living shoreline” means a project to mitigate the effects of erosion caused by shoreline 
flooding or inundation, currents, and wave energy through project design that: 
 
 
stabilizes a shoreline by using natural materials to create buffers to absorb the 
impact of coastal storms, flooding, and wave energy and to prevent or  
minimize shoreline erosion;  
 
incorporates as many natural elements as possible to ensure a substantial biological 
component, as specified; 
 
utilizes techniques that incorporate ecological and coastal engineering principles in 
shoreline stabilization; and  
 
to the extent possible, maintains or restores existing natural slopes and connections 
between uplands and adjacent wetlands or surface waters. 
 
“Living shoreline” includes the use of natural elements (such as sand, wetland plants, 
woody debris, oysters or other shellfish, submerged aquatic vegetation, native grasses, 
shrubs, trees, or other biodegradable materials as approved by MDE) and low profile 
structural elements channelward of the mean high water line, such as stone, concrete, 
oyster domes, or other approved engineered structure.  
 
“Nonstructural shoreline stabilization measure” means an erosion control measure that is 
dominated by tidal wetland vegetation and designed to preserve the natural shoreline, 
minimize erosion, and establish aquatic habitat. It includes marsh or other tidal wetland 
construction.  
 
Waivers from the General Requirement to Use a Living Shoreline or Nonstructural 
Shoreline Stabilization Measures 
 
The regulations adopted by MDE that establish a waiver process that exempts a person 
from the general requirement to use a living shoreline or nonstructural shoreline 
stabilization measures to protect a person’s property against erosion must require MDE, as 
part of its evaluation of waiver requests, to (1) on request of the property owner, visit the 
site of the proposed project within 45 days after the date of the waiver request and  
(2) provide the local soil conservation district (SCD) with written notice of the waiver 
request and provide the district the opportunity to make recommendations on the 
acceptance of or modifications to the waiver request.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 613/ Page 3 
Additionally, MDE must develop a scoring system to evaluate waiver requests; the scoring 
system must include (1) the factors MDE will consider in evaluating a request; (2) the 
relative weight of each factor; and (3) the minimum score that a project must receive to 
demonstrate to MDE’s satisfaction that a living shoreline or nonstructural shoreline 
stabilization measure is not feasible on the person’s property. MDE must publish the 
scoring system on its website. These requirements may not be construed to limit the 
discretion of MDE to grant a waiver to a project that does not receive a minimum score. 
 
MDE must work with stakeholders on further alterations to the waiver process. In doing 
so, MDE must (1) discuss how to address the specific challenges with constructing 
shoreline stabilization projects in medium- and high-energy environments and provide 
greater transparency and certainty to the waiver process and (2) review existing  
time-of-year and mitigation requirements.  
 
Alterations to Statewide Erosion Control Measures  
 
The bill repeals existing provisions under the Natural Resources Article that (1) establish 
standards for the construction of erosion control measures and (2) require the Department 
of Natural Resources (DNR) to adopt regulations to implement those measures in 
consultation with MDE. Instead, under the bill, erosion control measures must be 
conducted in accordance with § 16-201 of the Environment Article, as amended by the bill.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Wetlands Regulation 
 
Wetlands in the State are protected, and the Wetlands and Waterways Program within 
MDE administers a statewide program for the management, conservation, and protection 
of Maryland’s tidal wetlands and nontidal wetlands and waterways. Pursuant to current law 
and MDE regulations, and subject to certain exceptions, a person may not dredge, fill, or 
construct or reconstruct structures in: 
 
 
State wetlands, without a license issued by the Board of Public Works (or MDE, as 
MDE is delegated authority to authorize certain activities in State wetlands); or 
 
private wetlands, without a permit issued by MDE. 
 
Application fees for wetlands and waterways authorizations are set in statute and range 
from $290 (for certain shoreline stabilization projects) to $9,720 multiplied by the impact 
area in acres (for major projects with an impact of one acre or more). The application fee 
for minor projects is $980. Certain projects and activities are exempt from the requirement 
to pay the application fees, including, among others, stream restoration, vegetative 
shoreline stabilization, wetland creation, or other projects in which the primary effect is to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 613/ Page 4 
enhance the State’s wetland or water resources. Revenues from application fees accrue to 
the Wetlands and Waterways Program Fund within MDE.  
 
Shoreline Stabilization Measures 
 
State tidal wetlands law authorizes riparian (waterfront) property owners to make 
improvements to protect the shoreline against erosion. After an improvement has been 
constructed, the attached improvement is considered part of the landowner’s property.  
 
Generally, improvements to protect a person’s property against erosion must consist of 
nonstructural shoreline stabilization methods that preserve the natural environment, such 
as marsh creation, except in areas designated by MDE mapping as appropriate for structural 
shoreline stabilization measures and in areas where a property owner can demonstrate to 
MDE that such measures are not feasible, including areas of excessive erosion, areas 
subject to heavy tides, and areas too narrow for effective use of nonstructural shoreline 
stabilization measures. 
 
MDE is required to adopt regulations, in consultation with DNR, to implement these 
provisions. The regulations must include a waiver process that exempts a person from the 
nonstructural shoreline stabilization methods requirements on a demonstration to MDE’s 
satisfaction that nonstructural measures are not feasible for the person’s property. 
 
Regulations establish the criteria for obtaining a waiver. When evaluating a request for a 
waiver, MDE must consider several listed factors to determine whether the site is suitable 
to support a nonstructural shoreline stabilization measure. A person may obtain a waiver 
from the nonstructural shoreline stabilization requirement if, to MDE’s satisfaction, a 
structural shoreline stabilization measure is the only feasible alternative that will protect 
and maintain the person’s shoreline. 
 
Lawful Uses of Private Wetlands 
 
Notwithstanding any regulation adopted by the Secretary of the Environment to protect 
private wetlands, the following uses are lawful on private wetlands:  (1) conservation of 
soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife; (2) trapping, hunting, fishing, and 
catching shellfish if otherwise legally permitted; (3) exercise of riparian rights to improve 
land bounding on navigable water to preserve access to the navigable water, or to protect 
the shore against erosion; (4) reclamation of fast land owned by a natural person and lost 
during the person’s ownership of the land after January 1, 1972, as specified; (5) routine 
maintenance and repair of existing bulkheads, provided that there is no addition or 
channelward encroachment; and (6) installing a pump, a pipe, or any other equipment 
attached to a pier that is associated with a permitted shellfish nursery operation if such a 
project does require increasing the length, width, or channelward encroachment of the pier. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 613/ Page 5 
Relevant Definitions 
 
“Nonstructural shoreline stabilization measure” is defined under COMAR 26.24.01.02 to 
mean an erosion control measure that is dominated by tidal wetland vegetation and is 
designed to preserve the natural shoreline, minimize erosion, and establish aquatic habitat. 
The term includes a living shoreline. “Living shoreline” is not defined in statute or 
regulations. 
 
State Revenues:  Although it is unclear, special fund revenues for the Wetlands and 
Waterways Program Fund from application fees may increase beginning in fiscal 2027. 
MDE anticipates that the definitions established by the bill for living shorelines and 
nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures may limit the applicability of such projects 
in certain areas and potentially result in more structural shoreline stabilization measure 
projects being undertaken. To the extent that the bill results in more structural projects 
instead of nonstructural projects, special fund revenues increase, as MDE advises that 
nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures are exempt from wetlands and waterways 
application fees.  
 
State Expenditures:  While the bill has an operational impact on MDE, MDE anticipates 
that it can update its regulations, evaluate waiver requests under the altered process, 
develop a scoring system, work with stakeholders, and report to the General Assembly 
using existing staff (by redirecting their priorities).  
 
Although the overall effect of the bill’s changes on project costs for shoreline stabilization 
projects is unknown, the bill may increase expenditures for entities – including State 
agencies – that undertake shoreline stabilization projects beginning in fiscal 2027. In 
addition to the potential that the bill’s definitions may limit the applicability of living 
shorelines and nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures in certain areas (as discussed 
above), MDE advises that defining nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures 
separately from living shorelines may introduce conflicting standards and stabilization 
practices, which may lead to inconsistent interpretation between applicants and regulators, 
resulting in project delays and cost increases. MDE also notes that the bill’s provisions 
requiring MDE to provide notice of waiver requests to local SCDs and provide them with 
an opportunity to make recommendations regarding such requests may increase permit 
turnaround times. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the effect discussed above for State agencies that 
undertake shoreline stabilization measures, expenditures for local governments that 
undertake shoreline stabilization projects may increase. Additionally, the bill’s changes 
may result in an increase in workload for local SCDs throughout the State; the extent to 
which this increases county expenditures is unknown. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 613/ Page 6 
Small Business Effect:  Similar to the effect discussed above for State agencies and local 
governments, expenditures for small businesses that undertake shoreline stabilization 
projects may increase. Small businesses that plan, design, install, and/or provide materials 
for shoreline stabilization projects may also be affected. Some small businesses may be 
positively affected, while others may be negatively affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 368 (Senators Bailey and Harris) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Calvert, St. Mary’s, and Somerset counties; Board 
of Public Works; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6