START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 648 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 648 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Human Services) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Office of Home Energy Programs - Uniform Redetermination Process - Age 
 
 
This departmental bill reduces the age, from 65 to 60 years old, for which the Office of 
Home Energy Programs (OHEP) must develop a uniform redetermination process to assist 
eligible energy customers in enrolling in energy assistance programs. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing funds may be used. 
To the extent it requires administrative changes, the Department of Human Services (DHS) 
can handle them with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local administering agencies (LAAs) can likely handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  DHS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  OHEP, located within DHS, administers a variety of energy assistance 
programs and services for residential customers using LAAs, including local departments 
of social services, in each county and Baltimore City. These programs include, among 
others, the Electric Universal Service Program (EUSP) and the Maryland Energy 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 648/ Page 2 
Assistance Program (MEAP), which is Maryland’s version of the federal Low Income 
Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP).  
 
Chapters 665 and 666 of 2022 require OHEP to develop a uniform determination process, 
to be updated annually, to assist eligible energy customers who are at least 65 years old in 
enrolling in energy assistance programs. The redetermination process must require LAAs 
to (1) have an accessible location to receive eligible energy customers’ applications 
according to OHEP’s contractual or program requirements and (2) establish a policy 
reflecting reasonable accommodations for applicants who are homebound or request 
accommodation, including by arranging a home visit or allowing an individual to apply on 
behalf of an eligible energy customer. OHEP may not require a new application for a 
current energy customer whose eligibility has not changed from the previous year.  
 
Under the redetermination process, OHEP must:  
 
 
provide notice of the redetermination process to all eligible energy customers and 
include with the notice an addressed envelope with prepaid postage;  
 
require yearly verification of status for each customer that qualifies for the 
redetermination process; and  
 
allow an eligible energy customer 45 days to respond to a request for additional 
information.  
 
Fuel and Utility Assistance Program Eligibility  
 
Chapter 207 of 2023 requires OHEP to enroll in any fuel and utility assistance program 
any household with an individual who is categorically eligible for the Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Supplemental 
Security Income, or means-tested Veterans Affairs benefits. Categorical eligibility refers 
to the practice of qualifying an applicant for a benefit program based on their prior or 
concurrent determination of eligibility for another benefit program.  
 
Chapter 207 also increased the annual income eligibility level for EUSP to 200% of the 
federal poverty level (FPL). For its fiscal 2024 LIHEAP state plan, DHS submitted and 
received approval from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to increase the 
income eligibility for MEAP benefits from 175% to 200% of FPL. This change set income 
eligibility for MEAP equal to EUSP income eligibility. Therefore, both programs require 
a household income of at or below 200% of FPL ($31,920 for an individual, $43,280 for a 
household of two, $54,640 for a household of three).  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 648/ Page 3 
Electric Universal Service Program  
 
EUSP helps the State’s vulnerable and traditionally underserved populations pay their 
electric bills, minimize crises, and reduce their electric costs. Benefits include bill payment 
assistance and arrearage retirement assistance. EUSP is funded through ratepayer surcharge 
revenues collected by electric companies from consumer electric bills and through an 
allocation of the revenue generated by the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative quarterly 
auctions for the sale of carbon dioxide emission allowances, which is deposited to the 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund. When available and if needed, federal LIHEAP funds 
may also be used to support EUSP benefits.  
 
Maryland Energy Assistance Program 
 
MEAP helps the State’s vulnerable populations pay their heating bills, minimize crises, 
and make heating costs more affordable. Benefits include utility and fossil fuel payments, 
the Utility Service Protection Program, referrals to weatherization services, emergency 
heating system repairs/replacement, waivers on utility fees, discounts on fuel purchases, 
and a gas arrearage component.  
 
MEAP is 100% federally funded by LIHEAP. In general, MEAP benefits are paid directly 
to the building operator, property management company, or landlord if they agree to reduce 
the tenant’s utility charge or rent by the amount of the benefit received on the resident’s 
behalf. However, it is possible for a resident to receive the benefit directly if the heating 
bill is in the resident’s name.  
 
Background:  DHS advises that the bill aligns eligibility for the redetermination process 
with LIHEAP reporting requirements. Expanding eligibility for the redetermination 
process to individuals age 60 and older allows OHEP to streamline federal reporting and 
avoid potential confusion regarding what constitutes an older adult (60 years or older). The 
LIHEAP Household Report collects data, including the number of households with an older 
adult that received energy assistance.  
 
OHEP advises that, in fiscal 2025, 39,694 households with members who are at least  
aged 65 qualified for the redetermination process. OHEP estimates that approximately 
1,760 additional households with members aged 60 to 64 will qualify for the expanded 
redetermination process under the bill. The bill alters how these households access OHEP 
programs but will not impact their benefits. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  OHEP’s redetermination process includes assisting older adults in 
enrolling in energy assistance programs. Although the bill expands eligibility for the 
redetermination process to customers who are at least aged 60, it is likely that a portion of 
individuals who currently receive energy assistance benefits may qualify to receive 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 648/ Page 4 
assistance through the redetermination process. Therefore, DLS advises that it is unclear 
how many new energy assistance customers may receive energy assistance benefits as a 
result of expanded eligibility for the redetermination process outlined in the bill. 
 
Each year OHEP examines the expected numbers of applications and recipients for energy 
assistance programs and adjusts benefit levels based on estimated available funding and 
recipient levels. Under the bill, if new households enroll for energy assistance through the 
redetermination process, OHEP will likely reduce benefit amounts in fiscal 2027 to 
accommodate the increased number of eligible households within available funding. 
However, if a significant number of new households enroll, funding may be exhausted, and 
DHS will stop issuing benefits under the programs. 
 
For example, following expansion of categorical eligibility for energy assistance programs 
under Chapter 207 of 2023, total applications for energy assistance increased by 61.1% in 
fiscal 2024. In April 2024, funding for MEAP and the gas arrearage assistance programs 
was exhausted, and DHS stopped issuing new benefits. All pending MEAP applications, 
including gas arrearage assistance grant applications, were denied. However, benefits 
continued to be provided under EUSP. DHS began to issue benefits under these programs 
again in fiscal 2025.  
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $47.7 million in special funds for EUSP and 
$94.7 million in federal funds for MEAP.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Maryland Energy 
Administration; Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
Third Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 648/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Office of Home Energy Programs - Uniform Redetermination Process - Age 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 648 
 
PREPARED BY: Vincent Pacheco  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING  
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  
BUSINESS  
 
OR  
 
___ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  
BUSINESSES  
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS  
 
This bill proposal does not have an economic impact on small businesses in Maryland. The 
proposal aligns the age of eligibility for uniform redetermination sixty (60) in Human Services 
Article 5-5A-09 to align with the federal LIHEAP definitions of “older adult” and “vulnerable 
populations.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5