START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 621 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 621 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Local Boards of Elections - Board Counsel - Qualifications 
 
 
This emergency bill modifies a provision that authorizes a local board of elections to 
appoint or retain an individual as counsel. The bill modifies the provision by requiring that 
the individual be a registered voter of the State, rather than a registered voter of the local 
board’s county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each local board of elections is authorized to appoint or retain as counsel 
an individual who is a registered voter of its county and admitted to practice law in the 
State.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 443 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 621/ Page 2 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, and Somerset counties; 
Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2