START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 619 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 619 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact 
 
 
This bill enters Maryland into the Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact. The bill 
establishes (1) specified procedures and requirements for a podiatrist to practice under an 
“expedited license” in a member state; (2) the composition, powers, and responsibilities of 
the Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact Commission; and (3) requirements 
related to the oversight, enforcement, dispute resolution, defaulting, withdrawal, and 
dissolution of the compact. The bill is contingent on similar legislation being enacted in 
four other states. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the State Board of Podiatric 
Medical Examiners (BPME) likely increase by an indeterminate amount upon entry into 
the compact, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the purpose of the compact is to create a streamlined licensure 
process that allows podiatrists to become licensed in multiple states, thereby enhancing the 
portability of a podiatric medical license and ensuring patient safety. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 619/ Page 2 
The compact adopts the prevailing standard for licensure and requires that a podiatrist is 
licensed under the jurisdiction of the State podiatric medical board where a patient is 
located at the time of the patient’s encounter with a podiatrist. 
 
“Practice of podiatric medicine” means that clinical prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of 
human disease, injury, or condition requiring a podiatrist to obtain and maintain a license 
in compliance with the laws of a member state. 
 
Expedited Licensure Privilege 
 
“Expedited license” means a full unrestricted podiatric medical license granted by a 
member state to an eligible podiatrist through the process set forth in the compact. To be 
eligible for an expedited license, a podiatrist must: 
 
 
graduate from a podiatric medical school accredited by the Council of Podiatric 
Medical Education; 
 
pass parts I, II, and III (PMLexis) of the National Board of Podiatric Medical 
Examiners (NBPME)/American Podiatric Medical Licensing Examination 
(APMLE), or their NBPME/APMLE recognized replacement examinations; 
 
successfully complete a podiatric residency program approved by the Council on 
Podiatric Medical Education; 
 
hold specialty certification from a specialty board recognized by the Council on 
Podiatric Medical Education; 
 
possess a full and unrestricted license to engage in the practice of podiatric medicine 
issued by a member board; 
 
have never been convicted, received adjudication/deferred adjudication, community 
supervision, or deferred disposition for any offense by a court of appropriate 
jurisdiction; 
 
have never held a podiatric medicine license subjected to discipline by a licensing 
agency in any state, federal, or foreign jurisdiction (excluding non-payment of fees); 
 
have never had a controlled substance license or permit suspended or revoked by a 
state or the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) or voluntarily 
surrendered such license; and 
 
not be under active investigation by a licensing agency or law enforcement authority 
in any state, federal, or foreign jurisdiction. 
 
A podiatrist seeking an expedited license must file an application with the member board 
of the state selected by the podiatrist as the state of principal license. The member board 
must evaluate the podiatrist’s eligibility and issue a letter of qualification to the 
commission, verifying or denying eligibility. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 619/ Page 3 
The member board of the state of principal licensure must perform a criminal background 
check, including the use of biometric data checks compliant with requirements of the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Communication between a member board and the 
commission (and between member boards) may not include information received from the 
FBI related to a criminal records check. 
 
Appeal of the determination of eligibility must be made to the member state where the 
application was filed and is subject to that state’s law. 
 
Upon verification of eligibility, to receive an expedited license, an eligible podiatrist must 
complete the registration process established by the commission, including paying any 
applicable fees. An expedited license is valid for a period consistent with the licensure 
period in the member state. An expedited license obtained through the compact must be 
terminated if a podiatrist fails to maintain a license in the state of principal licensure for a 
non-disciplinary reason, without redesignation of a new state of principal licensure. 
 
A member state issuing an expedited license may impose a fee for a license issued or 
renewed through the compact. 
 
License Renewals 
 
A podiatrist seeking to renew an expedited license must complete a renewal process with 
the commission if the podiatrist (1) maintains a full and unrestricted license in a state of 
principal licensure; (2) has not been convicted, received adjudication/deferred 
adjudication, community supervision, or deferred disposition for any offense by a court of 
appropriate jurisdiction; (3) has not had a podiatric medical license subject to discipline or 
voluntarily surrendered (except for non-payment of fees); and (4) has not had a controlled 
substance license or permit suspended or revoked by a state or the DEA or voluntarily 
surrendered such license or permit. 
 
Podiatrists must comply with all continuing professional development or continuing 
medical education requirements for renewal of a license issued by a member state.  
 
The commission must collect any renewal fees charged for the renewal of a license and 
distribute the fees to the applicable member board. Upon receipt of any renewal fees, a 
member board must renew the podiatrist’s license. Podiatrist information collected by the 
commission during renewal must be distributed to all member boards. 
 
Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact Commission 
 
The member states of the compact create the Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure 
Compact Commission to administer the compact. It must be a body corporate and joint 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 619/ Page 4 
agency of the member states with the responsibilities, powers, and duties assigned by the 
compact, as well as additional powers that can be conferred onto it by the respective 
legislatures of member states. 
 
The commission must have one voting representative appointed by each member state who 
serves as a commissioner. A commissioner must be (1) a podiatrist appointed to a member 
board; (2) an executive director, executive secretary, or similar executive of a member 
board; or (3) a member of the public appointed to a member board.  
 
The commission must meet at least once each year, and the chairperson may call additional 
meetings (including on request of the majority of member states). In the absence of its 
commissioner, a member state may delegate voting authority for a specific meeting to 
another person from that state who meets the requirements to serve as a commissioner. 
 
The powers and duties of the commission consist of, among other things: 
 
 
overseeing and maintaining the administration of the compact; 
 
promulgating binding rules for the compact; 
 
upon request of a member state or board, issuing advisory opinions concerning the 
meeting or interpretation of the compact and its bylaws; 
 
enforcing compliance with compact provisions, commission rules, and bylaws, 
including through the judicial process; 
 
establishing and appointing committees; 
 
paying for expenses related to the commission; 
 
establishing and maintaining one or more offices; 
 
borrowing, accepting, hiring, or contracting for personnel; 
 
purchasing and maintaining insurance and bonds; 
 
employing an executive director; 
 
establishing personnel policies and programs; 
 
establishing a budget and making expenditures; 
 
adopting a seal and commission bylaws; and 
 
reporting annually to the legislatures and governors of the member states concerning 
commission activities. 
 
The commission additionally may levy and collect an annual assessment from each 
member state to cover the cost of operations, activities, and staff. The total assessment must 
be sufficient to cover the annual budget approved each year for which revenue is not 
provided by other sources. The aggregate annual assessment amount must be allocated by 
a formula to be determined by the commission. The commission may not pledge the credit 
of any member state, except by and with the authority of the member state. The commission 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 619/ Page 5 
must maintain financial records, including profit and loss statements and balance sheet 
reports, which must be included in the commission’s annual report. 
 
The commission must, by majority vote, adopt bylaws to govern its conduct within 
12 months of the first commission meeting. The commission must annually elect or appoint 
a chair, vice-chair, and treasurer. Officers must serve without renumeration. Officers and 
employees of the commission as well as member states must generally be immune from 
suit and liability for acts within the scope of their employment. 
 
Coordinated Information System 
 
The commission must establish a database of all licensed podiatrists and applicants for 
licensure under the compact. Member boards must report to the commission (1) any public 
action or complaints against a podiatrist who applied for or received an expedited license 
through the compact and (2) disciplinary or investigatory information, as specified. 
 
Member boards must share complaint or disciplinary information about a podiatrist upon 
request of another member board. All information provided to the commission or 
distributed by member boards must be confidential, filed under seal, and used only for 
investigatory or disciplinary matters. 
 
Investigations and Disciplinary Actions 
 
A member board may participate with other member boards in joint investigations of 
podiatrists licensed by the member boards. Member boards may share any investigative, 
litigation, or compliance materials in furtherance of any investigation initiated under the 
compact. Any member state may investigate actual or alleged violations of the statutes 
authorizing the practice of podiatric medicine in any other member state in which a 
podiatrist holds a license to practice podiatric medicine. 
 
Boards that participate in the compact retain jurisdiction to impose an adverse action 
against a license issued through the compact procedures to practice podiatric medicine in 
that State. 
 
Any disciplinary action taken by any member board against a podiatrist licensed through 
the compact must be deemed unprofessional conduct, which may be subject to discipline 
by other member boards, in addition to any violations in that state. 
 
If a license granted by a member board in the state of principal licensure is revoked, 
surrendered, relinquished, or suspended, then all licenses issued to that podiatrist by 
member boards must automatically be placed on the same status. If the member board of 
the state of principal license subsequently reinstates the podiatrist’s license, a license issued 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 619/ Page 6 
by any other member board must remain encumbered until that respective board takes 
action to reinstate the license. If a license granted by any member board is revoked, 
surrendered, relinquished, or suspended, then all licenses issued to that podiatrist by other 
member boards must be automatically suspended for 90 days. 
 
If disciplinary action is taken against a podiatrist by a member board not in the state of 
principal licensure, any other member board may deem the action conclusive and 
(1) impose the same or lesser sanctions or (2) pursue separate disciplinary action in 
accordance with the laws of that state, regardless of the action taken in other member states. 
 
Oversight and Enforcement of the Compact 
 
Each member state must enforce the compact. If the commission determines that a member 
state has defaulted in the performance of its obligations or responsibilities under the 
compact, the commission must (1) provide a written notice to the defaulting state and other 
member states that describes the default, proposed means of curing the default, and any 
other action that the commission may take and (2) offer training and specific technical 
assistance regarding the default. If a member state fails to cure the default, the defaulting 
state may be terminated from the compact upon an affirmative vote of a majority of 
member states. 
 
The commission must attempt to resolve disputes that arise between member states and 
member boards upon request, and must promulgate rules providing for mediation and 
dispute resolution as appropriate. 
 
Withdrawal and Dissolution 
 
Once effective, a member state may withdraw from the compact by repealing the statute 
that enacted the compact into law. Withdrawal may not take effect until one year after the 
effective date of entrance into the compact and until written notice is given by the 
withdrawing state to the governor of each other member state. The withdrawing state must 
also notify the chairperson of the commission in writing upon introduction of repealing 
legislation in the state. Reinstatement following withdrawal may occur if the withdrawing 
state reenacts the compact. 
 
The compact must be dissolved upon the date of the withdrawal or default of a member 
state that reduces the membership of the compact to one member state. 
 
Construction and Severability 
 
The provisions of the compact must be severable. If any part of the compact is deemed 
unenforceable, the remaining provisions must be enforceable. Nothing in the compact may 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 619/ Page 7 
be construed to prohibit the applicability of other interstate compacts in member states. If 
the compact is held to be contrary to the constitution of any member state, the compact 
must remain in full force and effect as to the remaining member states and in full force and 
effect as to the member state affect for all severable matters. 
 
Current Law:  An individual must be licensed by BPME before the individual may 
practice podiatry in this State. “Practice podiatry” means to diagnose or surgically, 
medically, or mechanically treat the human foot or ankle, the anatomical structures that 
attach to the human foot, or the soft tissue below the mid-calf. 
 
To qualify for a license to practice podiatry, among other requirements, an applicant must 
be at least 18 years old, be of good moral character, be a graduate of a school or college of 
podiatry that is accredited by the Council on Education of the American Podiatric Medical 
Association and that is approved by the board, and pass examinations given by the National 
Board of Podiatric Examiners and BPME. 
 
For more information on existing medical licensure compacts and their membership, see 
Appendix – Interstate Licensure Compacts. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  BPME advises that certain functions of the interstate compact 
commission likely result in increased expenditures for the board, including the bill’s 
requirement of a coordinated information system between member states and the 
commission’s ability to collect an annual assessment fee from each member state. 
Additionally, BPME may receive increased applications for licensure under the contract, 
creating additional administrative expenses. Thus, there is an indeterminate increase in 
BPME special fund expenditures upon entry into the compact. 
 
As the bill authorizes the commission to develop rules regarding fees for an expedited 
license, BPME special fund revenues also likely increase by an indeterminate amount if 
and when the board issues expedited licenses.  
 
BPME advises that its special funds are limited and solely derived from licensing fees, so 
it may not have sufficient resources to support the requirements of the compact. 
Additionally, the board advises that many of the compact’s requirements are duplicative of 
BPME’s existing responsibilities related to licensure.  
 
Other licensure compacts have generally not had a significant impact on revenues or 
expenditures for other health occupations boards in the State.  
 
Additional Comments:  Enactment of the bill is contingent on similar legislation being 
enacted in at least four other states. The Department of Legislative Services advises that, 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 619/ Page 8 
as of February 5, 2026, similar legislation has not been enacted in any jurisdiction, but has 
been introduced in Arizona, Iowa, Florida, and Maryland. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 333 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 619/ Page 9 
Appendix – Interstate Licensure Compacts 
 
 
Licensing compacts are legally binding agreements between two or more states that allow 
health care providers licensed in one state to practice in another state without an additional 
license. A compact establishes a formal, legal relationship among states. State entrance into 
a compact requires enactment of model legislation containing specific compact language. 
The authorizing language in each state’s compact legislation must be the same for the 
compact to be enforceable. Compacts may require a certain threshold of member states to 
be operational. Compacts are governed across states by an administrative entity (such as 
an interstate commission) as authorized by member states through the terms of the 
compact. As of November 2025, Maryland has entered eight health occupations licensing 
compacts: 
 
 
the Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology Interstate Compact; 
 
the Nurse Licensure Compact; 
 
the Interstate Occupational Therapy Licensure Compact; 
 
the Interstate Physical Therapy Licensure Compact; 
 
the Interstate Medical Licensure Compact; 
 
the Counseling Compact; 
 
the Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact; and 
 
the Social Work Licensure Compact. 
 
Nationally, there are 11 additional compacts relating to 10 health fields (including 
2 competing compacts for dentists and dental hygienists) that Maryland has not joined. 
Two such compacts deal with professionals regulated by the Maryland State Department 
of Education (school psychologists) and the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services Board, rather than by the health occupations boards. 
 
Exhibit 1 lists all health occupations licensing compacts and their associated member 
states. There are currently no interstate compacts impacting the State boards of 
Acupuncture, Chiropractic Examiners, Environmental Health Specialists, Long-Term Care 
Administrators, Morticians and Funeral Directors, Optometry, Pharmacy, or Residential 
Child Care Program Professionals. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 619/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 1 
Health Occupations Interstate Licensure Compacts 
 
Maryland 
Board/Entity 
Compact 
Practitioners 
Included 
Member States 
Maryland 
Authorizing 
Legislation 
Audiologists, 
Hearing Aid 
Dispensers, 
Speech-Language 
Pathologists, and 
Music Therapists 
Audiology and 
Speech-Language 
Pathology 
Interstate Compact 
Audiologists and 
Speech-Language 
Pathologists 
AL, AK, AR, AZ, CO, 
DE, FL, GA, ID, IN, IA, 
KS, KT, LA, ME, MD, 
MN, MI, MO, MT, NB, 
NV, NH, NC, OH, OK, 
RI, SC, TN, UT, VT, VA, 
VI, WA, WV, WI, WY 
  
Chapter 158 
of 2021 
Dental Examiners 
 
Dentists and Dental 
Hygienists Compact 
Dentists and Dental 
Hygienists 
AR, CO, IA, KS, ME, 
MN, NB, OH, TN, VA, 
WA, WI 
 
n/a 
Interstate Dental and 
Dental Hygiene 
Licensure Compact 
 
Dentists and Dental 
Hygienists 
LA 
n/a 
Dietetic Practice 
Dietitian Licensure 
Compact 
Dietician-nutritionists 
AL, AR, IA, KS, MS, 
MT, NB, ND, OH, OK, 
RI, SD, TN, UT, WI 
 
n/a 
Massage Therapy 
Examiners 
 
Interstate Massage 
Compact 
Massage Therapists 
AR, MT, NV, OH, VA 
n/a 
Nursing 
 
Nurse Licensure 
Compact 
Registered Nurses and 
Licensed Practical 
Nurses 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, CT, 
DE, FL, GA, GU, ID, IN, 
IA, KS, KT, LA, ME, 
MD, MA, MS, MO, MT, 
NB, NH, NJ, NM, NC, 
ND, OH, OK, PA, RI, 
SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, 
VT, VA, VI, WA, WV, 
WI, WY 
 
Chapter 186 
of 1999; 
Chapter 669 
of 2017 
Advanced Practice 
Registered Nurse 
Compact 
Nurse Anesthetists, 
Nurse Midwives, 
Nurse Practitioners, 
and Clinical Nurse 
Specialists 
 
DE, ND, SD, UT 
n/a 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 619/ Page 11 
Maryland 
Board/Entity 
Compact 
Practitioners 
Included 
Member States 
Maryland 
Authorizing 
Legislation 
Occupational 
Therapy Practice 
Interstate 
Occupational 
Therapy Licensure 
Compact 
Occupational 
Therapists and 
Occupational Therapy 
Assistants 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, DE, 
GA, IN, IA, KT, LA, 
ME, MD, MN, MS, MO, 
MT, NB, NH, NC, ND, 
OH, RI, SC, SD, TN, UT, 
VT, VI, WA, WV, WI, 
WY 
 
Chapter 93 
of 2021 
Physical Therapy 
Examiners 
Interstate Physical 
Therapy Licensure 
Compact 
Physical Therapists 
and Physical Therapy 
Assistants 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, DE, 
GA, IN, IA, KT, LA, 
MD, MS, MO, MT, NB, 
NH, NJ, NC, ND, OH, 
OK, OR, SC, SD, TN 
 
Chapter 374 
of 2019 
Physicians 
 
Interstate Medical 
Licensure 
Compact 
Physicians 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, DE, 
DC, FL, GA, GU, ID, IL, 
IN, IA, KS, KT, LA, ME, 
MD, MI, MN, MS, MO, 
MT, NB, NV, NH, NJ, 
ND, OH, OK, OR, RI, 
SD, TN, TX, UT, WA, 
WV, WI, WY 
CT, HI, PA, VT1 
 
Chapter 470 
of 2018 
Physician Assistant 
Licensure Compact 
Physician Assistants 
AR, CO, CT, DE, IA, 
KS, ME, MN, MT, NB, 
NC, OH, OK, TN, UT, 
VA, WA, WV, WI 
 
n/a 
Athletic Trainer 
Interstate Compact 
 
Athletic Trainers 
None 
n/a 
Respiratory Care 
Interstate Compact 
 
Respiratory Care 
Practitioners 
AL, IA, MT, WA 
n/a 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 619/ Page 12 
Maryland 
Board/Entity 
Compact 
Practitioners 
Included 
Member States 
Maryland 
Authorizing 
Legislation 
Podiatric Medical 
Examiners 
Interstate Podiatric 
Medical Licensure 
Compact 
 
Podiatrists 
None 
n/a 
Professional 
Counselors and 
Therapists 
Counseling 
Compact 
Clinical Professional 
Counselors 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, CT, 
DE, DC, FL, GA, IN, IA, 
KS, KT, LA, ME, MN, 
MD, MS, MO, MT, NB, 
NH, NJ, NC, ND, OH, 
OK, RI, SC, SD, TN, UT, 
VT, VA, WA, WV, WI, 
WY 
 
Chapters 134 
and 135 
of 2021 
Examiners of 
Psychologists 
Psychology 
Interjurisdictional 
Compact 
Psychologists 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, CT, 
DE, DC, FL, GA, ID, IL, 
IN, KS, KT, ME, MD, 
MI, MN, MS, MO, MT, 
NB, NV, NH, NJ, NC, 
ND, MP, OH, OK, PA, 
RI, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, 
VT, VI, WA, WV, WI, 
WY 
 
Chapter 329 
of 2021 
Social Work 
Examiners 
Social Work 
Licensure 
Compact 
Bachelor, Graduate, 
Certified, and Certified 
Social Workers – 
Clinical 
AL, AZ, AR, CO, CT, 
GA, IO, KS, KT, LA, 
ME, MD, MN, MS, MO, 
NB, NH, NJ, NC, ND, 
OH, OK, RI, SD, TN, 
UT, VT, VA, WA 
 
Chapters 9 and 
10 of 2025 
Maryland State 
Department of 
Education 
 
School Psychologist 
Interstate Licensure 
Compact 
School Psychologists 
AL, CO, GA, KS, NB, 
WV 
n/a 
Emergency Medical 
Services Board 
Emergency Medical 
Services Compact 
Emergency Medical 
Services Clinicians  
AL, AR, CO, DE, GA, 
ID, IN, IA, KS, LA, MS, 
MO, NB, NV, ND, OK, 
PA, SC, SD, TN, TX, 
UT, VI, WV, WY 
 
n/a 
 
1 Connecticut, Hawaii, Pennsylvania, and Vermont are not “states of principal licensure” 
in the Interstate Medical Licensure Compact; thus, physicians cannot use those states as 
their state of primary licensure when applying for the compact. 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 619/ Page 13 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13