START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 638 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 638 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Judges - Mandatory Retirement Age 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, would raise the mandatory retirement age, from 70 to 73, for justices of 
the Supreme Court of Maryland and judges of the Appellate Court of Maryland, circuit 
courts, and the District court. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If approved by the voters at referendum, State pension liabilities likely 
decrease by approximately $21.7 million and the normal cost decreases by $1.5 million. 
Therefore, State pension contributions (general funds) likely decrease by $4.3 million 
beginning in FY 2029; out-years reflect actuarial assumptions. No effect on revenues. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
(4.3) 
(4.4) 
(4.5) 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$4.3 
$4.4 
$4.5 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Specified provisions of Article IV of the Maryland 
Constitution institute mandatory retirement for all circuit, District, and appellate court 
judges at age 70. However, retired judges, except retired orphans’ court judges, may be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 638/ Page 2 
appointed on a temporary basis by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland to 
serve as a judge on any court except an orphans’ court, regardless of age. Exceptions allow 
former circuit court judges in Harford and Montgomery counties to perform acts that a 
judge of the orphans’ court in their respective counties is authorized to perform. 
 
Most judges within the State are appointed and retained through a hybrid process. At all 
four court levels (the Supreme Court of Maryland, the Appellate Court of Maryland, circuit 
courts, and the District Court), the Governor appoints a qualified member of the 
Maryland Bar in the case of a vacancy or the creation of a new judgeship. For both appellate 
courts, these appointments must be confirmed by the Maryland Senate and the judge or 
justice holds the office until the first general election following the expiration of 1 year 
from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy. At the general election, the incumbent 
judge’s or justice’s name is placed on the ballot without opposition and citizens vote for or 
against the retention of the judge for a 10-year term. For the District Court, judges are 
appointed by the Governor and serve 10-year terms upon confirmation by the Senate; when 
they reach the end of their term, they must be reappointed by the Governor with the 
Senate’s consent. 
 
Circuit court judges are also appointed by the Governor and must stand for election at the 
first general election following the expiration of 1 year after the occurrence of the vacancy. 
However, unlike the justices/judges on the appellate courts, they are elected to 
15-year terms (which begin following their election) and may face a contested election in 
which any member of the Maryland Bar who meets the minimum constitutional 
requirements may challenge the incumbent judges by filing as a candidate. 
 
There is no salary scale for judges or justices; rather, their compensation is dictated by the 
court on which they sit, not their tenure in that position. 
 
Judges’ Retirement System 
 
All circuit, District, and appellate court judges and justices are members of the Judges’ 
Retirement System (JRS) as a condition of their employment. The employee contribution 
for JRS members is 8% of compensation, but after 16 years of service members cease 
making employee contributions and earning service credit. 
 
Eligibility requirements for normal service retirements under JRS differ for members who 
joined before July 1, 2012, and those who joined on or after that date. Members who joined 
prior to that date vest immediately and are eligible to retire at age 60. Members who joined 
on or after that date vest after 5 years and are also eligible to retire at age 60. A full-service 
retirement is equal to two-thirds of the salary of a judge sitting in a similar position as the 
retiree at the time of termination of employment or retirement; retirees with fewer than 
16 years of service in JRS receive a prorated benefit based on their years of service. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 638/ Page 3 
As of June 30, 2025, there were 315 active members of JRS with an average age of 57.7. 
At that time, the average age at retirement for JRS retirees was 65.8 years. 
 
State Expenditures:  The proposed constitutional amendment does not alter the total 
number of sitting judges, and reduced turnover among judges as a result of longer terms on 
the bench has no effect on judicial compensation, which is not linked to tenure. Therefore, 
the proposed constitutional amendment has no direct effect on the State’s judicial payroll. 
 
Longer Terms for Sitting Judges 
 
The proposed constitutional amendment allows current judges who remain in service and 
who reach age 70 on or after November 2026 to remain in office until age 73 instead of 
having to retire at age 70. Judges who complete 16 years of service before reaching  
age 70 already maximize their pension benefit. Thus, the proposed constitutional 
amendment only adds to pension liabilities for judges that do not, or will not, complete 
16 years of service prior to reaching age 70. 
 
The proposed constitutional amendment is subject to approval by the voters at the 
November 3, 2026 general election. If approved, the amendment would take effect shortly 
thereafter, when the Governor issues a proclamation that it was adopted. Based on age and 
tenure information for the 315 active members of JRS: 
 
 
69 judges reach age 70 before accruing the full 16 years of service (assuming they 
continue serving until age 70); and 
 
246 attain the full 16 years of service before reaching age 70 (assuming they 
continue serving that long). 
 
Pension Costs 
 
For this analysis, the General Assembly’s consulting actuary adjusted the retirement 
assumptions for JRS and amortized new accrued liabilities over 11 years, consistent with 
the State Retirement and Pension System’s amortization policy. Specifically, the actuary 
delayed the 100% retirement assumption at age 70 (the current age of mandatory 
retirement) to 100% retirement by age 73, phased in with 25% of judges retiring by  
ages 70 or 71 and 50% retiring by age 72. 
 
Based on these assumptions, the proposed constitutional amendment has two offsetting 
effects on pension costs, but the net effect is a reduction in State pension costs. It likely 
increases pension costs for the estimated 69 current judges who will turn 70 before earning 
the maximum 16 years of service credit in JRS. These judges may earn up to 3 more years 
of service credit in JRS under the proposed constitutional amendment. However, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 638/ Page 4 
proposed amendment likely reduces pension costs by allowing 246 judges to defer their 
retirement for up to 3 years, thereby reducing their total pension payments. 
 
The actuary has determined that any additional service credit earned by sitting judges able 
to work for more years is more than offset by actuarial savings generated by deferred 
benefit payments to all judges who reach age 70 after the constitutional amendment is 
enacted. Therefore, there is likely a net savings to the State in the form of reduced pension 
liabilities and employer contributions due to members working longer at an advanced age. 
 
If the constitutional amendment is approved by the voters in November 2026, the change 
in retirement age would first be recognized with the June 30, 2027 actuarial valuation, 
which determines pension contribution rates for fiscal 2029. Thus, there is no fiscal effect 
until fiscal 2029. The actuary estimates that pension liabilities decrease by $21.7 million, 
and the normal cost decreases by $1.5 million. Amortizing the reduction in liabilities over 
11 years and adding the full normal cost savings results in first-year savings in 
State pension contributions of $4.3 million, with savings continuing to accrue in 
future years according to actuarial assumptions. JRS contributions are paid with general 
funds. To the extent that actual retirement patterns differ from the assumptions used in this 
analysis, the fiscal effects will differ. 
 
All judges appointed for the first time following the approval of the amendment would be 
eligible for the longer terms, but they are subject to a five-year vesting period and, 
therefore, would not be eligible for retirement during the time period covered by this 
fiscal and policy note. To the extent that the proposed constitutional amendment causes 
future judges to work past the age of 70, it likely reduces future State pension liabilities 
and contributions due to deferred retirements. 
 
Additional Comments:  Judges are entitled to unlimited paid sick leave for any period of 
an illness or temporary disability that precludes them from carrying out their judicial duties. 
To the extent that older judges may be more likely to use their unlimited sick leave benefits, 
and thereby would need to be replaced on the bench during their absence, personnel 
expenditures for the Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts) may increase. This 
analysis does not reflect those potential costs because they cannot be reliably quantified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 74 and HB 1490 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 638/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5