START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 630 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 630 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Correctional Services - Immigration Detention Facilities - Original Design and 
Construction 
 
 
This emergency bill prohibits a person from operating an immigration detention facility at 
a building, structure, or facility that was not originally designed and constructed for the 
purpose of housing or detaining individuals. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 19 of the 2021 special session prohibits the State, local 
governments, and specified State and local agents from (1) entering into an agreement of 
any kind for the detention of individuals in an immigration detention facility owned, 
managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity; (2) paying, reimbursing, 
subsidizing, or defraying in any way any costs related to the sale, purchase, construction, 
development, ownership, management, or operation of an immigration detention facility 
that is or will be owned, managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity; 
(3) receiving any payment related to the detention of individuals in an immigration 
detention facility owned, managed, or operated in whole or in part, by a private entity; or 
(4) otherwise giving any financial incentive or benefit to any private entity or person in 
connection with the sale, purchase, construction, development, ownership, management, 
or operation of an immigration detention facility that is or will be owned, managed, or 
operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 630/ Page 2 
The State, local governments, and specified State and local agents are prohibited from 
approving a zoning variance or issuing a permit for the construction of a building or the 
reuse of existing buildings or structures by any private entity for use as an immigration 
detention facility unless the entity (1) provides notice to the public of the proposed zoning 
variance or permit action at least 180 days before authorizing the variance or issuing the 
permit and (2) solicits and hears public comments on the proposed zoning variance or 
permit action in at least two separate meetings open to the public. 
 
The State, local governments, and specified State and local agents are prohibited from 
entering into or renewing an immigration detention agreement. Those with an existing 
immigration detention agreement must exercise the termination provision contained in the 
immigration detention agreement no later than October 1, 2022. In any dispute over an 
immigration detention agreement with the State, these provisions govern. However, the 
provisions may not be construed to authorize or prohibit the State, local governments, and 
specified State and local agents from entering into an agreement with the 
federal government under 8 U.S.C. § 1357(g). 
 
“Immigration detention agreement” means any contract, agreement, intergovernmental 
service agreement, or a memorandum of understanding that authorizes a State or local 
government agency to house or detain individuals for federal civil immigration violations. 
“Immigration detention facility” means any building, facility, or structure used, in whole 
or in part, to house or detain individuals for federal civil immigration violations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2