START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 643 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 643 
(Delegate Valderrama, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Certified Public Accountants - Licensure - Qualifications 
 
   
This bill establishes alternative pathways to licensure as a certified public accountant 
(CPA) by the State Board of Public Accountancy. Under the bill, practical work experience 
requirements may be completed over a longer period, while educational and experiential 
requirements may be combined in alternative ways to qualify for a license. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Public Accountancy can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing resources. Special fund revenues may increase minimally to the extent 
additional individuals seek licensure.   
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
State Board of Public Accountancy  
 
The State Board of Public Accountancy regulates and licenses individuals acting as 
certified public accountants and issues permits to business entities that provide public 
accountancy services. Practicing certified public accountancy means, among other things, 
to (1) conduct an audit; (2) conduct any examination, review, or agreed-upon procedures 
engagement to be performed in accordance with the Statements on Standards for 
Attestation Engagements issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 643/ Page 2 
or (3) provide a written certificate or opinion offering positive or negative assurance or full 
or limited assurance on the correctness of the information or on the fairness of the 
presentation of the information in certain documentation. 
 
Qualifications and Educational Requirements  
 
Under current law, among other requirements, an applicant for an initial license must 
complete practical work experience that is approved by the board and that:   
 
 
is obtained over a period of between one and three years (six years under the bill); 
 
includes providing any type of service or advice involving the use of accounting, 
attest, management advisory, financial advisory, tax, or consulting skills; 
 
is performed under the direction of a licensed CPA or an appropriately qualified 
professional, as determined by the board;  
 
is obtained through employment in government, industry, academia, or public 
practice; and 
 
amounts to 2,000 hours. 
 
Under the bill, the 2,000 hours of practical work experience remains unchanged for 
candidates holding a relevant master’s or bachelor’s degree with 30 additional hours with 
a concentration in accounting or equivalent. However, for individuals holding a 
bachelor’s degree without the required additional credit hours in accounting, the bill 
establishes an alternative requirement of 4,000 hours of practical experience.  
 
Under current law, in order to take the CPA examination, an applicant must have 
satisfactorily completed 120 semester hours or their equivalent, and hold a 
bachelor’s degree or higher. In order to become licensed, an applicant must have 
satisfactorily completed 150 hours or their equivalent, including the attainment of a 
bachelor’s degree or higher. Under the bill, these semester hour requirements are repealed. 
Instead, the bill establishes alternative requirements, with certain bachelor’s degree holders 
subject to greater practical work experience requirements. These requirements are shown 
in Exhibit 1. 
 
Under current law (and generally unchanged under the bill), an applicant must have 
completed a curriculum that the board considers to constitute a major in accounting or a 
substantial equivalent, of which required credits or courses may be taken at any two or 
four-year regionally accredited institution of higher education. The required degree must 
be awarded by a school, college, university, or other institution that meets specified 
membership or accreditation requirements or is recognized and approved by the board. The 
board may use the services of any institution that it considers appropriate to determine what 
constitutes a “substantial equivalent” to a major in accounting; if it does so, the board may 
accept the determination as final. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 643/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Educational and Experiential Requirements  
for CPA Applicants under the Bill 
 
Degree Type 
Practical Work 
Experience 
Hours of Work 
Experience 
Master’s degree with a concentration in accounting 
or equivalent  
At least one year 
2,000 hours 
Bachelor’s degree and an additional 30 semester 
credit hours with a concentration in accounting or 
equivalent 
At least one year 
2,000 hours 
Bachelor’s degree with a concentration in 
accounting or equivalent 
At least two years 
4,000 hours 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business accounting firms may benefit to the extent 
additional individuals choose to pursue licensure under the bill’s more flexible educational 
and experiential work requirements. For instance, under the bill, individuals without 
additional academic credits beyond a bachelor’s degree who may not have otherwise been 
eligible to pursue licensure may be able to do so, provided they meet the additional work 
experience required under the bill. Small businesses employing those individuals likely 
benefit.  
 
Additional Comments:  Virginia recently established alternative pathways to CPA 
licensure that are similar to the pathways established under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 34 (Senators Ellis and Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 643/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Virginia Board of Accountancy; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4