START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 628 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 628 
(Delegate Acevero, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Human Services - Universal Basic Income for Transition-Age Youth Program - 
Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes a Universal Basic Income for Transition-Age Youth Program in the 
Department of Human Services (DHS) to provide a universal basic income of $1,000 per 
month for a period of three years for specified individuals aging out of the out‑of‑home 
placement program. By October 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, DHS must submit a 
specified report about the program to the General Assembly. The bill terminates 
September 30, 2031.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $1.3 million in FY 2027 
for contractual staff, one-time only information technology (IT) costs, and to provide a 
universal basic income benefit to eligible individuals, as discussed below. Future years 
reflect annualization, elimination of one‑time costs, and a rolling number of individuals 
receiving the benefit. Revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1.3 
4.1 
7.1 
9.5 
9.5 
Net Effect 
($1.3) 
($4.1) 
($7.1) 
($9.5) 
($9.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 628/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Universal basic income” means unconditional cash payments of equal 
amounts distributed monthly to eligible individuals. 
 
An individual is eligible for a universal basic income of $1,000 per month if (1) the 
individual resided in an out-of-home placement on the individual’s eighteenth birthday, 
regardless of the age at which the individual entered out-of-home placement and (2) the 
individual’s eighteenth birthday is on or after October 1, 2026.  
 
Universal income payments may not be considered income or resources for the purpose of 
determining the individual’s eligibility to receive benefits (or the amounts of benefits 
received), as permitted by federal law, for Medicaid, the Maryland Earned Income Tax 
Credit, or State and federal financial aid and college support programs. 
 
By October 1 each year, DHS must submit a report to the General Assembly that contains 
descriptive information and outcome measures of program recipients during the previous 
year, including, at minimum (1) the starting income of each recipient, exclusive of 
universal basic income payments; (2) geographic information about each recipient, 
including county, city, and zip code of residence; (3) the employment status of each 
recipient before receiving universal basic income payments; and (4) the housing status of 
each recipient before receiving universal basic income payments. 
 
Current Law:  DHS is required to establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor 
children (1) who are placed in the custody of a local department of social services, for a 
period of up to 180 days, by a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement 
agreement; (2) who are abused, abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has 
determined that continued residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare 
and has committed the child to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or 
(3) who, with the approval of DHS, are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local 
department under a voluntary placement agreement regarding a child with a developmental 
disability or a mental illness, as specified. An out‑of‑home placement may include family 
foster care, group and residential care, kinship care, and treatment foster care. 
 
Foster youth are generally allowed to remain in care up until age 21, as long as the youth 
is in school, enrolled in a training program or other program or activity to promote or 
remove barriers to employment, employed at least 80 hours per month, or disabled. 
Independent living after-care services are available for youth exiting care after turning 
age 18 but before turning age 21, including financial assistance, assistance with utilities 
and room and board, educational and employment services, counseling, and other services 
to assist with self-sufficiency. These services are available for up to 180 days but may be 
extended, and youth may reapply for services until age 21. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 628/ Page 3 
Since January 2014, former foster care adolescents who were in foster care on their 
eighteenth birthday are eligible for Medicaid up until the age of 26. 
 
State Expenditures:  DHS general fund expenditures increase to provide universal basic 
income for specified individuals, hire contractual staff to oversee the program, and for IT 
costs, as discussed below. 
 
Universal Basic Income Benefits 
 
The bill requires DHS to provide a universal basic income to individuals that resided in an 
out-of-home placement on their eighteenth birthday and if their eighteenth birthday is on 
or after October 1, 2026. DHS must provide eligible individuals with a monthly benefit of 
$1,000 for a period of three years. DHS advises that there is an average of 3,800 individuals 
in foster care in the State per year, and approximately 790 individuals in foster care each 
year are between age 18 and 21. This estimate assumes: 
 
 
DHS requires a 90-day start up delay from the bill’s October 1, 2026, effective date 
to make IT changes, train staff, and begin issuance of benefits beginning 
January 1, 2027; 
 
because eligibility for the program includes individuals who turn 18 on or after 
October 1, 2026, and based on the ages and birth dates of individuals in foster care 
as of March 2026, 63 individuals are eligible to begin receiving the benefit on 
January 1, 2027; and  
 
an average of 21 individuals in foster care will turn 18 each month and enroll into 
the program on a rolling basis (with approximately 21 additional enrollees 
per month) until January 1, 2030, when the three-year benefit for those individuals 
who entered the program in January 2027 ends, and program enrollment stabilizes 
at an estimated total of 777 individuals until the program terminates 
September 30, 2031. 
 
Thus, DHS general fund expenditures increase by approximately $819,000 in fiscal 2027, 
which reflects provision of the benefit beginning January 1, 2027, (and excludes staffing 
and administrative costs discussed below). The cost to provide a universal basic income 
increases to $3.9 million in fiscal 2028, $6.9 million in fiscal 2029, and $9.3 million in 
fiscal 2030 and 2031 (during which initial entrants to the program from January 2027 begin 
to exit the program). Although outside the five-year fiscal estimate of this analysis, benefit 
costs for fiscal 2032 are estimated at $2.3 million for the final three months of the program, 
which terminates September 30, 2031. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that, due to bill’s termination date, 
individuals who enroll in the program on or after October 1, 2028, will not receive benefits 
for a full three years as required under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 628/ Page 4 
Staffing and Administrative Costs 
 
DHS advises that existing staff are unable to absorb the bill’s requirements. Accordingly, 
DHS general fund expenditures increase by an additional $145,238 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026, effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring two full-time contractual positions (one program manager and one administrative 
specialist) to determine eligibility for and oversee the benefit program and to complete the 
required reports. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses (including system maintenance). 
 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$126,956 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
FY 2027 State Administrative Expenditures 
$145,238 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Additionally, DHS advises that one-time only programming costs of approximately 
$378,000 are required in fiscal 2027 only to update and maintain the Enrollment and 
Eligibility System (E&E) to manage the monthly distribution of funds to eligible 
individuals. Oversight of, and all funds associated with, E&E is handled by the Maryland 
Department of Information Technology (DoIt). Thus, this analysis assumes that DoIT 
general fund expenditures increase by $378,000 in fiscal 2027; maintenance costs of 
approximately $37,800 are incurred annually beginning in fiscal 2028.  
 
Additional Comments:  The bill specifies that universal income payments may not be 
considered income or resources for the purpose of determining the individual’s eligibility 
to receive benefits for Medicaid or federal financial aid and college support programs. 
However, DLS notes that the bill cannot waive federal program requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 849 of 2024 and HB 108 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 628/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5