START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 600 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 600 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
St. Mary's County - Metropolitan Commission 
 
 
This bill makes several changes to the Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County. The bill 
alters the fines and administrative enforcement actions that the county and the St. Mary’s 
County Metropolitan Commission (MetCom) may impose for certain misdemeanors, civil 
infractions, and other violations of MetCom rules and regulations, as specified. The bill 
increases, from $25,000 to $250,000, the minimum amount of the bond that the Treasurer 
or any Deputy Treasurer appointed by MetCom must give to the State, MetCom, and the 
county commissioners. Finally, the bill authorizes, rather than requires, MetCom to cause 
studies, plans, and estimates to be made for new facilities in portions of the county 
designated as not planned for service by the county comprehensive water and sewerage 
plan. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County and MetCom revenues may increase, beginning in 
FY 2027, to the extent higher fines or penalties are imposed for certain misdemeanors or 
civil infractions. St. Mary’s County and MetCom expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 600/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Penalty Provisions 
 
The bill increases, from $100 to $1,000, the maximum fine that can be levied against an 
individual who is convicted of violating the following sections of the Public Local Laws 
of St. Mary’s County: 
 
 
section 113-7 (Levy of Taxes); 
 
section 113-11 (Permits and Regulations of Use); 
 
section 113-17 (Privately Constructed Systems); 
 
section 113-19 (Entry Into Buildings); and  
 
section 113-20 (Obstructions). 
 
Further, the bill authorizes MetCom to impose the following schedule of fines in the case 
of certain civil infractions: 
 
 
$250 for the first violation; 
 
$500 for the second violation; 
 
$750 for the third violation; and 
 
$1,000 for the fourth or any subsequent violations. 
 
Each day that a violation continues is a separate civil infraction subject to an additional 
citation and fine of $250. 
 
The bill authorizes MetCom to impose a maximum fine of $1,000 the first time an 
individual removes water from a public system without authorization under MetCom 
jurisdiction and a maximum fine of $2,000 for any additional violations. 
 
The bill authorizes MetCom to use any combination of administrative enforcement 
remedies authorized in current law to address violations of any rules or regulations adopted 
by MetCom concerning public water and sewer use, including lines and mains, all 
appurtenances, connections, and discharge into the public sewer systems. 
 
Current Law:  MetCom, a component unit of St. Mary’s County, was established by the 
General Assembly in 1957 as a quasi-governmental, nonprofit body, to supply water and 
sewer service to St. Mary’s County. MetCom has been providing water and sewer service 
since 1964. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 600/ Page 3 
Penalty Provisions 
 
Any act or omission designated as a misdemeanor in the Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s 
County governing sanitary districts is punishable by a maximum fine of $100, confinement 
for no more than 30 days in county jail, or both. 
 
MetCom is authorized to designate any violation of the Sanitary Districts Chapter of the 
Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County as a civil infraction. With the exception of 
removing water from a public system under MetCom jurisdiction, MetCom is authorized 
to impose a maximum fine of $100 for each violation. MetCom may establish a schedule 
of fines for each violation and may adopt procedures to collect those fines. 
 
In the case of removing water from a public system under MetCom jurisdiction, MetCom 
is authorized to impose a maximum fine of $1,000 for each violation and may establish a 
fine schedule for each violation, to be based on the amount of water removed and number 
of violations. 
 
Administrative Enforcement 
 
MetCom may use administrative or judicial enforcement remedies for violations of any 
rules or regulations adopted by MetCom concerning public water and sewer use, including 
lines and mains, all appurtenances, connections, and discharge into the public sewer 
systems. Among other administrative enforcement remedies, MetCom may issue:   
(1) a notification of a violation; (2) a reimbursement assessment for actual costs (including 
time and materials); or (3) an emergency suspension. 
 
Bonds 
 
The Treasurer and any Deputy Treasurer of MetCom must provide a bond of $25,000  
(or a greater amount that the county commissioners prescribe), to the State, MetCom, and 
the county commissioners. 
 
Studies, Plans, and Estimates for New Facilities 
 
MetCom is required to conduct studies, plans, and estimates to be made for new facilities 
in the portions of the county in which MetCom determines that the facilities are necessary 
and may divide each sanitary district into water and sewerage districts in a manner that, in 
the judgment of MetCom, best serves the communities needs and promotes convenience 
and economy of installation and operation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 600/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); St. Mary’s 
County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4