START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 640 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 640 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Budget and 
Management) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Mandated Reports, Boards, and Commissions - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) alters the composition of specified boards, commission, and 
committees; (2) repeals specified boards and councils; (3) repeals specified reporting 
requirements by affected bodies; (4) consolidates reporting requirements by specified 
entities; and (5) makes stylistic changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is largely procedural in nature and otherwise has no direct 
effect on State finances.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached 
assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A summary of the bill’s changes is listed below, grouped by the affected 
Article of the Maryland Annotated Code. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 640/ Page 2 
Agriculture Article 
 
 
Repeals the Renewable Fuels Incentive Board and transfers its duties to Maryland 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
Correctional Services Article 
 
 
Removes the representative from Department of Commerce on the Customer 
Council. 
 
Criminal Procedure Article 
 
 
Repeals the Criminal Justice Information Advisory Board and makes corresponding 
changes. 
 
Economic Development Article 
 
 
Repeals the Partnership for Workforce Quality Advisory Board; 
 
increases members’ terms on the Maryland Life Sciences Advisory Board from  
two to three years and staggers the terms on July 1, 2026, as specified; and 
 
for the Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission:  (1) removes 
representatives from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation; (2) adds an additional representative from each of 
the Maryland aerospace manufacturing community and the aerospace technology 
industry; and (3) requires that it update its strategic plan at least every five years and 
annually report on the progress in implementing the strategic plan. 
 
Education Article 
 
 
Repeals annual report on “specialized intervention services.” Instead, each local 
board of education must report to the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE) on students requiring support to meet grade 3 literacy. MSDE must then 
report on those findings and submit them to the Governor, the State Board of 
Education, and the General Assembly. MSDE may adopt related regulations; 
 
changes (1) the deadline from December 1 to April 1 by which local departments of 
social services and local health departments must report on the number of parents 
given notification and then enrolled in publicly funded prekindergarten and (2) the 
recipient of the reports to be the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) instead of 
the General Assembly. Further requires MDH, in collaboration with the Department 
of Human Services (DHS), to compile the information and submit a summary report 
to the General Assembly annually by May 1, and makes clarifying changes; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 640/ Page 3 
 
repeals annual report regarding status and effectiveness of youth suicide prevention 
school programs; and 
 
repeals the obsolete requirement that the Geographic Cost of Education Index 
(GCEI) Adjustment be updated every three years. The bill also repeals the annual 
requirement that MSDE submit the proposed GCEI adjustment update to the 
Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Election Law Article 
 
 
Repeals annual report the Maryland Department of Labor must submit on efforts of 
one-stop career centers to register voters in the prior year, and efforts to improve 
efficiency/effectiveness of the process. 
 
Environment Article 
 
 
Repeals the Just Transition Employment and Retraining Working Group, the Energy 
Industry Revitalization Working Group, the Energy Resilience and Efficiency 
Working Group, and the Solar Photovoltaic Systems Recovery, Reuse, and 
Recycling Working Group; 
 
repeals annual report by the Commission on Climate Change on the status of the 
Oil Contaminated Site Environmental Cleanup Fund; and 
 
alters the membership of the Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island Citizens Oversight 
Committee from 11 to 9 specified individuals. 
 
Family Law Article 
 
 
Repeals the multidisciplinary alternative response advisory council. 
 
Health – General Article 
 
 
Repeals annual report on specified information related to the hepatitis C virus; 
 
repeals an annual report by the Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use 
Disorder Registry and Referral System Advisory Committee must submit on the 
implementation of the Registry and Referral System; 
 
repeals and consolidates information regarding incidents occurring at youth camps 
that require the use of epinephrine so that it is included in a similar existing annual 
report; 
 
removes the Secretary of Agriculture, or designee, as a member of the Cannabis 
Public Health Advisory Council; 
 
repeals the annual report on activities of the cancer registry; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 640/ Page 4 
 
requires the Maryland Health Care Commission to analyze information from similar 
but different/repealed provision regarding health care disparities (see report card 
item); 
 
removes the Secretary of Health from the Oversight Committee on Quality of Care 
in Nursing Homes and Assisted Living Facilities; 
 
for the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities:  (1) adds information 
regarding the “Health Care Disparities Policy Report Card” to another annual report 
and repeals a related stand-alone annual report and (2) repeals an annual report on 
federal and special funding; and 
 
repeals an annual report on cottage food businesses and related product complaints. 
 
Housing and Community Development Article 
 
 
For the Interagency Council on Homelessness:  (1) makes the Secretary of Housing 
and Community Development, or designee, the chair; (2) repeals term limit of the 
chair, and removes prohibition on serving consecutive terms as chair; and  
(3) entitles the unhoused member of the council to reimbursement for expenses, and 
reasonable compensation as determined by a compensation policy administered by 
the Department of Housing and Community Development. 
 
Human Services Article 
 
 
Repeals the Commission on Trauma-Informed Care; 
 
repeals the Two Generation Family Economic Security Commission as a unit of 
DHS; and 
 
alters membership of the Maryland Commission on Caregiving by removing the 
representative from Maryland Respite Care Coalition and adding an extra member 
representing organizations representing respite care services. 
 
Natural Resources Article 
 
 
Repeals requirement that the Department of Natural Resources publish on its 
website a list of maintenance projects in every unit of the State park system expected 
to cost more than $25,000; and 
 
repeals annual report regarding eradication of nutria in the State.  
 
State Finance and Procurement Article 
 
 
Removes the Secretary of Commerce, or designee, as a member of the Maryland 
Green Purchasing Committee. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 640/ Page 5 
State Government Article 
 
 
Alters the annual reporting date for the Governor’s Interagency Council on 
Homelessness from October 1 to December 15; and 
 
removes the Secretary of Health, or designee, as a member of the Justice 
Reinvestment Oversight Board. 
 
Transportation Article 
 
 
Removes a representative from MSDE from the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory 
Committee. 
 
Current Law/Background:  State law requires State agencies and other statutory entities 
to report to the General Assembly on specified activities, services, and trends. Chapter 58 
of 2015 requires, by December 1 of the year immediately preceding the start of a new term 
of the General Assembly, that DLS, in consultation with State agencies, review and make 
recommendations for the introduction of legislation to repeal or modify reporting 
requirements that may no longer be warranted. Chapters 47 and 48 of 2023 were the most 
recent Acts enacted to repeal, modify, and consolidate reporting requirements in response 
to Chapter 58. The next scheduled review will occur during the 2026 legislative interim. 
 
DBM advises that the bill is tied to the Government Modernization Initiative (GMI) team’s 
effort to coordinate with State departments to create governmental efficiency. GMI was 
created as a result of Executive Order 01.01.2025.08, which, among other things, 
established the Governor’s Office of Performance Improvement and established GMI. 
DBM advises that the bill relieves unnecessary reporting burdens on affected State 
departments and that the bill allows department staff to focus their attention on other 
activities due to them no longer being required to staff or attend unnecessary meetings.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Technology Development Corporation; Department of Commerce; Governor’s Office of 
Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
State Department of Education; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 640/ Page 6 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
General Services; Department of Human Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 640/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Mandated Reports, Boards, and Commissions - Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 640 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 7