START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 672 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 672 
(Delegates Shetty and Rosenberg) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund - Entities Eligible for Grants 
 
 
This bill alters the entities eligible to receive grants for conducting pediatric cancer research 
from the Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund to include only nonprofit hospitals, educational 
institutions, and other nonprofit organizations. Laboratories and persons are no longer 
eligible for grants.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 253 and 254 of 2022 established the Maryland Pediatric Cancer 
Fund within the Maryland Department of Health. The fund is authorized to provide grants 
for eligible physicians, hospitals, laboratories, educational institutions, and other 
organizations and persons to conduct pediatric cancer research.  
 
Each year, the Secretary of Health may (1) distribute funds from the fund to a promotional 
account to be allocated to a State-based childhood cancer organization for use in promoting 
further donations to the fund and to educate the State scientific community about the 
opportunities for childhood cancer research through the fund and (2) use funds from the 
fund to administer the fund (including staff and administrative costs associated with the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 672/ Page 2 
Pediatric Cancer Research Commission). However, the Secretary may not distribute or use 
more than 5% of the fund for these purposes. 
 
Chapters 924 and 925 of 2024 established the Pediatric Cancer Research Commission to 
oversee the award of competitive grants from the fund. The commission must:   
 
 
develop criteria, standards, and requirements for the review of applications for 
pediatric cancer research grants from the fund; 
 
establish procedures and guidelines to be used in the review, evaluation, ranking, 
and rating of the research grant proposals; 
 
develop criteria and a process for reviewing grant applications to ensure that each 
application is complete and satisfies the developed criteria, standards, and 
requirements; 
 
develop disclosure and recusal guidelines to be followed by commission members 
when considering grant applications; 
 
establish standards for the oversight of awards; and 
 
conduct progress reviews of grant recipients. 
 
Expenditures from the fund must be made in accordance with the State budget, and money 
expended from the fund is supplemental to and may not supplant funding otherwise 
appropriated to pediatric cancer research. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes 
$2,481,141 in special fund expenditures for the fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2