START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 647 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 647 
(Delegates Ivey and Fennell) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Power Plant Research Program - Study on Nuclear Energy 
 
 
This bill requires the Power Plant Research Program (PPRP), within the Department of 
Natural Resources (DNR), to study and make recommendations on nuclear energy and its 
role as a renewable energy resource that can effectively combat climate change in the State. 
By September 30, 2027, PRRP must report its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General/special fund expenditures increase by $218,800 in FY 2027 and by 
$11,600 in FY 2028 to complete the required study and report. Revenues are not affected.  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/SF Exp. 
218,800 
11,600 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($218,800) 
($11,600) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study, PPRP must:   
 
 
evaluate and summarize the current state of nuclear energy in Maryland; 
 
identify the benefits of nuclear energy use in the State, including its environmental 
benefits that may help to combat climate change; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 647/ Page 2 
 
identify the potential for a new nuclear power initiative to be deployed within the 
State using one or more nuclear technologies, including identifying major barriers 
to, and a time frame for, deploying a successful nuclear power initiative; 
 
identify potential locations in the State where State‑owned and operated nuclear 
energy generating stations may be constructed; 
 
assess the practicality of adding nuclear energy to Maryland’s Renewable Energy 
Portfolio Standard (RPS); and 
 
include recommendations regarding initiatives for the State and General Assembly 
to responsibly and efficiently grow the nuclear energy industry in the State, support 
new emerging nuclear energy technologies that may improve nuclear energy as a 
viable renewable energy resource, and utilize nuclear energy as a resource to help 
the State combat climate change. 
 
Current Law:   
 
2020 Power Plant Research Program Study  
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 required PPRP to conduct a specified study, by January 1, 2020, of 
nuclear energy and its role as a renewable or clean energy resource that can effectively 
combat climate change in the State. The report can be found here. 
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Maryland’s RPS was enacted in 2004 to facilitate a gradual transition to renewable sources 
of energy. The RPS includes specified eligible (Tier 1 or Tier 2) sources as well as  
carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Nuclear energy does not currently 
qualify as a Tier 1 or Tier 2 source under the RPS.  
 
For more information on Maryland’s RPS, see the Appendix – Renewable Energy 
Portfolio Standard. 
 
Next Generation Energy Act  
 
The Next Generation Energy Act of 2025 (Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025):   
 
 
establishes that it is the policy of the State to encourage the development of clean, 
carbon-free nuclear power, including development through innovative designs; 
 
establishes the General Assembly’s support for the extension or renewal of the 
federal license for the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant’s nuclear reactors in the 
years 2034 and 2036; 
 
requires the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA), in coordination with the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 647/ Page 3 
Public Service Commission (PSC) and DNR, to pursue (1) cost-sharing agreements 
with neighboring states to mitigate the risks of developing new nuclear energy 
generating stations and (2) agreements with federal agencies regarding the siting of 
small modular reactors on federal land or on or near federal facilities; and 
 
establishes a process for PSC approval of one or more proposed nuclear energy 
generation projects funded through electric distribution rates. 
 
By December 1, 2026, MEA must report to the General Assembly on (1) its efforts to 
pursue cost-sharing and federal agreements, mentioned above, including an assessment of 
any opportunities to participate with other states, federal agencies, and public or private 
partners in a multistate procurement of new nuclear technology, and (2) an evaluation and 
status of the process for PSC approval of one or more proposed nuclear energy generation 
projects. 
 
State Expenditures:  General/special fund expenditures for DNR increase by $218,821 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring an independent consultant to complete the study and report, and 
a part-time contractual site assessor to supplement existing staff, allowing for existing staff 
to devote time to managing the consultant’s work on the study and report. DNR advises 
that PPRP cannot complete the required study and report with existing resources and must 
retain a consultant and part-time contractual staff to do so. The estimate includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
In general, special funds from the Environmental Trust Fund are used to fund a significant 
portion of PPRP’s operations. PPRP also receives funding from the Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced (see the Governor’s Fiscal 2027 
Budget Books, Volume I, p. 462). However, PPRP’s workload and costs have been 
increasing and, to the extent sufficient special funds are not available to cover the costs of 
the bill, general funds may be required to cover a portion or all of the costs. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$35,722 
Consultant Expenses 
175,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
     8,099 
Total FY 2027 DNR Expenditures 
$218,821 
 
This estimate assumes that (1) the contractual position terminates September 30, 2027 
(concurrent with PPRP’s deadline to submit the report), resulting in a relatively small 
amount of expenditures in fiscal 2028, and (2) the cost of the consultant is incurred in  
fiscal 2027 only. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 647/ Page 4 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 647/ Page 5 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Electric 
companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy credits 
(RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each year 
or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. 
Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely through RECs, with 
negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that has not been the 
case more recently. Generally, the Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for 
purposes related to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2026, the requirements are 38.0% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 8.0% from solar 
and 0.50% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 
14.5% from solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 647/ Page 6 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a five-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the  
Generation Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by  
PJM Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of 
RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water‑heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; thermal energy from a thermal biomass system; and raw or treated 
wastewater used as a heat source or sink for heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large 
hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from Tier 1 
beginning in 2022, although some black liquor RECs remain eligible through the duration 
of certain contracts. Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025 removed waste-to-energy and 
refuse-derived fuel from RPS eligibility. The exclusion generally applies to all RPS 
compliance years starting on or after January 1, 2025, except for a facility owned by a 
public instrumentality of the State (i.e., Montgomery County), which applies beginning 
July 1, 2026. 
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $616.9 million in 2024:  $254.7 million 
for 7.0 million RECs and $362.3 million in ACPs. This continues a multi-year trend of 
increasing overall compliance costs, reliance on ACPs, and REC prices. Of note,  
2024 continues the trend of 2023 that ACPs have been used in a significant way for general  
Tier 1 compliance. In fact, 2024 had the fewest RECs retired since 2014. ACP prices were 
in many instances less expensive than REC prices and, as a result, suppliers chose to pay 
the ACP rather than retire RECs. Compliance costs and REC prices for the most recent 
five-year period are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 647/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2020-2024 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
RECs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$99.8  
$187.3  
$246.5  
$124.9  
$90.1  
Tier 1 Solar 
122.9 
144.4 
101.4 
109.6 
150.4 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
0.1 
2.2 
Tier 2  
0.4 
1.0 
4.4 
9.3 
12.0 
RECs Subtotal 
$223.1  
$332.7  
$352.3  
$243.8  
$254.7  
ACPs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1  
$0.0  
$0.2  
$0.7  
$262.4  
$319.4  
Tier 1 Solar 
0.0 
76.9 
85.9 
56.0 
37.2 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.6 
4.4 
Tier 2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
1.3 
ACPs Subtotal 
$0.1  
$77.1  
$86.6  
$320.4  
$362.3 
Total 
$223.2  
$409.8  
$438.9  
$564.2  
$616.9  
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$8.24  
$14.36  
$17.80  
$24.61 
$27.09  
Tier 1 Solar 
$66.10 
$72.59 
$57.80 
$56.67 
$58.56 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
$94.47 
$94.04 
Tier 2 
$1.06 
$6.45 
$7.42 
$10.50 
$11.16 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
n/a:  not applicable 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The post-2022 geothermal system carve-out became 
effective in 2023. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Approximately 45% of RECs used for compliance in 2024 came from in-state resources, 
up from 35% in 2023. RECs derived from three fuel types, solar (43.4%), black liquor 
(16.2%), and wind (15.1%), were the predominant sources of Tier 1 compliance in 2024. 
Maryland facilities generated approximately 5.7 million RECs in 2024:  1.5 million Tier 1 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 647/ Page 8 
nonsolar RECs, 2.4 million Tier 1 SRECs, and 1.8 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can 
be used for compliance in both Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are 
geographic and energy source restrictions. 
 
Related Studies and Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2024, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
PPRP’s supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a 
goal of 100% by 2040 can be found here. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also issued an RPS report in 2025, which can be 
found here. The report contains additional detail on the program, significant statutory 
changes, and visualizations of planned and actual RPS percentage requirements over time. 
 

END OF PAGE 8