START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 669 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 669 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Political Subdivisions - Third-Party Road Improvements - Satisfactory 
Completion 
 
 
This bill prohibits a political subdivision (i.e., any county or municipality) from issuing a 
use and occupancy permit to a nongovernment holder of a permit issued by the State 
Highway Administration (SHA) to complete specified types of work on a State highway 
until the work is completed to the satisfaction of SHA and the political subdivision. The 
bill only applies to work completed on a State highway that carries an average traffic 
volume of more than 25,000 vehicles a day.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures decrease beginning as early 
as FY 2027 to the extent the bill results in fewer instances in which SHA assumes 
responsibility from private contractors for completing work on State highways, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to significantly affect local government  finances 
but may delay the issuance of use and occupancy permits in some cases. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SHA must construct, reconstruct, and repair State highways as necessary 
and maintain them in good condition. Generally, unless a person has a permit from SHA, 
the person may not:  
 
 
make an opening in any State highway;  
 
place any structure on any State highway; 
 
change or renew any structure placed on any State highway; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 669/ Page 2 
 
dig up any State highway for any purpose, including the placement of pipes, sewer, 
poles, wires, or rails; 
 
plant or remove any tree on any State highway; or 
 
place any obstruction or improvement on any State highway. 
 
If any such work is permitted by SHA, the work must be performed to the satisfaction of 
SHA and under its supervision. The person to whom the permit is issued or by whom the 
work is done must pay the cost of replacing the highway in as good a condition as before 
the work was done.  
 
SHA must require a nongovernment applicant for a permit who is a developer to submit a 
performance bond, letter of credit, or surety acceptable to SHA. Additionally, any 
nongovernment applicant must submit a payment bond, letter of credit, or other surety if 
(1) the amount of the improvement is estimated to exceed $100,000; (2) the project is 
financed, in whole or in part, by private funds; and (3) the entire improvement is located 
outside the applicant’s property. 
 
State Expenditures:  SHA anticipates, and the Department of Legislative Services 
concurs, that by prohibiting a political subdivision from issuing a use and occupancy permit 
for work permitted by SHA until SHA and the political subdivision approve of the 
completed work, the bill may result in fewer instances in which SHA ultimately assumes 
responsibility from private developers for completing any remaining work that was not 
completed satisfactorily; accordingly, the bill may result in a decrease in TTF expenditures 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027. 
 
More specifically, SHA advises that, frequently, a developer completes a building or other 
site work that may require adjustments to/work on a State highway (for example, a new 
sidewalk may need to be installed on an abutting State highway); the developer then 
requests and is awarded a use and occupancy permit from the relevant local government 
before the highway work has been completed to SHA’s satisfaction. SHA reports that in 
such cases, because a use and occupancy permit has already been issued, SHA sometimes 
has difficulty requiring the developer to complete the work that is needed and, on occasion, 
must assume responsibility for doing so.  
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent any small business developers refuse to complete 
the required roadway improvements, they may experience a delay in receiving their use 
and occupancy permits. In order to receive such permits, they may incur costs to complete 
the work that, under current law, may have been completed by SHA instead.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 669/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been considered within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Prince George’s 
County; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3