START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 735 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 735 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Earned Income Tax Credit - Assistance Program Implementation Delay and 
Study 
 
 
This bill delays by five years, to tax year 2030, the Maryland Earned Income Tax Credit 
Assistance Program for Low-Income Families established under Chapters 110 and 111 of 
2022 and makes conforming changes to reporting requirements and the termination date of 
the program. The bill also requires (1) the Comptroller’s Office to study and make 
recommendations regarding outreach efforts to encourage eligible taxpayers to claim the 
State earned income tax credit and (2) the Department of Service and Civic Innovation 
(DSCI) to study and make recommendations on how Maryland Corps participants might 
assist low-income Marylanders with claiming the State earned income tax credit and other 
family-serving tax credits and government assistance for which they may be eligible. The 
Comptroller’s Office and DSCI must each report their findings to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by December 1, 2026. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office and DSCI can conduct the required studies and 
prepare the related reports with existing budgeted resources. General fund revenue 
reductions associated with any increase in State income tax credit claims under the program 
are delayed. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenue reductions associated with any increase in local 
income tax credit claims under the program are delayed. Local finances are not otherwise 
affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 735/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Earned Income Tax Credit 
 
Maryland’s earned income tax credit offers both refundable and nonrefundable credits 
against the State income tax and a nonrefundable credit against the local income tax for 
low- to moderate-income resident taxpayers. The State nonrefundable credit is generally 
equal to 50% of the amount of an eligible taxpayer’s federal earned income tax credit for 
the taxable year. A taxpayer for whom the State nonrefundable credit is less than the 
taxpayer’s State income tax liability may also be eligible to claim the State and local 
poverty level tax credits. 
 
Maryland Earned Income Tax Credit Assistance Program 
 
Chapters 110 and 111 established the Maryland Earned Income Tax Credit Assistance 
Program to (1) identify residents who are eligible to claim the Maryland earned income tax 
credit but have failed to claim the credit and (2) provide these residents with a streamlined 
mechanism to claim the credit. The Comptroller must administer the program, adopt 
regulations, and report to the Governor and the General Assembly on program activity  
by December 31 annually in 2025 through 2030. 
 
For tax year 2025 and beyond, the Comptroller must provide, as part of the program, a 
form to claim the credit to any resident (1) for whom the Comptroller has received specified 
federal income tax return information; (2) whose wages were reported by the resident’s 
employer to the Comptroller for the tax year; (3) who failed to claim the Maryland earned 
income tax credit for the tax year; and (4) who is eligible to file a claim for a refund of 
Maryland income tax. In processing the form to claim the credit, the Comptroller’s Office 
must calculate the credit using the standard deduction method. On request from a resident, 
the Comptroller’s Office must waive any penalties or interest on any assessment of tax due 
unless the Comptroller’s Office reasonably believes the resident knew or should have 
known the tax was miscalculated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 519 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 735/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Service and Civic 
Innovation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
me/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3