START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 783 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 783 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Washington County - Property Tax Credit - Platoon 22, Incorporated 
 
 
This bill requires Washington County and municipalities in Washington County to grant a 
100% property tax credit against the county and municipal property tax imposed on real 
property owned by Platoon 22, Inc. and used to provide housing to veterans. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County property tax revenues decrease by approximately 
$4,000 annually beginning in FY 2027 and the City of Hagerstown property tax revenues 
decrease by approximately $5,000 annually. Local expenditures are not directly affected. 
This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Tax credit programs mandated by law may be applicable only to specific 
counties or municipalities. These credits can be found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the  
Tax-Property Article. In addition to statewide optional tax credits, some optional credits 
are applicable only to a specified county or municipality within a specified county. These 
county specific optional credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Tax-Property Article. 
Exhibit 1 shows the mandatory and optional property tax credits in Washington County. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 783/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Washington County Property Tax Credits 
 
9-323 
Optional Tax Credits 
(a)(1)(i) 
New construction/improvements to existing property 
(a)(1)(ii) 
Nonprofit civic association 
(a)(1)(iii) 
Women's Club of Hagerstown 
(a)(1)(iv) 
Rohrersville Cornet Band of Washington County 
(a)(1)(v) 
Principal residence of firefighter/fire police/EMT 
(a)(1)(vi) 
Hagerstown Soccer Club 
(c)(1) 
Personal property owned by Mid-East Milk Lab Services 
(c)(2) 
Real property subject to agricultural land preservation program 
(d) 
Qualifying commercial/industrial business 
(e)  
Renovated/rehabilitated business in priority funding area 
(f) 
New/expanding business that creates jobs 
(g) 
Disabled veterans/surviving spouses  
9-323 
Mandatory Tax Credits 
(b)(1)(i) 
District 15 Civic Association-Big Pool 
(b)(1)(ii) 
Improvements to structure in historic district 
 
EMT:  Emergency Medical Technician 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Washington County property tax revenues decrease by approximately 
$4,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027 and the City of Hagerstown property tax revenues 
decrease by approximately $5,000 annually. The estimate is based on the following: 
 
 
Platoon 22 owns one property, which is located in the City of Hagerstown. 
 
The taxable property assessment totals $480,700 for fiscal 2027. 
 
The county property tax rate in Hagerstown is $0.803 per $100 of assessment. 
 
The municipal property tax rate is $1.057 per $100 of assessment. 
 
Platoon 22 is a nonprofit organization that provides support services to veterans in an effort 
to end instances of suicide by veterans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 783/ Page 3 
Property Tax Collections in Washington County 
 
Washington County is projecting to collect $164.2 million in property tax revenues in  
fiscal 2026, as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. The City of Hagerstown is 
projecting to collect $46.6 million in property tax revenues in fiscal 2026. The Guide to 
Local Government Taxing Authority provides an overview on each county government’s 
statutory authority to establish property tax credits and exemptions. A copy of both reports 
are available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 501 (Washington County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3