START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 755 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 755 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Student Personal Electronic Device Use Policy - 
Establishment (Phones Away for the School Day Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education to develop and implement, by the 
2026‑2027 school year, a policy to limit the use of “electronic communication devices” 
(devices) by students during the school day hours, which includes all the hours of the 
school day from the start of the day until the end of the day. During school day hours, local 
policies must prohibit the use of devices and require students to store devices in a manner 
determined by the local board to ensure the device is not carried on the student’s person. 
Policies may not prohibit a student from using devices for any purpose documented in the 
student’s individualized education program or Section 504 Plan. Each school must 
designate on or more telephones in the school to be used by students to contact a parent, 
legal guardian, or other responsible adult during school day hours if necessary. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None, the bill pertains to local boards of education. 
 
Local Effect:  Local boards of education can likely develop and implement device policies 
with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Electronic communication device” means any portable electronic device 
carried or transported by a student to receive, send, or record voice, image, or text content. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 755/ Page 2 
Under the bill, “electronic communication device” does not include a device provided by 
a local board of education for instructional purposes or a medical device provided by a 
medical professional for a student’s health care needs. 
 
Current Law:  Most local school systems have policies governing the use of cell phones 
in schools or on school grounds, which are aligned with local codes of discipline. Policies 
vary across school systems and schools and typically cover definitions, guidelines, 
compliance procedures, and consequences for violations. They also generally cover 
procedures for notifying parents and staff, and the responsibilities of school administrators 
and may provide differing levels of flexibility for elementary, middle, and high school 
students. 
 
MSDE and the State Board of Education convened the Task Force on Student Cell Phone 
Use in Schools in spring 2025 to review policies across the State on allowable student use 
of cell phones in schools and develop guidance and recommendations. In August 2025, the 
State Board passed a resolution reinforcing the recommendations from the task force’s 
guidance document and encouraging local school systems to regularly revisit and assess 
their current policy to ensure it satisfies community needs and aligns with task force 
recommendations; and requesting that school systems clearly define expectations for their 
student cell phone use policies. 
 
Additionally, MSDE advises that the agency has partnered with Phones in Focus, a national 
research study that gathers educators’ input on school cell phone policies, with a goal of 
developing evidence-based recommendations for policies that support academic learning, 
social well-being and student focus. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 57, HB 147, HB 192, and HB 630, and SB 29, SB 130, SB 368, and 
SB897 of 2025 and SB 112 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 755/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3