START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 789 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 789 
(Delegates Forbes and Griffith) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Law Enforcement Officers' Pension System - Military Service Credit Eligibility 
 
 
This bill allows a member or vested former member of the Law Enforcement Officers’ 
Pension System (LEOPS) to earn military service credit even if that member or former 
member receives service credit for the same military service under another retirement 
system. However, a member may not receive military service credit from the State more 
than once. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities and contributions increase minimally beginning in 
FY 2029, potentially by more than $340,000 and $42,600, respectively. Costs are assumed 
to increase annually according to actuarial assumptions and be allocated to general and 
special funds in proportion to the number of LEOPS members compensated by each fund 
source. To the extent that LEOPS members are more likely than the general population to 
have retired from the U.S. Armed Forces, the fiscal effect may be slightly greater. No effect 
on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Negligible increase in local participating governmental units’ (PGUs) 
pension liabilities, and no discernible effect on local employer contributions due to the 
small number of affected members in the PGU pool. No effect on local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, any member or vested former member of the State Retirement 
and Pension System (SRPS) who accrues 10 years of service as a member of any State plan 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 789/ Page 2 
may receive 1 year of additional service credit for each year of prior active military duty 
performed, up to a maximum of 5 years. That credit is granted at no cost to the member or 
former member and is applied using the accrual rate in effect when the member or former 
member submits an application for the credit to the State Retirement Agency (SRA). 
 
However, SRPS members or vested former members who claim credit for the same military 
service from another retirement system may not receive military service credit from SRPS, 
unless they claimed credit for that military service from:   
 
 
Social Security; 
 
National Railroad Retirement Act; or 
 
National Guard or military reserves pensions (Title 3 or Title 10 of the U.S. Code). 
 
This generally means that any SRPS member receiving a military pension after completing 
20 years of active military service cannot claim the military service credit from SRPS. 
 
State Expenditures:  SRA does not have reliable data on the number of State employees 
with prior military service, nor data on the number who have retired from the military and 
are receiving a military pension. Therefore, a reliable estimate of the number of LEOPS 
members who would be eligible to claim military service credit under the bill cannot be 
determined. 
 
However, using a variety of data sources, and for illustrative purposes only, the 
Department of Legislative Services estimates that about 3 current active members of 
LEOPS may be eligible for military service credit under the bill. The General Assembly’s 
consulting actuary identified 128 active members in LEOPS who fit the profile of 
individuals who could be eligible to claim additional service credit. These individuals are 
generally at least age 50 and, therefore, could have served 20 years in the military and 
earned 10 years of service credit in SRPS, making them eligible for the military service 
credit. Published reports by the U.S. Department of Defense indicate that approximately 
55,600 military retirees live in Maryland, which is 2.4% of the State’s population  
age 50 or older. Assuming the same percentage of LEOPS members identified by the 
actuary in that age group are military retirees, approximately 3 LEOPS members affected 
by the bill may be eligible for 5 years of military service credit. To the extent that 
individuals in law enforcement roles may be more likely to have served in (and retired 
from) the military, the number of affected individuals may be greater. 
 
This analysis can only determine the increase in pension liabilities and employer 
contributions if a “typical” member of LEOPS claimed an additional five years of service 
credit. Since the bill applies only to individuals with a 20-year pension, it is assumed that 
they all claim the maximum five years of credit allowed by the State. The earliest that an 
individual covered by the bill can claim military service credit is fiscal 2027. That credit 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 789/ Page 3 
is, therefore, counted in the July 1, 2027 actuarial valuation, which calculates contribution 
rates for fiscal 2029. Based on the actuarial assumptions for a typical LEOPS member, the 
estimated annual cost for a single member to claim the bill’s service credit is $14,200, and 
the associated increase in actuarial liabilities is $114,400 per member. These costs would 
begin in fiscal 2029 and increase annually according to actuarial assumptions.  
For illustrative purposes only, if the estimated three members earn the military service 
credit, total State pension liabilities increase by more than $340,000 and employer 
contributions increase by approximately $42,600 in fiscal 2029. 
 
As the military service credit allowed by the bill counts toward both eligibility and 
creditable service, some affected members may retire earlier than they otherwise would 
because of the additional eligibility service credit they receive. Early retirements can 
increase pension liabilities because benefits are paid over a longer period of time; however, 
this analysis does not address the fiscal effects from earlier retirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1102 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 491 (Senator Salling) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Maryland Municipal League; State Retirement Agency; 
US Census Bureau; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3