START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 744 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 744 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Dorchester County 
 
 
This bill makes Dorchester County detention center officers members of the Correctional 
Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) as a condition of employment, subject to 
Dorchester County beginning participation in CORS. Past eligibility and creditable service 
with Dorchester County transfers to CORS for the affected officers, and they are not subject 
to specified credit transfer provisions in current law. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only Dorchester County. 
  
Local Effect:  Assuming Dorchester County elects to participate in CORS and based on 
an actuarial analysis as of June 30, 2025, its pension liabilities increase by $842,000. Due 
to a new entrant liability credit, net contributions increase by only $37,000 beginning as 
early as FY 2028. No discernible effect on pension liabilities or employer contribution rates 
for other participating governmental units (PGUs) in CORS. No effect on local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In general, when a PGU withdraws or transfers from a State 
pension plan, assets and liabilities credited to the withdrawing members are calculated in 
a manner specified by statute. If there is a net withdrawal liability, the withdrawing PGU 
must make regular payments to the State Retirement and Pension System until the liability 
is paid off. In the case of transfers to another plan, the assets and liabilities from the original 
plan are transferred to the members’ “new” plan, but they are still subject to the same 
withdrawal asset/liability calculation. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 744/ Page 2 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs transfers from the 
Employees’ Pension System (EPS) to another contributory pension system (like CORS). 
Under Title 37, a “new system” means the system into which the member is transferring 
service credit, and “previous system” means the system from which the individual is 
transferring. Members transferring creditable service from EPS to another contributory 
system must pay the difference in the member contribution rates in effect for the period of 
service covered by the transferred service credit, plus interest. They are also refunded any 
accumulated contributions in the previous system that are in excess of the member 
contributions required by the new system. 
 
Dorchester County is currently a PGU in EPS, but the county seeks to transfer its 
37 detention center officers from EPS to CORS. Exhibit 1 shows the benefit structures for 
both plans. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Pension Plan Provisions 
 
 
Employees’ Pension System 
 
 
Hired Before July 1, 2011 
Hired After June 30, 2011 
CORS 
Normal Retirement Age 
621 
652 
553 
Years of Service for 
Normal Retirement 
30 
Age and service add to 90 
20 
Employee Contribution 
None prior to 1998 
2.0% (1998-2006) 
3.0% in 2007 
4.0% in 2008 
5.0% (2009-2011) 
7.0% after June 30, 2011 
7.0% 
 5.0% 
Benefit Multiplier 
1.8% (after 1998) 
1.2% (before 1998) 
1.5% 
1.82% of AFC 
 
AFC:  average final compensation 
CORS:  Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
 
1 Retiree must have at least 5 years of service. 
2 Retiree must have at least 10 years of service. 
3 Retiree must have 5 years of service if hired before July 1, 2011; otherwise, retiree must have 10 years of 
service if hired on or after July 1, 2011. 
 
Source:  Maryland Annotated Code; State Personnel and Pensions Article 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 744/ Page 3 
As Exhibit 1 shows, the member contribution rate for EPS was less than the CORS rate of 
5% prior to fiscal 2009. Thus, under Title 37, an employee of the Dorchester County 
detention center would have to pay the difference in contribution rates for any prior service 
credit in EPS before fiscal 2009, with interest. However, the bill exempts them from that 
requirement. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Typically, when a PGU is considering transferring personnel from 
one State plan to another State plan, it requests that the State Retirement Agency conduct 
an actuarial valuation to determine the costs or benefits associated with the transfer. For 
this bill, Dorchester County requested an actuarial valuation of the cost of transferring its 
detention center officers from EPS to CORS. The analysis was conducted in 
December 2025. 
 
Under CORS, Dorchester County liabilities for the transferring detention officers increase 
by $842,322, and the annual cost for those members is initially estimated to increase by 
$147,756 starting in fiscal 2028 due to a higher employer contribution rate for 
CORS (19.16%) when compared with EPS (12.10%). The CORS municipal pool is small, 
so the addition of Dorchester County’s 37 detention officers increases the size of the pool 
by more than 20%, which alters the demographic composition of the group. The  
37 Dorchester County officers are generally younger, have less service credit, and have 
lower average compensation than the current CORS membership pool. Because the assets 
transferring with the 37 members from EPS to CORS are favorable relative to their 
CORS liabilities, Dorchester County would receive an incremental new entrant liability 
credit of $111,008 per year for 25 years, resulting in a net estimated contribution increase 
of $36,748 beginning in fiscal 2028 ($147,756 – $111,008). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 614 (Dorchester County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Dorchester County; State Retirement Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 744/ Page 4 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4