START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 754 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 754 
(Wicomico County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Wicomico County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B (Golf Course) License - Hours 
of Sale 
 
   
This bill extends the hours of sale the holder of a Class B beer, wine, and liquor (golf 
course) license in Wicomico County can sell alcoholic beverages on Monday through 
Saturday to 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. and on Sunday to 7:00 a.m. to midnight. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Wicomico County can handle any additional enforcement activities with 
existing resources. Wicomico County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Wicomico County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to 
issue a Class B beer, wine, and liquor (golf course) license to a golf course or organization 
that (1) is open to the public; (2) is operated for profit; (3) owns real estate in the county; 
and (4) has a golf course with a minimum of 18 holes. The license holder may sell beer, 
wine, and liquor for consumption on the land and in the buildings, including the clubhouse, 
used for golfing purposes. A patron does not need to be seated to be served. 
 
A holder of the license may sell beer, wine, and liquor (1) on Monday through Saturday, 
from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, and (2) on Sunday, from 10:00 a.m. to 
midnight. The annual license fee is $2,200. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 754/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 700 (Wicomico County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Wicomico County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2