START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 739 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 739 
(Delegate Martinez) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Prompt Payment of Claims - Requirements 
 
 
This bill alters requirements for an insurer, nonprofit health service plan, and health 
maintenance organization (collectively carriers) regarding prompt payment of claims. 
Specifically, the bill (1) clarifies that notice of receipt of a claim may be sent by mail or 
email; (2) specifies that refusal to reimburse all or part of a claim must be considered a 
denial; and (3) for claims where notice has been sent to the provider advising that additional 
information is necessary and the provider does not send such information within 30 days, 
requires the carrier to pay the claim or send a denial notice. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload on the Maryland Insurance Administration can be 
handled with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. No impact on the 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Under current law, within 30 days of receipt of a claim for 
reimbursement, a carrier must mail or transmit payment for the claim or send a notice of 
receipt with the status of the claim. The notice must state that (1) the carrier refuses to 
reimburse all or part of the claim and the reason for refusal; (2) the legitimacy of the claim 
or the appropriate amount of reimbursement is in dispute (and the additional information 
necessary to determine if all or part of the claim will be reimbursed); or (3) the claim is not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 739/ Page 2 
clean and the specific information necessary to be considered clean. If a carrier wholly or 
partially denies a claim for reimbursement, the carrier must permit a provider a minimum 
of 90 working days after the date of denial to appeal the denial. Under the bill, the notice 
of receipt may be sent via mail or email; also, a refusal to reimburse all or part of a claim 
as stated in the notice must be considered a denial of all or part of the claim. 
 
Under current law, if a carrier disputes a portion of a claim, it must provide payment for 
any undisputed portion within 30 days of receipt of the claim. If a carrier requests specific 
additional information, the carrier must pay the claim within 30 days after receiving receipt 
of the requested information. The bill specifies that, if a provider does not send the 
requested additional information within 30 days, the carrier must either (1) mail or 
otherwise transmit payment for the claim or (2) mail or email a notice of receipt with the 
status of the claim. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Under the bill, if a carrier refuses to reimburse all or part of a 
claim, it must be considered a denial. Thus, small business health care providers for whom 
all or part of a claim is not reimbursed will receive a notice of denial and may move to 
appeal the claim. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2