START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 718 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 718 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Information Technology – State and Higher Education E–Mail – Requirements 
 
 
This bill states that it is the policy of the State that email systems and resources for State 
and higher education employees are intended to support State business, as defined, and 
may not serve as a public forum. The bill also requires the Information Technology (IT) 
policies, plans, and standards in place for State agencies and institutes of higher education 
to include provisions protecting employee email services from spam email and other use 
that does not support State business, as specified. However, the policies, plans, and 
standards must permit incidental personal use of IT, including email, by State employees 
that has a de minimis impact on resources and is consistent with generally accepted 
professional business norms and expectations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill generally codifies existing practice, it is not anticipated to 
materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “State business” means the furtherance of the State’s obligations (1) under 
the Maryland Constitution, Maryland Code, and Code of Maryland Regulations; (2) under 
the laws of the United States; and (3) by operation of contracts and similar obligations. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 718/ Page 2 
“Spam email” means unsolicited, phishing, solicitation, and bulk emails unrelated to State 
business. It does not include solicitation and bulk emails relating to State business, 
including bulk email from State vendors, partners, and exclusive representatives. 
 
Current Law:  The Department of Information Technology and the Secretary of 
Information Technology are responsible for, among other things, (1) developing, 
maintaining, revising, and enforcing IT policies, procedures, and standards; (2) providing 
technical assistance, advice, and recommendations to the Governor and any unit of 
State government concerning IT matters; and (3) developing and maintaining a statewide 
IT Master Plan, as specified. “IT” means all electronic information processing, including 
maintenance, telecommunications, hardware, software, and associated services. 
 
Each unit of State government must develop and submit to the Secretary of Information 
Technology (1) IT policies and standards; (2) an IT plan; and (3) an annual project plan 
outlining the status of efforts to make information and services available to the public over 
the Internet. Additionally, the governing board of the public institutions of higher education 
must develop and submit IT policies and standards and an IT plan for their respective 
institutions or systems to the Secretary; generally, these policies, plans, and standards must 
be consistent with the master plan, as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 629 (Senator Kramer) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of Budget 
and Management; Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2