START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 721 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 721 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Uniformed Services Spouses Act 
 
 
This bill (1) expands eligibility for priority registration for courses at public institutions of 
higher education; (2) extends eligibility for veterans’ services at community colleges to 
veterans’ spouses; (3) expands eligibility for senatorial and delegate scholarships to active 
service members’ spouses; (4) expands eligibility for hiring and promotion preferences 
relating to veterans; and (5) expands the veterans eligible for credits on selection tests for 
applicants of specified State and local employee positions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local finances are not materially affected, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Priority Registration for Public Higher Education Institutions 
 
Current Law:  Public institutions of higher education must grant priority registration for 
courses to an eligible service member. The priority registration requirement applies only 
within 15 years after an eligible service member was last on active duty and does not apply 
after an eligible service member’s fourth academic year. “Eligible service member” is 
defined as an active service member or a veteran who has received an honorable discharge 
or a certificate of satisfactory completion of service.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 721/ Page 2 
Under the Bill:  The bill expands priority registration at public higher education institutions 
for service members to include a veteran who has received an other than dishonorable 
discharge (instead of only an honorable discharge) and to also include the spouse of an 
eligible service member.  
 
Veterans Resource Centers at Community Colleges 
 
Current Law:  Each community college must (1) employ at least one individual whose job 
duties and responsibilities include providing comprehensive and intensive enrollment and 
advising services to current and prospective students who are veterans; (2) ensure all 
student advisors are trained on the unique needs and resources available to students who 
are veterans; and (3) establish a veterans resource center on campus. Veterans resource 
centers are established to (1) provide access to federal and State veterans resources; 
(2) serve as a quiet place for veterans to study; (3) enable veterans to connect to other 
veterans; and (4) be the central hub for all activities on campus related to veterans. 
 
Under the Bill:  The bill expands the requirements above to also include spouses of 
veterans.  
 
Senatorial and Delegate Scholarships 
 
Current Law:  Senatorial and delegate scholarships allow each senator and delegate to 
make scholarship awards during a term of office. The exact qualifications and selection 
criteria differ across the senatorial and delegate scholarship awards. Senators and delegates 
may award scholarships, as specified, to active service members who are domiciled in the 
State to be used at an out-of-state institution of higher education. A recipient of a senatorial 
scholarship who is an active service member and otherwise meets specified conditions may 
maintain eligibility for the scholarship by being domiciled in the State (rather than being 
eligible for in-State tuition). 
 
Under the Bill:  The bill extends the provisions above regarding senatorial and delegate 
scholarships to be applicable to spouses of active service members.   
 
Hiring and Promotion Preferences – In General 
 
Current Law:  An employer, including a county or municipality, may grant a hiring and 
promotion preference to an eligible veteran, the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a 
service-connected disability, the spouse of an eligible active service member, or the 
surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran. Granting this preference does not violate 
any State or local Equal Employment Opportunity law. A county or municipality that elects 
to offer this hiring or promotion preference may adopt a local law granting the preference 
before implementing the preference. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 721/ Page 3 
An “eligible veteran” is a veteran, as defined in § 9‐901 of the State Government Article, 
who has received an honorable discharge or a certificate of satisfactory completion of 
service, including a reserve component, the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health 
Service (PHS), and the Commissioned Corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA).  
 
Under § 9‐901 of the State Government Article, a veteran is a person who served in the 
active military, naval, air, or space service, and who was discharged or released under 
nondishonorable conditions.  
 
Under the Bill:  The bill makes clarifying changes to statutory language in the Labor and 
Employment Article. 
 
Hiring and Promotion Preferences – Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission 
 
Current Law:  The Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC) may grant a 
hiring and promotion preference to an eligible veteran, the spouse of an eligible veteran 
who has a service-connected disability, or the surviving spouse of a deceased eligible 
veteran. An eligible veteran is a veteran of any branch of the uniformed services who has 
received an honorable discharge or a certificate of satisfactory completion of military 
service, including a reserve component, the Commissioned Corps of PHS , and the 
Commissioned Corps of NOAA. Granting this preference does not violate any State or 
local Equal Employment Opportunity law. 
 
Under the Bill:  WSSC may also grant a hiring and promotion preference to the spouse of 
an active service member. The bill also changes the definition of “eligible veteran” to be a 
veteran who has received an other than dishonorable discharge (instead of honorable 
discharge).  
 
State Employees within the State Personnel Management System 
 
Current Law:  For positions in the State Personnel Management System for which selection 
tests are used, certain credits may be applied to the results of selection tests for applicants 
who are otherwise qualified and have at least the minimum passing score on a selection 
test. This includes the application of 10 points on any selection test for eligible veterans, 
spouses of active service members, spouses of veterans with service-connected disabilities, 
and surviving spouses of a deceased eligible veteran; an appointing authority must also 
apply a credit of two additional points on any selection test for a former prisoner of war.  
An “eligible veteran” is a veteran who has received an honorable discharge or a certificate 
of satisfactory completion of service, including a reserve component.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 721/ Page 4 
Chapters 272 and 273 of 2025 authorize counties or  municipalities that use selection tests 
to hire or promote employees to award 10 credit points on the test, or their equivalent, to 
eligible veterans (as defined by § 7-207 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article), 
spouses of active service members, spouses of veterans with service-connected disabilities, 
and surviving spouses of a deceased eligible veteran. 
 
Under the Bill:  An “eligible veteran” is a veteran who has received an other than 
dishonorable discharge (instead of honorable discharge) or a certificate of satisfactory 
completion of service and also includes the Commissioned Corps of PHS and the 
Commissioned Corps of NOAA. This expanded definition also applies to counties and 
municipalities that use selection tests and provide credits. 
 
State and Local Expenditures:  The bill’s changes necessitate minor changes to the 
Department of Budget and Management’s JobAps system, as well as associated guides and 
training materials. Any expenses from these changes are likely minimal and assumed to be 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources.  
 
The bill does not alter the total dollar amount a senator or delegate may award in 
scholarships each year; thus, there is no fiscal impact associated with the bill’s expansion 
to include active service members’ spouses. 
 
Public senior institutions of higher education, Baltimore City Community College, and 
local community colleges can handle the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Awarding discretionary preferences or credits has no direct effect on local governmental 
finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 243 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 721/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5