START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 730 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 730 
(Delegate Korman) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Regulation - Maryland Franchise Registration and Disclosure Law - 
Alterations (Franchise Reform Act) 
 
 
This bill alters the time periods within which specified legal actions may be taken by the 
Securities Commissioner in the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) or by a franchisee 
under the Maryland Franchise Registration and Disclosure Law. Among other provisions, 
the bill also (1) specifies rights of association for franchisees and (2) requires the Securities 
Commissioner to establish a pilot program to expedite the review of franchise registration 
renewal applications, as specified, and by September 30, 2031, submit a report with certain 
information to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Economic Matters 
Committee. The bill’s provisions related to the pilot program terminate 
September 30, 2032.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by approximately $305,500 in FY 2027 
for staff; future years reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
305,500 
362,400 
379,100 
396,100 
413,400 
Net Effect 
($305,500) 
($362,400) 
($379,100) 
($396,100) 
($413,400) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  This bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 730/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Maryland Franchise Registration and Disclosure Law – Generally 
 
The Maryland Franchise Registration and Disclosure Law (Title 14, Subtitle 2 of the 
Business Regulation Article) governs an offer to sell or the sale of a franchise if (1) the 
franchisee must pay a franchise fee of more than $100 and (2) the offeree or franchisee is 
a resident of the State; the franchised business will be or is operated in the State; the offer 
to sell is made in the State; or the offer to buy is accepted in the State. A franchise means 
an expressed or implied, oral or written agreement in which (1) a purchaser is granted the 
right to engage in the business of offering, selling, or distributing goods or services under 
a marketing plan or system prescribed in substantial part by the franchisor; (2) the operation 
of the business under the marketing plan or system is associated substantially with the 
trademark, service mark, trade name, logotype, advertising, or other commercial symbol 
that designates the franchisor or its affiliate; and (3) the purchaser must pay, directly or 
indirectly, a franchise fee. The Maryland Franchise Law is enforced by the OAG Securities 
Commissioner. 
 
Enforcement Remedies 
 
Under current law, whenever the commissioner finds that a person has violated or is about 
to violate the applicable statute or a regulation adopted or order passed under it, the 
commissioner may (1) order the person to cease and desist from the further offer to sell or 
sale of the franchise or (2) sue in circuit court to enjoin the violation or enforce the statute 
or the regulation or order. Statute includes additional specifications regarding the court 
procedures. Under current law, the commissioner may not exercise these powers more than 
three years after the violation occurs. The bill extends this time period to five years. 
 
Civil Liability 
 
Under current law, a person who sells or grants a franchise is civilly liable to the person 
who buys or is granted a franchise if the person who sells or grants a franchise offers to 
sell or sells a franchise, as further specified. The person who buys or is granted a franchise 
may sue to recover damages sustained by the grant of the franchise. Under current law, an 
action must be brought within three years after the grant of the franchise. The bill extends 
the applicable time period to the earlier of (1) five years after the grant of the franchise or 
(2) the later of three years after the grant of the franchise or two years after the date of the 
initial commencement or operations of the franchise.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 730/ Page 3 
The bill limits applicability of the provisions related to civil liability to only apply to (1) a 
franchisee or franchisor who is a resident of the State or (2) a franchised business that 
operates or will be operated in the State.  
 
Franchisee’s Right of Free Association 
 
The bill specifies that a franchisor may not, directly or indirectly, through any officer, agent 
or employee (1) restrict or inhibit the right of a franchisee to join a trade association 
consisting of other franchisees of the same franchise or (2) prohibit the right of free 
association among franchisees for any lawful purpose. A violator may be sued in 
circuit court for temporary or permanent injunctive relief; damages, if any; and costs of the 
suit, including reasonable attorney’s fees. The injunctive relief may be sought from the 
circuit court in the county where the individual who is alleged to be in violation resides or 
where the franchise affected by the violation conducts business. The plaintiff may not be 
required to allege or prove actual damages suffered to obtain injunctive relief. An action 
must be brought within the earlier of (1) two years after the alleged violation occurred or 
(2) one year after the discovery by the plaintiff of the facts of the alleged violation. 
 
Seasoned Franchisor Exemption – Net Equity Amounts 
 
Under current law, a person must generally register the offer of a franchise with the 
commissioner before the person offers to sell – through advertisement or otherwise – or 
sells the franchise in the State. However, there are numerous exemptions, including that 
registration requirements do not apply to any other transaction the Securities Commissioner 
exempts by regulation because (1) the transaction is not within the purpose of the Maryland 
Franchise Law and (2) the registration of the transaction is not necessary or appropriate in 
the public interest or for the protection of investors. Regulations also contain several 
transactions exempt from the registration requirement, including a transaction involving 
the offer or sale of a franchise when the franchisor: 
 
 
has a net equity of at least (1) $10.0 million (on a consolidated basis) or  
(2) $1.0 million and is at least 80% owned by a corporation or entity that has a net 
equity of at least $10.0 million, as specified; and  
 
has had at least 25 franchisees conducting the same franchised business at all times 
during the five‐year period immediately preceding the offer or sale.  
 
The bill requires that the franchisor net equity amounts for the exemption set forth above 
account for inflation or deflation based on the Consumer Price Index for all urban 
consumers by the U.S. Department of Labor.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 730/ Page 4 
Maryland Franchise Disclosure Document Renewal Fast-Track Review Pilot Program 
 
Franchise Renewal Registration:  Generally, under current law, a registration expires on 
the first anniversary of its effective date, unless registration of an offer of a franchise is 
renewed for a one‐year term. The Securities Commissioner by regulation or order may set 
a different term of registration. Before the registration expires, the registrant periodically 
may renew it for an additional one‐year term, if the registrant (1) at least 15 business days 
before the expiration of registration files with the Securities Commissioner a renewal 
application and a prospectus; (2) otherwise is entitled to be registered; and (3) pays a 
renewal fee of $250. The Securities Commissioner by order may allow a registrant to 
submit a renewal application after the fifteenth business day before expiration of the 
registration. Unless a stop order or other order is in effect, renewal of the registration of 
the offer of a franchise automatically takes effect at noon on the day when the previous 
registration is due to expire, or an earlier time set by the Securities Commissioner. 
 
Maryland Franchise Disclosure Document Renewal Fast‐Track Review Pilot Program  
 
The bill requires the Securities Commissioner to establish and administer a pilot program 
to expedite the review of the franchise registration renewal application filed in accordance 
with statute. The Securities Commissioner must (1) establish a standard for the review and 
approval of incomplete franchise disclosure documents and (2) adopt regulations to carry 
out the pilot program, including regulations establishing requirements and procedures for 
the submission and approval of franchise disclosure documents. By September 30, 2031, 
the commissioner must submit to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Economic 
Matters Committee, and post on the website of OAG, a report that includes:  
 
 
the number of franchise disclosure documents submitted by franchisors under the 
pilot program; 
 
the amount of time required to administer the program; 
 
an analysis of any impact on the franchise disclosure documents submitted outside 
the program, including the amount of time required for the analysis of franchise 
disclosure documents that were rejected; 
 
a description of programs in other states that address exemptions for certain 
franchisors, including the standards used by the appropriate authority to make 
determinations; 
 
an analysis of whether the program effects consumer protection; and 
 
information regarding the efficiency of the review of franchise disclosure 
documents, including specified information.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 730/ Page 5 
Legislative Policy and Intent of the Maryland Franchise Registration and Disclosure Law 
 
Finally, the bill expresses additional findings of the General Assembly, including that 
franchising has played a role in the State’s economy by enabling residents to open and 
operate businesses in the State under established systems and brands. The bill also alters 
the expressed intent of the Maryland Franchise Registration and Disclosure Law, including 
by adding the goal of promoting honesty, transparency, accountability, and fair dealing in 
the offer and sale of franchises. 
 
State Expenditures:  Based on the substantial increase in franchise renewal registration 
applications in recent years, most of which are filed from March through May, the 
Securities Commissioner determined that a pilot program would be beneficial to 
franchisors, existing and potential franchisees, and the OAG Securities Division. 
Accordingly, a pilot program was established within OAG to expedite the review of 
franchise registration renewal applications during fiscal 2026 to potentially serve as a 
model for future years. For context, the commissioner reports that the number of renewal 
filings received during March through May 2025 was nearly equal to the total number of 
filings received in all of 2015; in 2024, 65% of franchise applications were received during 
March through May. OAG indicates that 916 franchise registration renewals were 
processed in fiscal 2025. 
 
OAG anticipates that existing resources can handle the administrative requirements of 
reviewing and approving documents under the pilot program created under the bill. 
However, the bill’s provisions specifying the rights of association of a franchisee, 
extending the period of time during which the Securities Commissioner may exercise its 
enforcement powers, and the information tracking necessary for the reporting requirements 
for the pilot program require additional staff. This analysis assumes, therefore, that 
one assistant Attorney General, one administrator, and one examiner are needed.  
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures increase by at least $305,518 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$278,096 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Minimum FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$305,518 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The termination of the pilot 
program is beyond the five‐year period covered by this fiscal and policy note.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 730/ Page 6 
In addition to the costs reflected above, OAG likely incurs additional expenditures to 
develop a tracking system to better facilitate the reporting requirements (either by the 
addition of a computer network specialist or contractual information technology costs). 
These expenditures have not been accounted for in this analysis.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Franchisees that are small businesses may meaningfully benefit 
from the bill’s requirements related to (1) a longer period of time to bring a civil action for 
damages against a franchisor and (2) the pilot program expediting the review of the 
franchise registration renewal application. 
 
Additional Comments:  The October 2025 guidelines for the fiscal 2026 pilot program 
referenced above specify eligibility criteria and filing instructions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 992 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 415 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Securities Division); Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6