START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 714 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 714 
(Delegate Grammer, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health - Abortion Data - Submission to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to submit any data regarding 
abortion that is requested by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
MDH is authorized to refuse to submit the requested data if doing so would be in violation 
of federal or State law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect MDH operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For a detailed discussion of both federal and State abortion laws, please 
see Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that, while the bill requires it to submit any data 
regarding abortion that the CDC requests, MDH does not currently collect any information 
on abortions in the State. Therefore, MDH advises that the bill will not have a fiscal or 
operational impact. 
 
MDH advises that, to the extent it must respond to requests from CDC, it can do so with 
existing budgeted resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 714/ Page 2 
Additional Comments:  Each year, the CDC requests abortion data from the central health 
agencies for the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and New York City that it summarizes 
and publishes. In 2022, the most recent report available, 48 of the specified jurisdictions 
provided aggregate abortion data to CDC (excluding California, Maryland,  
New Hampshire, and New Jersey). CDC has conducted abortion surveillance since 1969 to 
document the number and characteristics of women obtaining legal induced abortions in 
the United States. In most jurisdictions, the collection of abortion data is facilitated by a 
legal requirement for hospitals, facilities, or physicians to report abortions to a central 
health agency. Reporting of abortion data to CDC is voluntary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 373 of 2025 and HB 276 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 714/ Page 3 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion 
 
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
Roe and Casey were codified in Maryland law before the Dobbs decision, thereby limiting 
its impact in the State. Section 20-209 of the Health-General Article prohibits the State 
from interfering with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the health or life of the woman or in cases of fetal defect, 
deformity, or abnormality. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may also adopt 
regulations consistent with established clinical practice if they are necessary and the least 
intrusive method to protect the life and health of the woman. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 expanded beyond physicians the types of health care providers who 
may provide abortions to include nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives, licensed certified 
midwives, physician assistants, and other qualified licensed health care providers. The Act 
also established the Abortion Care Clinical Training Program to (1) ensure there are enough 
health care professionals to provide abortion services in the State and (2) require health 
insurers and Maryland Medicaid to cover abortion services without a deductible, 
coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. Chapters 248 and 249 of 2023 
require certain health insurers that provide labor and delivery coverage to also cover 
abortion care services, with limited exceptions. 
 
Chapters 244 and 245 of 2023 proposed a constitutional amendment to (1) establish an 
individual’s fundamental right to reproductive freedom, including but not limited to the 
ability to make and effectuate decisions to prevent, continue, or end one’s own pregnancy 
and (2) prohibit the State from directly or indirectly denying, burdening, or abridging the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 714/ Page 4 
right unless justified by a compelling State interest achieved by the least restrictive means. 
In November 2024, Maryland voters approved this constitutional amendment through a 
ballot referendum. 
 
Chapters 435 and 436 of 2025 established the Public Health Abortion Grant Program. The 
program was intended to transfer excess funds from carriers’ segregated accounts, which 
are required under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), to a 
separate fund under MDH to provide grants to improve access to abortion care clinical 
services for individuals without sufficient resources. Uncodified language in the Acts 
specified that the bills must terminate if the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) advised that the bills violate the ACA. On December 9. 2025, CMS issued 
new guidance about the use of carriers’ segregated funds. CMS subsequently notified the 
Maryland Insurance Administration that, in accordance with the guidance, the Acts exceed 
the permissible uses of the segregated funds under Section 1303 of the ACA. Therefore, 
the Acts must terminate. 
 
Maryland Shield Laws 
 
Chapters 248 and 249 generally prohibit the disclosure of mifepristone data or the 
diagnosis, procedure, medication, or related codes for abortion care and other sensitive 
health services (including reproductive health services other than abortion care) by a health 
information exchange, electronic health network, or health care provider. The Acts also 
define “legally protected health care” to mean all reproductive health services, medications, 
and supplies related to the provision of abortion care and other sensitive health services as 
determined by the Secretary of Health based on the recommendation of the Protected 
Health Care Commission. 
 
Chapters 246 and 247 of 2023 generally (1) establish additional protections for information 
related to “legally protected health care” when that information is sought by another state; 
(2) prohibit a health occupations board from taking specified disciplinary actions related 
to the provision of legally protected health care; (3) prohibit a medical professional liability 
insurer from taking “adverse actions” against a practitioner related to the practice of legally 
protected health care; and (4) prohibit specified State entities, agents, and employees from 
participating in any interstate investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or 
sanctions against a person for activity related to legally protected health care (with limited 
exception). Data related to legally protected health care is also generally protected from 
other states. 
 
State Actions Following the Dobbs Decision 
 
As of December 2025, 41 states have some type of abortion ban or gestational limit in place 
with limited exceptions. Thirteen states (Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 714/ Page 5 
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, and 
West Virginia) have implemented total abortion bans. Twenty-eight states have abortion 
restrictions based on gestational duration, including seven states that ban abortion at or 
before 18 weeks gestation and 21 states that ban abortion at some point after 18 weeks. All 
41 states have an exception for a threat to the mother’s life; 22 states have exceptions for a 
threat to the physical health of the mother; and 13 states have exceptions for a threat to the 
general health of the mother. Several states also have limited exceptions for rape (9 states), 
incest (8 states), or lethal fetal anomalies (13 states). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5