START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 713 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 713 
(Cecil County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Cecil County - Orphans' Court Judges - Compensation 
 
 
This bill requires that, beginning in fiscal 2027, the Cecil County Council is to determine 
the annual salary and expense allowance for a judge of the Cecil County Orphan’s Court. 
The annual salary must be at least $11,000, and the allowance for traveling expenses must 
be at least $1,500. Further, the chief judge must receive additional compensation of at least 
$1,500 in an amount determined by the council. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, 
the increases take effect at the beginning of the next terms of office. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Cecil County expenditures increase by at least $4,800 in FY 2027 and by at 
least $8,200 in FY 2028 and beyond. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The current salary for an Orphan’s Court judge in Cecil County is $8,750 
annually. The allowance for traveling expenses for an Orphan’s Court judge in  
Cecil County is $1,500 annually and paid out quarterly. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Cecil County expenditures increase by a minimum of $4,813 in 
fiscal 2027 and by at least $8,250 for fiscal 2028 and beyond. This estimate reflects the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 713/ Page 2 
minimum salary (and expense allowance) amounts that may authorized and the next terms 
of office beginning December 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 835 (Cecil County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Cecil County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2