START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 732 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 732 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore County Code of Public Local Laws - 2025 Edition - Legalization 
 
 
This bill legalizes the 2025 Edition of the Baltimore County Code of Public Local Laws 
and any supplement to it that contains laws enacted by the General Assembly. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County can likely handle publication costs with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore County Code is legalized approximately every ten years. 
Chapter 159 of 2015 legalized the 2015 Edition of the Baltimore County Code,  
Chapter 251 of 2004 legalized the 2003 Edition of the Baltimore County Code, and  
Chapter 6 of 1990 legalized the 1988 Edition of the Baltimore County Code. 
 
Baltimore County is 1 of 11 counties that operates under the charter form of government. 
Charter counties have express powers delegated to them by the General Assembly.  
Charter counties do not need to seek General Assembly approval for changes to local laws 
except laws regarding alcoholic beverages, courts, criminal law, education, campaign 
finance regulation, gambling, and taxation exclusive of property taxes. However, legalizing 
changes enacted by the General Assembly to the new edition of the county code and any 
supplement must receive approval of the General Assembly. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 732/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  SB 472 (Senator Hettleman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2