START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 727 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 727 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class C (Veterans' Organization) 
Licenses - Membership 
 
 
This bill alters the criteria for a Class C (veterans’ organization) license in 
Anne Arundel County to include the local unit of a nationwide nonprofit organization or 
club that is composed only of members who served in the uniformed services, rather than 
the armed forces, thereby incorporating veterans’ organizations with members who served 
in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Public Health 
Service (PHS). The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Anne Arundel County finances and 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Uniformed services,” as defined by 37 U.S.C. § 101, refers to the Army, 
Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space Force, Coast Guard, NOAA, and PHS. 
 
Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have boards of 
license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses in their 
jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses are 
Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 727/ Page 2 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner. Class C licenses authorize the sale of alcohol to 
members and guests at a club, for on-site consumption only. 
 
Class C (veterans’ organization) licenses can be issued by the Anne Arundel County Board 
of License Commissioners only to a local unit of a nationwide nonprofit organization or 
club that (1) is composed only of veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States in a 
war in which the United States has been engaged; (2) has a charter from a national veterans’ 
organization; (3) has a membership of at least 100 individuals and dues of at least  
$5 per year per individual; and (4) operates for its members and meets in a clubhouse 
principally used by its members. 
 
The annual license fee for a Class C (veterans’ organization) license in 
Anne Arundel County is $300. 
 
Chapters 253 and 254 of 2025 revised the definitions of several military terms throughout 
the Code of Maryland and replaced references to the armed forces with uniformed services 
to incorporate those who served in PHS and NOAA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 76 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2