START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 773 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 773 
(Delegate Hornberger, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Historic Motor Vehicles and Street Rod Vehicles - Minimum Age 
 
   
This bill establishes that a motor vehicle must be at least 30 years old to be eligible for 
registration as a Class L (historic) vehicle; accordingly, it repeals the current statutory 
requirement that limits Class L (historic) registrations to vehicles with a model year of 
1999 or earlier. The bill also requires that a motor vehicle be at least 40 years old (rather 
than 25) to be eligible for registration as a Class N (street rod) vehicle. The bill must be 
construed to apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have 
any effect on or application to any historic motor vehicle or street rod registered 
before the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues (including Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues) 
annually increase from FY 2027 through 2029 and annually decrease beginning in 
FY 2030, as discussed below. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the local finances or operations 
of any individual local jurisdiction, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In applying for a registration of a historic or street rod motor vehicle, the 
owner must certify that the vehicle for which the application is made will be maintained 
only for use in exhibitions, club activities, parades, tours, and occasional transportation. 
The vehicle may not be used for purposes such as general daily transportation. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 773/ Page 2 
The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 limited the definition of 
“historic motor vehicle” to model year 1999 (or earlier) vehicles, repealing the previous 
requirement that a motor vehicle be at least 20 years old. Accordingly, any Class L 
(historic) vehicles with a model year of 2000 or later lost eligibility for registration as a 
historic vehicle and, instead, must register by their corresponding class and weight 
effective July 1, 2025. Pursuant to Section 22 of the BRFA of 2025, the revenue increases 
attributable to this change must remain allocated within the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT). Otherwise, a portion of the revenues collected from motor vehicle 
registrations is provided to local governments from the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle 
Revenue Account (GMVRA) through capital transportation grants. 
 
A Class N (street rod) vehicle is a vehicle that is at least 25 years old and has been 
substantially altered from the manufacturer’s original design. 
 
Most vehicle classes may register for one or two years. Registration fees vary based on a 
vehicle’s characteristics (e.g., class and weight, whether the vehicle is an electric drive 
vehicle, etc.) and the fees can be found on the Motor Vehicle Administration’s (MVA) 
website. The annual registration fee for a Class L (historic) vehicle is $55.50; for a  
Class N (street rod) vehicle, the annual registration fee is $55.00. 
 
Registration fees for most vehicle classes (but not Class L or Class N) also include a yearly 
$40.00 surcharge, primarily for the Maryland Emergency Management System Operations 
Fund (as much as $24.50). A portion of that surcharge ($6.50) is reserved for the Maryland 
Trauma Physician Services Fund , and at least $9.00 from each surcharge must be allocated 
to the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center. 
 
State Revenues:  Because the 30-year period for Class L (historic) vehicles differs from 
the existing 1999 (or earlier) model year requirement, some vehicles initially lose eligibility 
for a Class L (historic) registration once the bill takes effect. Although some vehicles lose 
eligibility initially compared to current law, in later years, the number of eligible vehicles 
increases compared to current law, as the static 1999 model year requirement no longer 
applies. For Class N (street rod) vehicles, the number of vehicles eligible decreases 
compared to current law, but the overall change is minimal each year (between 
approximately 500 and 600 vehicles are affected each year). 
 
As a result of these changes, on net, TTF revenues are anticipated to annually increase from 
fiscal 2027 through 2029 and annually decrease beginning in fiscal 2030. A preliminary 
analysis by MVA estimates that the bill’s changes may increase TTF revenues by 
approximately $300,000 in fiscal 2027, $170,000 in fiscal 2028, and $29,000 in fiscal 2029 
and then decrease TTF revenues by approximately $109,000 in fiscal 2030 and 
$247,000 in fiscal 2031; MVA advises that these figures are based on the historically low 
numbers of registered vehicles for the affected model years. TTF revenues are anticipated 
to continue to decrease, at an increasing rate, in future fiscal years as well. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 773/ Page 3 
As noted above, these vehicles are exempt from the $40.00 emergency medical services 
surcharge. Therefore, as the population of vehicles eligible for Class L (historic) or  
Class N (street rod) registrations changes, surcharge revenues are also affected in the same 
manner as TTF revenues. Based on MVA’s preliminary analysis, emergency medical 
services surcharge revenues may increase by approximately $242,000 in fiscal 2027 but 
decrease by approximately $196,000 by fiscal 2031. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Generally, a portion of the revenues from motor vehicle registration 
fees accrues to GMVRA and is provided to local governments through capital 
transportation grants. However, as noted above, the BRFA of 2025 limited eligibility for 
Class L (historic) vehicles to model year 1999 and earlier model years (instead of the 
previous requirement that a motor vehicle be at least 20 years old) and specified that the 
revenue increases attributable to that change had to remain within MDOT. Accordingly, 
local governments do not share in the ongoing higher revenues attributable to the change 
under current law. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that, while not clear, the bill’s modification 
to the BRFA’s eligibility provision likely also negates the BRFA’s requirement that the 
increase in revenues attributable to that provision remain within MDOT. As a result of this 
change, and because the registration fee for a Class N (street rod) vehicle accrues to 
GMVRA under current law and the bill, revenues provided to local governments through 
GMVRA may be minimally affected. However, as GMVRA revenues are distributed 
among all local jurisdictions in the State, the bill’s impact on any one individual local 
jurisdiction is likely negligible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
caw/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3