START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 772 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 772 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Behavioral Health Rate Methodology Modernization - Workgroup Establishment 
and Study 
 
 
This bill alters the behavioral health rate-setting study required under Chapters 571 and 
572 of 2017, by requiring the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to conduct the study 
by June 30, 2028, as specified. The bill also establishes the Workgroup on Behavioral 
Health Rate Methodology Modernization in the Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC) to develop transparent, cost-based reimbursement methodologies for certified 
community behavioral health clinics (CCBHCs), outpatient mental health centers, and 
independent outpatient providers. A member of the workgroup may not receive 
compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The bill also outlines reporting 
requirements for the workgroup. The bill does not (1) require an immediate rate increase; 
(2) mandate an appropriation; or (3) create a fiscal obligation in the absence of subsequent 
legislative or budgetary action. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and the workgroup 
terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $181,700 in FY 2027 and 
$158,500 in FY 2028, and MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $210,300 in 
FY 2027 and $197,600 in FY 2028 for contractual staff and services to support the rate 
study and workgroup, respectively; additional costs may be incurred in the out-years, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
181,700 
158,500 
0 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
210,300 
197,600 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($392,000) 
($356,100) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 772/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Workgroup on Behavioral Health Rate Methodology Modernization 
 
The bill establishes the workgroup, which consists of members of the General Assembly, 
representatives from MDH, and individuals working in behavioral health care, among 
others. The Presiding Officers must jointly designate one legislative member and one 
provider member to serve as co-chairs. 
 
MHCC, in consultation with MDH, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS), and the 
Community Behavioral Health Association of Maryland, must provide staff for the 
workgroup. 
 
The workgroup must: 
 
 
use the federally required CCBHC cost study as the baseline dataset for evaluating 
outpatient mental health service costs in the State; 
 
review and analyze cost drivers for outpatient behavioral health, including 
(1) staffing mix and workforce models; (2) medical director and clinical supervision 
requirements; (3) contractor versus salaried structures; (4) geographic and 
volume variation; (5) compliance with State and federal regulatory requirements; 
(6) differentiation of costs between nonprofit and for-profit organizations; (7) ratio 
of services delivered by telehealth; and (8) size and volume of group-based services; 
 
approve methodologies for analyzing outpatient costs and MDH’s completion of the 
required rate study that include (1) cost reporting structures; (2) sampling 
methodologies that exclude all programs founded after 2020; (3) allocation of 
overhead and administrative costs; (4) differentiation of the treatment of 
Medicaid vs. non-Medicaid provider revenues; and (5) modeling approaches used 
to estimate sustainable reimbursement rates; 
 
evaluate reimbursement methodologies used in other states and federal 
demonstration programs; 
 
develop at least one cost-based, rate-setting methodology applicable to CCBHCs, 
outpatient mental health centers, and independent outpatient providers that includes 
(1) re-evaluating and rebasing reimbursement rates under the CCBHC payment 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 772/ Page 3 
model in demonstration year two and every three years thereafter; (2) assumptions, 
cost-model components, and inflationary adjustments; and (3) integration of data 
and analyses produced under the required rate study, to the extent data and analyses 
are available; 
 
build on all previously completed and ongoing cost-reporting and analytical work 
related to setting community provider rates for community-based behavioral health 
services in developing the aforementioned methodologies, including (to the extent 
available) the required rate study, the CCBHC cost and rate study required by the 
2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report, and cost reporting tools and submission review 
processes discussed below; 
 
ensure all recommended methodologies comply with both federal Medicaid 
financing rules and the Medicaid Upper Payment Limit and provide 
recommendations on strategies to implement the recommended methodologies 
while remaining compliant with federal requirements; 
 
identify any regulatory or statutory barriers to statewide implementation of cost-
based, rate-setting methodologies; and 
 
propose options for phased statewide implementation of cost-based, rate-setting 
methodologies when fiscal conditions allow. 
 
By June 1, 2027, the workgroup must submit an interim report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. By December 1, 2027, the workgroup must submit a final report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly that includes (1) recommended rate-setting 
methodologies; (2) assumption and cost-model components; (3) options for phased 
implementation; (4) estimated fiscal considerations; and (5) any recommended statutory or 
regulatory changes. 
 
Rate Study 
 
Chapters 571 and 572 of 2017 require the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) and 
the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) to jointly (1) conduct an independent, 
cost-driven, rate-setting study to set community provider rates for community-based 
behavioral health services; (2) develop and implement a payment system incorporating the 
findings of the study, including projected costs of implementation and recommendations 
to address potential funding shortfalls; and (3) consult with stakeholders in conducting the 
rate study and developing the payment system. BHA was required to complete the rate 
study by September 30, 2019, and adopt regulations to implement the payment system as 
developed. 
 
While the study has not yet occurred, the Behavioral Health System of Care Optimization 
and Integration Workgroup had discussions in 2019 and 2020 about requirements for the 
study, including stakeholder feedback. Based on the feedback, MDH decided to engage in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 772/ Page 4 
a two-phase process for the study. The first phase involves designing a cost report template 
for providers to use, while the second phase involves analyzing the data and conducting 
the study. 
 
The bill alters the required rate study by requiring MDH, by June 30, 2028, to (1) conduct 
the required independent rate-setting study; (2) review and implement the 
recommendations of the Workgroup on Behavioral Health Rate Methodology 
Modernization; and (3) administer cost-reporting tools and oversee cost-report submissions 
required to support the rate study. MHCC must assist MDH with the facilitation of the 
rate-setting study, including by (1) consulting with stakeholders, including community 
providers and individuals receiving services and (2) providing analytical support and 
technical assistance. 
 
Under the bill, BHA and MCPA must still jointly (1) develop and implement a payment 
system incorporating the findings of the rate-setting study and (2) consult with 
stakeholders, including community providers and individuals receiving services, in 
developing the payment system. 
 
The bill requires the Secretary of Health (or the Secretary’s designee) to designate a 
representative of BHA to serve as a technical liaison between MDH and MHCC. The 
technical liaison must (1) provide technical input for the completion of the rate-setting 
study regarding Medicaid policy, behavioral health reimbursement structures, and existing 
data sources; (2) ensure continuity between MDH’s work regarding the completion of the 
study and MHCC’s facilitation of the workgroup; and (3) coordinate MHCC’s access to 
existing analytical work or study preparation that has been completed by MDH. The liaison 
must be a member of the workgroup. 
 
The bill replaces obsolete reporting requirements for MDH with new reporting 
requirements for MHCC, as follows: 
 
 
By January 1, 2028, MHCC must submit an interim report to the Governor and 
General Assembly on (1) the delivery system through which community-based 
behavioral health services should be provided; (2) the status of the implementation 
of workgroup recommendations; and (3) any preliminary recommendations 
regarding the payment system; and 
 
By December 1, 2028, and annually thereafter, MHCC must submit a report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on the impact of the rate adjustments and the 
payment system, including the impact on (1) the wages and salaries paid and the 
benefits provided to direct care staff and licensed clinicians employed by 
community providers; (2) the tenure and turnover of direct care staff and licensed 
clinicians employed by community providers; and (3) the ability of community 
providers to recruit qualified direct care staff and licensed clinicians. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 772/ Page 5 
Under current law, MDH may require a community provider to submit information 
necessary for the completion of the required report. The bill specifies that MHCC may 
require the submission of information. 
 
Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics  
 
Chapter 275 of 2023 requires MDH to apply for grant funds related to CCBHCs from the 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) for fiscal 2025 
and 2026.  
 
SAMHSA awards demonstration funding to states that have completed the planning grant 
and are prepared to implement the CCBHC model. Under the demonstration,  
Medicaid-eligible services provided at a CCBHC receive an enhanced federal match, and 
clinics are paid through a prospective payment system (PPS), which provides clinics with 
an average rate based on the estimated daily or monthly cost of operating the facility, 
regardless of the volume or type of service provided. This differs from a fee-for-service 
model, wherein Medicaid pays providers for each service given to a patient. 
 
The federal CCBHC model is designed to ensure access to high-quality and comprehensive 
behavioral health care. CCBHCs are required to serve anyone seeking wraparound 
behavioral health care services, including care for mental health or substance use, 
regardless of their ability to pay, place of residence, or age. 
 
Participating clinics must be certified by the State and meet specific State and federal 
criteria related to staffing adequacy, service accessibility, care coordination, quality and 
outcomes reporting, and organizational governance. CCBHCs must also provide nine core 
services either directly or through designated collaborating organizations:  (1) crisis 
services 24 hours a day, seven days a week; (2) treatment planning; (3) screening, 
assessment, diagnosis, and risk assessment; (4) outpatient mental health and substance use 
services; (5) targeted case management; (6) outpatient primary care screening and 
monitoring; (7) community-based mental health care for veterans; (8) peer, family support, 
and counselor services; and (9) psychiatric rehabilitation services. CCBHCs also provide 
care coordination and may offer additional services depending on the needs of the service 
area.  
 
There are currently five clinics in Maryland that operate under the CCBHC model; 
however, because Maryland is not currently participating in the demonstration program, 
these clinics are not able to use PPS, nor qualify for enhanced match. All five offer the 
required services and have received grant funding from SAMHSA to bridge the costs of 
providing CCBHC services. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 772/ Page 6 
Outpatient Mental Health Centers 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.63.03.05), to be licensed, an outpatient mental 
health center must (1) provide regularly scheduled outpatient mental health treatment 
services in a community-based setting; (2) provide individual, group, and family therapy 
and medication management; (3) employ a medical director who is a psychiatrist, has 
overall responsibility for clinical services, and is on-site for at least 20 hours per week; and 
(4) employ multidisciplinary clinical treatment staff who is authorized to provide services. 
Chapters 274 and 275 and Chapters 481 and 482 of 2019 required updates to regulations 
to allow, respectively, (1) a medical director to be considered on-site through telehealth 
and (2) a psychiatric nurse practitioner to serve as medical director of an outpatient facility. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH expenditures (general and special funds) increase by a total of 
$391,974 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. MHCC 
requires one additional staff (using a vacant position) and a contractual vendor to conduct 
analysis and draft reports for the workgroup, and BHA requires two additional staff to 
conduct the rate study. This estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, a contractual vendor, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$262,469 
Contractual Services 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    29,505 
Total FY 2027 Total State Expenditures 
$391,974 
 
These positions are all assumed to be contractual and terminate at the end of fiscal 2028, 
along with the termination of the workgroup and the deadline for the rate study. Further 
details of each set of costs are outlined below. 
 
Although the rate study was initially required by Chapters 571 and 572 of 2017, and DLS 
estimated that MDH would require contractual services and one full-time policy analyst to 
coordinate data collection, because the initial rate study has not been conducted, these are 
assumed to be all new costs. 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission – Workgroup Staff and Annual Reporting 
 
MHCC advises that it requires additional staff to lead the data analysis, develop options 
and recommendations, and draft reports for the workgroup. MHCC can likely use an 
existing, vacant contractual position; however, funding is required for the position and 
related costs. Thus, MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $210,275 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one contractual methodologist (using MHCC’s vacant position) to lead data analysis 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 772/ Page 7 
efforts, write reports, and complete any other tasks related to the workgroup. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, as well as 
$100,000 in annual contractual services for cost-based reimbursement analytic research 
and actuarial and fiscal analysis. 
 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$100,440 
Contractual Services 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
      9,835 
Total FY 2027 MHCC Special Fund Expenditures 
$210,275 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Costs are assumed to terminate 
at the end of fiscal 2028 along with termination of the workgroup; however, as MHCC 
must continue to report annually, MHCC advises it may incur additional costs. If so, rather 
than terminate, the contractual position may be converted to a regular position beginning 
in fiscal 2029. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). 
 
Behavioral Health Administration and Rate Study Staff 
 
BHA advises that it requires two additional staff to conduct the rate study. Thus, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $181,699 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s 
July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual data 
analyst and one contractual health policy analyst to conduct the required rate study, review 
and implement workgroup recommendations, and administer and oversee cost reports. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$162,029 
Operating Expenses 
    19,670 
Total FY 2027 BHA General Fund Expenditures 
$181,699 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Costs terminate at the end of 
fiscal 2028 upon the deadline to complete the rate study. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and the ACA. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 772/ Page 8 
Additional Comments:  MDH applied for and was awarded nearly $1.0 million in 
CCBHC planning grant funding in fiscal 2025 to determine how to implement the CCBHC 
program in the State. The current planning grant received a no-cost extension from 
SAMHSA and will expire in December 2026. MDH has indicated that it plans to apply for 
the four-year CCBHC demonstration grant in April 2026, but the Budget Reconciliation 
and Financing Act of 2026 includes a provision that would authorize, rather than require, 
MDH to apply for the grant and move the application date from fiscal 2026 to fiscal 2029.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Correction - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8