START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 776 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 776 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Juvenile Law - Child in Need of Supervision - Mandatory Petition (NyKayla 
Strawder Memorial Act) 
 
   
This bill establishes that if a law enforcement officer alleges the commission of an act by 
a child younger than age 13 that results in the death of a victim, the law enforcement officer 
must forward the complaint to the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) for appropriate 
action. If a DJS intake officer receives such a complaint, the intake officer must file a 
petition alleging that the child is in need of supervision.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finance and operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Juvenile Court Jurisdiction  
 
In general, the juvenile court has jurisdiction over children, who are alleged to be 
delinquent, in need of supervision (CINS), or who have received a citation for specified 
violations. The juvenile court also has jurisdiction over peace order proceedings in which 
the respondent is a child. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 776/ Page 2 
The juvenile court has jurisdiction over a child who is at least age 10 and is alleged to have 
committed an act that would, if committed by an adult, be (1) a “crime of violence ” (as 
defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article); (2) specified crimes involving handguns 
and firearms; (3) aggravated cruelty to animals; or (4) third-degree sexual offense. Outside 
of these circumstances, the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over a child younger 
than age 13 for purposes of a delinquency proceeding, and such a child may not be charged 
with a crime. A child of any age may be adjudicated a CINS and subject to the juvenile 
court’s jurisdiction under applicable provisions. 
 
The juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over (1) a child at least age 14 alleged to have 
committed an act which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime punishable by life 
imprisonment; (2) a child at least age 16 alleged to have violated specified traffic or boating 
laws; (3) a child at least age 16 alleged to have committed specified crimes (violent crimes, 
firearms crimes, etc.,); or (4) a child who previously has been convicted as an adult of a 
felony and is subsequently alleged to have committed an act that would be a felony if 
committed by an adult. These cases are tried in adult criminal court. 
 
Intake in Juvenile Cases  
 
Intake occurs when a complaint is filed by a police officer or other person or agency having 
knowledge of facts that may cause a child to be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile 
court. Within 15 business days after a complaint is filed, a DJS intake officer is required to 
make an inquiry to determine whether the juvenile court has jurisdiction and whether 
judicial action is in the best interests of the public or the child. The intake officer may make 
any of the following decisions:  (1) deny authorization to file a petition or a peace order 
request or both in the juvenile court; (2) propose an informal adjustment of the matter; or 
(3) authorize the filing of a petition or a peace order request or both in the juvenile court. 
However, if a law enforcement officer requests an intake officer to detain a child prior to a 
hearing and the intake officer does not authorize detention of the child, the intake officer 
must make an inquiry within 2 business days. 
 
Petitions alleging delinquency are prepared and filed by the State’s Attorney. A petition 
alleging delinquency must be filed within 30 days of a referral from an intake officer, unless 
that time is extended by the court for good cause shown. Petitions alleging that a child is 
in need of supervision are filed by the intake officer.  
 
Forwarding Complaints to the State’s Attorney for Consideration for Prosecution 
 
However, if a complaint is filed that alleges the commission of certain handgun or firearms 
offenses or acts that would be felonies if committed by an adult, the intake officer must 
immediately forward the complaint and case file to the State’s Attorney for additional 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 776/ Page 3 
review if the intake officer denies authorization to file a petition or proposes an informal 
adjustment.   
 
If the complaint is forwarded to the State’s Attorney, the State’s Attorney must make a 
preliminary review as to whether the court has jurisdiction and whether judicial action is 
in the best interests of the public or the child. After the preliminary review, and within 
30 days of the State’s Attorney’s receipt of the complaint (unless the court extends the 
time), the State’s Attorney must file a petition or a peace order request or both; refer the 
complaint to the DJS for informal disposition; or dismiss the complaint. 
 
Denial of Authorization to File a Petition or Peace Order Request  
 
The intake officer may deny authorization to file a petition or a peace order request in the 
juvenile court if the matter is not within the jurisdiction of the juvenile court or otherwise 
lacks legal sufficiency. If the intake officer determines that the juvenile court does have 
jurisdiction over the matter, but that further action by DJS or the court is not appropriate, 
the intake officer may deny authorization to file a petition or peace order request and 
resolve the case at intake. 
 
The victim, the arresting police officer, or the person or agency that filed the complaint or 
caused it to be filed may appeal a denial of authorization to file a petition for delinquency 
to the State’s Attorney. If authorization to file a peace order request or a petition alleging 
that a child in need of supervision is denied, the person or agency that filed the complaint 
or caused it to be filed may submit the denial for review by the DJS area director for the 
area in which the complaint was filed. 
 
Proposal of Informal Adjustment 
 
An intake officer may propose an informal adjustment if, based on the complaint and the 
inquiry, the officer concludes that a juvenile court has jurisdiction but that an informal 
adjustment, rather than judicial action, is in the best interests of the public and the child. 
The intake officer must propose an informal adjustment by informing the victim, the child, 
and the child’s parent or guardian of the nature of the complaint, the objectives of the 
adjustment process, and the conditions and procedures under which it will be conducted. 
The intake officer may not proceed with an informal adjustment unless the child and the 
child’s parent or guardian consent to the informal adjustment procedure. However, an 
intake officer may proceed with an informal adjustment without informing the victim if the 
intake officer has made reasonable efforts to contact the victim. During an informal 
adjustment process, the child is subject to such supervision as the intake officer deems 
appropriate. The process may not exceed 90 days unless the time is extended by the court 
or the intake officer determines that additional time is necessary for the child to complete 
a program that is part of the informal adjustment process. If, at any time before the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 776/ Page 4 
completion of an agreed upon informal adjustment, the intake officer believes that it cannot 
be completed successfully, the intake officer must either authorize the filing of a petition 
and/or a peace order request or deny authorization to file a petition and/or a peace order 
request. If the intake officer denies authorization to file a petition and/or peace order 
request, the intake officer must immediately forward the complaint and entire intake case 
file to the State’s Attorney. 
 
Informal adjustment may include (1) referrals to other agencies; (2) completion of 
community service; (3) individual or family counseling; (4) substance abuse treatment;  
(5) restitution; and (6) other types of nonjudicial intervention.  
 
Authorization to File a Petition or Peace Order Request  
 
If the intake officer determines that the juvenile court has jurisdiction over the matter and 
that judicial action is in the best interests of the public or the child, the intake officer may 
authorize the filing of a petition or a peace order request or both in the juvenile court. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to DJS’s FY 2025 Data Resource Guide, of the  
466 complaints in fiscal 2025 involving children younger than age 13, 63.5% were resolved 
at intake, 11.4% were referred for informal adjustment, and 25.1% resulted in a formalized 
petition. Child in Need of Supervision cases represented 4.3% of the 24,335 total intake 
charges received by DJS during fiscal 2025.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1504 of 2025; SB 2 of 2024; and SB 15 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4