START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 771 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 771 
(Delegate Miller, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Human Trafficking Awareness Training 
 
 
This bill requires each health occupations board to (1) allow an applicant for license or 
certification renewal to receive continuing education credits for completing an approved 
human trafficking awareness training program and (2) conduct outreach to make 
individuals regulated by the board aware of human trafficking awareness training options, 
including by providing information in general board communications and on the board’s 
website. By July 1, 2026, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in collaboration and 
consultation with required stakeholders, must approve the required training program. By 
January 1, 2027, each health occupations board must adopt regulations necessary to carry 
out the bill. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can collaborate with stakeholders to approve a training program, and 
the health occupations boards can promulgate regulations and conduct outreach, with 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Local university” means a public or private institution of higher 
education in the State with a public health, law, or social work program. “Local university” 
includes a program within an institution of higher education, such as the University of 
Maryland SAFE Center for Human Trafficking Survivors.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 771/ Page 2 
A training program for which an applicant may receive continuing education credits under 
the bill must: 
 
 
be approved by MDH in collaboration with a local university and in consultation 
with the Maryland Human Trafficking Task Force (MHTTF) and organizations that 
provide direct services to human trafficking survivors; 
 
be at least one hour in duration; 
 
be readily accessible and provided to an individual free of charge; and 
 
include instruction on:  (1) the definitions and forms of sex and labor trafficking 
under federal and State law; (2) an understanding of the trauma-informed care 
model; (3) the physical, behavioral, and emotional indicators of human trafficking, 
particularly those presenting in a health care setting; (4) appropriate screening 
protocols and documentation methods; (5) mandatory reporting requirements under 
State law and established protocols for reporting suspected cases of human 
trafficking to the appropriate authorities, including the National Human Trafficking 
Hotline; and (6) available federal, State, and local resources and services for 
survivors of human trafficking.  
 
Current Law:  Twenty health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating 
various health professions in Maryland. With specified exceptions, an individual must be 
licensed, certified, registered, or permitted by the respective board before the individual 
may practice in the State. Licensure, certification, registration, and permit requirements 
vary by profession but typically require, among other things, specified education and 
experience, passage of a national and/or State examination, and a criminal history records 
check. Several boards require continuing education as a condition of license renewal.  
 
Human Trafficking Awareness Training  
 
Numerous government entities and licensed businesses in the State are required to provide, 
approve, and/or receive training on the identification and reporting of human trafficking. 
For example:  
 
 
the Maryland State Department of Education must collaborate with MDH to provide 
awareness and training for Directors of Student Services in local education agencies 
on human trafficking, including strategies for the prevention of trafficking of 
children;  
 
a commercial driver’s license training school is required to include, as part of its 
curriculum, education and training on the recognition, prevention, and effective 
reporting of human trafficking; 
 
each innkeeper must provide a new employee with an annual training for the 
accurate and prompt identification and reporting of suspected human trafficking 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 771/ Page 3 
(any such training program must be approved by the Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy and the Maryland Department of Labor); and  
 
Chapter 437 of 2025 requires the Maryland Department of Transportation to 
develop or identify and implement a human trafficking awareness training program 
and administer the training program to specified employees and contractors. 
 
Additional Comments:  The University of Maryland SAFE Center for Human Trafficking 
Survivors, in collaboration with the Maryland Hospital Association, developed Guidelines 
for Healthcare Providers to help medical professionals identify and support survivors of 
human trafficking in hospitals.  
 
MHTTF is the State’s primary organization that works to prevent trafficking, protect 
victims by providing them with the services they need, prosecute traffickers, and partner 
with a variety of organizations to eradicate human trafficking from Maryland’s 
communities. MHTTF’s website compiles several human trafficking webinars. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3