START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 784 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 784 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Aquaculture - Placement of Shellfish, Bags, Nets, and Structures on Submerged 
Aquatic Vegetation - Extension 
 
 
This bill extends – from June 30, 2027, to June 30, 2030 – the termination date of  
Chapter 238 of 2019 (as amended by Chapter 113 of 2024), which allows an aquaculture 
leaseholder to place shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on submerged aquatic vegetation 
(SAV) with specified prior written approval from the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR). The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 238 of 2019 (as amended by Chapter 113 of 2024) allows an 
aquaculture leaseholder to place shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on SAV with prior 
written approval from DNR. In approving the placement of shellfish, bags, nets, or 
structures on SAV, DNR (1) may not authorize harvesting by dredge in areas where SAV 
is present; (2) must authorize for water column leases the placement of shellfish, bags, nets, 
or structures in at least 10% of the area where SAV is present; and (3) must authorize 
harvest by diving in areas on any submerged land lease where SAV is present. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 784/ Page 2 
Chapter 113 of 2024 extended the termination date of Chapter 238 of 2019, from  
June 30, 2024, to June 30, 2027. 
 
Chapter 113 also contains a requirement that DNR report – by June 1, 2025, and each 
June 1 of the following two years – on (1) specified impacts of allowing leaseholders to 
place shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on SAV and (2) specified related data. (The bill 
does not extend the reporting requirement.) 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses engaged in shellfish aquaculture may 
meaningfully benefit from extending Chapter 238 (as amended by Chapter 113). DNR 
indicates that the full extent of the law’s benefits to the industry have not been evaluated 
to date because authorized placement of shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on SAV has only 
been implemented for a few aquaculture leases. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
Third Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 784/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Aquaculture - Placement of Shellfish, Bags, Nets, and Structures on 
Submerged Aquatic Vegetation - Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 784 
 
PREPARED BY:  Sarah Widman 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
           WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
If the process can be expanded over time to include more leases, there could be a greater 
positive economic impact on the industry. For individual leases, this provides a meaningful 
positive economic impact as it allows the department to consider whether aquaculture 
activities should be allowed in these areas or not, and if so, maximize aquaculture working 
areas while still protecting SAV beds. 

END OF PAGE 3