START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 753 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 753 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Tax Sales - Homeowner Protections - Revisions 
 
 
This bill makes several changes related to tax sales:  (1) establishing protection from a tax 
sale for a homeowner who has a terminal illness or medical hardship, and requiring that 
such individuals be given priority under the Homeowner Protection Program (HPP);  
(2) modifying one of the eligibility criteria for HPP – the upper limit for the assessed value 
of a person’s dwelling (beyond which a person is not eligible for HPP) – by increasing the 
upper limit from $300,000 to $450,000; and (3) requiring the State Tax Sale Ombudsman 
to develop a process to allow a homeowner to designate a family member or another 
representative of the homeowner to communicate and work with the ombudsman on their 
behalf, including under HPP. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect the level of State funding appropriated to HPP; 
however, the bill’s expansion of the eligibility criteria for the program may allow for 
appropriated funding to be more fully expended for the purposes of the program, resulting 
in increased special fund expenditures from the fund beginning in FY 2027, to assist 
homeowners, and increased special fund revenues in future years from homeowner 
repayments. State finances are not expected to otherwise be materially affected by the bill. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may be affected, potentially only minimally, 
beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 753/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman  
 
 
Current Law 
 
The State Tax Sale Ombudsman must (1) assist homeowners to understand the process for 
collection of delinquent taxes; (2) actively assist homeowners to apply for tax credits, 
discount programs, and other public benefits that may assist the homeowners to pay 
delinquent taxes and improve their financial situation; (3) refer homeowners to legal 
services, housing counseling, and other social services that may assist the homeowners to 
pay delinquent taxes and improve their financial situation; (4) maintain a toll-free 
telephone number that a homeowner may call to obtain individualized personal assistance 
with delinquent taxes; and (5) maintain a website that functions as a clearinghouse for 
information concerning the process for collection of delinquent taxes and services and 
programs available to assist homeowners.  
 
 
The Bill 
 
The bill requires the ombudsman to also develop a process to allow a homeowner to 
designate a family member or another representative of the homeowner to communicate 
and work with the ombudsman on the homeowner’s behalf. 
 
Tax Sales and Withholding of Properties from Sale  
 
 
Current Law 
 
Subject to certain exceptions, a county tax collector must sell, through the tax sale process 
established in statute, at the time required by local law, all property in the county on which 
tax is in arrears. When a property in a municipality is delinquent in the payment of 
municipal taxes or charges levied against the property, the county collector must be notified 
of the unpaid taxes or charges. If the county collector does not begin the tax sale process 
with respect to the unpaid taxes or charges within 30 days of receiving the notice, the 
municipal collector may use the tax sale process to collect the unpaid taxes or charges, at 
any time after the 30-day period expires, to the same extent available to county collectors. 
 
There are various circumstances in which a property may or is required to be withheld from 
sale, including the following:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 753/ Page 3 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality may withhold from sale  
owner-occupied residential property or residential property occupied by an heir of 
a deceased owner that meets objective criteria established by the governing body of 
the county or municipality.  
 
A tax collector is required to withhold from sale owner-occupied residential 
property and residential property occupied by an heir of a deceased owner when the 
total taxes on the property, including interest and penalties, amount to less than 
$1,000.  
 
A tax collector may withhold from sale any nonowner-occupied residential property 
when the total taxes on the property, including interest and penalties, amount to less 
than $750.  
 
The Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county 
or municipality may withhold from sale a dwelling owned by a homeowner or 
occupied by an heir of a deceased homeowner who is low-income, at least 65 years 
old, or disabled if the homeowner or heir meets eligibility criteria established by the 
county or municipality. 
 
A tax collector must withhold from sale the dwelling of a homeowner who is 
enrolled in HPP.  
 
 
The Bill 
 
The bill adds a circumstance in which a property must be withheld from sale, by requiring 
the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county to 
withhold from sale the dwelling of a homeowner who has a terminal illness or medical 
hardship as documented by a physician who has treated or examined the homeowner. The 
Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county may adopt 
additional methods for establishing a terminal illness or medical hardship.  
 
Homeowner Protection Program  
 
 
Current Law 
 
Chapter 382 of 2021 established HPP, administered by the State Tax Sale Ombudsman, 
and the Homeowner Protection Fund to support the program. The program diverts 
vulnerable homeowners from the private tax lien sale process into an alternative  
program – through the purchase of a homeowners’ lien, whether before or after the lien is 
sold at a tax sale – in order to (1) minimize tax collection costs to homeowners; (2) assist 
homeowners to pay their taxes; and (3) allow homeowners to remain in their homes. 
 
Pursuant to changes made under Chapter 647 of 2025, (1) the Governor must annually 
appropriate $250,000 to the fund and (2) county governments must collectively pay 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 753/ Page 4 
$500,000 to the fund each fiscal year (allocated proportionally among the counties based 
on the number of real property accounts in a county). 
 
To be eligible for the program, a homeowner must (1) reside in a dwelling that has an 
assessed value of $300,000 or less and (2) have a combined income of $60,000 or less. The 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) may establish additional eligibility 
criteria for enrollment in the program. 
 
SDAT must establish, by regulation, a process to give priority for enrollment in the 
program to homeowners who are (1) at least 60 years old or (2) currently receiving 
disability benefits from the federal Social Security Disability Insurance program or the 
federal Supplemental Security Income program.  
 
 
The Bill 
 
The bill expands the assessed value eligibility criteria, to allow a homeowner to be eligible 
if they reside in a dwelling that has an assessed value of $450,000 or less.  
 
The bill adds to the above-mentioned priorities for enrollment in the program by also 
requiring that priority be given to homeowners who are experiencing a documented 
terminal illness or medical hardship.  
 
The bill also requires the State Tax Sale Ombudsman to develop a process to allow a 
homeowner enrolled in the program to designate a family member or another representative 
of the homeowner to communicate and work with the ombudsman on the homeowner’s 
behalf. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues may be delayed and/or reduced, 
beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent that properties of homeowners who have a terminal 
illness or medical hardship are withheld from tax sale under the bill’s authority that would 
not otherwise have been withheld from sale under existing authority, affecting the timing 
and amount of local government tax and other revenues collected from those properties. 
Any delay or reduction in revenues, however, may only be minimal, especially if such 
homeowners enroll in HPP – facilitated by the priority under HPP established by the bill 
and the ability for a homeowner to communicate with the State Tax Sale Ombudsman 
through a representative – in which case SDAT pays the county or municipality for the tax 
lien. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that would otherwise generate revenue from tax 
sales that no longer occur, due to the bill’s required withholding of properties from tax sale 
and/or expansion of the eligibility criteria for HPP, may be meaningfully affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 753/ Page 5 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on SDAT’s website, 
along with the office’s most recent annual report, which contains data on tax sales in the 
State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5