START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 797 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 797 
(Delegate Boafo) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Employment Discrimination - Fire and Rescue Public Safety Employees - Use of 
Medical Cannabis 
 
 
This bill prohibits an employer of a fire and rescue public safety employee, on the basis of 
the employee’s possession of a valid written certification for medical cannabis or a positive 
test for cannabis components or metabolites while holding a valid written certification, 
from (1) disciplining, discharging, or otherwise discriminating against the employee with 
respect to the employee’s compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment or 
(2) limiting, segregating, or classifying its employees in any way that would deprive or 
tend to deprive the employee of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect 
the employee’s status as an employee. The bill’s prohibitions are subject to additional 
restrictions on applicability. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 
(MCCR) increase by $67,800 in fiscal 2027; future years reflect annualization and 
inflation. In addition to operational impacts, State expenditures may also increase further 
based on the State’s role as an employer, as discussed below. No anticipated effect on 
revenues. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
67,800 
78,200 
81,900 
85,700 
89,400 
GF/SF Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($67,800) 
($78,200) 
($81,900) 
($85,700) 
($89,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential fiscal and operational impact on local governments, as discussed 
below. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 797/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill does not require an employer to commit an act that would violate 
federal law or regulations or cause the employer to lose a monetary or licensing‑related 
benefit under federal law or regulations. The bill also does not prohibit an employer from 
adopting policies and procedures that prohibit the employee from performing the 
employee’s duties while impaired by cannabis, or prohibiting an employee’s use of 
cannabis while on duty. If an employee reports for work while impaired by cannabis, the 
employer must report the incident to the State Emergency Medical Services Board. 
 
“Fire and rescue public safety employee” means a firefighter, an emergency medical 
technician, a cardiac rescue technician, or a paramedic employed by (1) a municipal 
corporation; (2) a county; (3) the State; (4) the State Airport Authority; or (5) a fire control 
district. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Discrimination in Employment – Generally  
 
Under § 20‑602 of the State Government Article, it is State policy to assure that all persons 
have equal opportunity in employment and in all labor management-union relations. As 
such, State law generally prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race, 
color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, military status, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, genetic information, or disability (unrelated in nature and 
extent so as to reasonably preclude the performance of the employment). 
 
Subject to limited exceptions, on any of these bases or because of an individual’s refusal 
to submit to or make available the results of a genetic test, an employer may not (1) fail or 
refuse to hire, discharge, or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to 
the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions or privileges or (2) limit, segregate, or 
classify its employees or applicants for employment in any way that deprives or tends to 
deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the 
individual’s status as an employee. An employer is also prohibited from failing or refusing 
to make a reasonable accommodation for the known disability of an otherwise qualified 
employee or an applicant for employment; however, State law does not require an 
employer to reasonably accommodate a disability if the accommodation would cause 
undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s business. Furthermore, an employer may 
not (1) engage in the harassment (including sexual harassment) of an employee or 
(2) discriminate or retaliate against an employee or applicant because the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 797/ Page 3 
employee/applicant has opposed any practice prohibited by State law relevant to 
employment discrimination or made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in an 
investigation, proceeding, or hearing related to such laws. Additional prohibitions – 
including those specific to interns, employment agencies, and labor organizations – are also 
specified in statute. 
 
In general, the above prohibitions are applicable to employers that have 15 or more 
employees (based on the number of employees working in each of 20 or more  
calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year). Provisions relating to harassment 
allegations apply to employers with 1 or more employees. Statute also specifically prohibits 
units, officers, or employees of the State, a county, or a municipal corporation from 
engaging in these discriminatory acts. 
 
Employment Discrimination Complaints – Initial Process, Administrative Proceedings, 
and Civil Actions 
 
Initial Process:  MCCR is the independent State agency charged with the enforcement of 
laws prohibiting discrimination in employment. An individual alleging employment 
discrimination may file an inquiry with MCCR, which initiates the intake process. Once a 
complaint has been properly filed, the case is assigned to an MCCR investigator to 
determine whether there is probable cause that discrimination has occurred. If at the 
conclusion of the investigatory stage, MCCR believes there is probable cause that 
discrimination occurred, MCCR issues a finding and attempts to resolve the matter through 
conciliation. If an agreement to remedy and eliminate the discrimination cannot be reached, 
the matter is certified for litigation and may proceed in a number of ways, including being 
heard before an administrative law judge. 
 
A complaint alleging an unlawful employment practice other than harassment must be filed 
within 300 days after the alleged act (a complaint alleging harassment must be filed within 
two years). However, complaints filed with a federal human relations commission or a 
local human relations commission within specified timeframes are deemed to be in 
compliance with these requirements. 
 
Administrative Proceedings:  At an administrative hearing, MCCR’s Office of the 
General Counsel presents the case on behalf of the complainant. Remedies available on a 
finding by an administrative law judge that the respondent (employer) is engaging or has 
engaged in an unlawful employment practice include (1) enjoining the respondent from 
engaging in the discriminatory act; (2) ordering appropriate affirmative relief (including 
the reinstatement or hiring of employees, with or without back pay); (3) awarding 
compensatory damages; and (4) ordering any other equitable relief that the judge considers 
appropriate. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 797/ Page 4 
Compensatory damages that are awarded (for future pecuniary losses, emotional pain, 
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, or nonpecuniary 
losses) are in addition to back pay, interest on back pay, and any other equitable relief that 
the complainant may recover under any other provision of law. The maximum amounts of 
compensatory damages that may be awarded are as follows:   
 
 
$50,000 for respondents with 15 to 100 employees; 
 
$100,000 for respondents with 101 to 200 employees; 
 
$200,000 for respondents with 201 to 500 employees; and 
 
$300,000 for respondents with 501 or more employees.  
 
If back pay is awarded, the award must be reduced by any interim earnings or amounts 
earnable with reasonable diligence by the person discriminated against. In addition to any 
other authorized relief, a complainant may recover back pay for up to two years preceding 
the filing of the complaint if the unlawful employment practice that has occurred during 
the complaint filing period is similar or related to an unlawful employment practice with 
regard to discrimination in compensation that occurred outside the time for filing a 
complaint.  
 
Civil Actions:  A complainant or a respondent may elect to have the claims asserted in a 
complaint alleging an unlawful employment practice determined in a civil action brought 
by MCCR on the complainant’s behalf if (1) MCCR has found probable cause to believe 
the respondent has engaged or is engaging in an unlawful employment practice and 
(2) there is a failure to reach an agreement to remedy and eliminate the practice. MCCR 
may also elect to have the claims asserted within the complaint determined in a civil action 
brought on its own behalf under the same conditions. On a finding that discrimination 
occurred, the circuit court may provide the same remedies that an administrative law judge 
is authorized to provide (described above). 
 
A complainant may also file a private civil action in circuit court against the respondent if 
(1) the complainant initially filed a timely administrative charge or a complaint under 
federal, State, or local law alleging an unlawful employment practice by the respondent 
and (2) at least 180 days have elapsed since the filing of the administrative charge or 
complaint. In addition, the civil action must be filed within two years after the alleged 
employment practice occurred (or within three years for a harassment allegation), however, 
these time limitations are tolled while an administrative charge or complaint is pending. 
The filing of a civil action automatically terminates any proceeding before MCCR based 
on the underlying administrative complaint.  
 
In addition to the remedies described above, a circuit court may also award punitive 
damages in a private civil action if the respondent is not a governmental unit or political 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 797/ Page 5 
subdivision, and the court finds that the respondent is engaging or has engaged in an 
unlawful employment practice with actual malice. If the court awards punitive damages, 
the sum of the amount of compensatory damages and punitive damages may not exceed 
the applicable limitations on compensatory damages (as shown above). If a complainant 
seeks compensatory or punitive damages in a circuit court action, any party may demand a 
jury trial, and the court may not inform the jury of the statutory limitations on compensatory 
and punitive damages. 
  
Pursuant to § 20-1015 of the State Government Article, a court may award the prevailing 
party reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, and costs. 
 
Medical Cannabis Use 
 
Chapter 403 of 2013 authorized use of cannabis for medical purposes. For more 
information on legal cannabis use in the State, see the Appendix – Medical and Adult-Use 
Cannabis. 
 
“Written certification” means a certification that (1) is issued by a certifying provider to a 
qualifying patient with whom the provider has a bona fide provider-patient relationship; 
(2) includes a written statement certifying that, in the certifying provider’s professional 
opinion, after having completed an assessment of the patient’s medical history and current 
medical condition, the patient has a condition that meets the inclusion criteria and for which 
potential benefits of the medical use of cannabis would likely outweigh the health risks for 
the patient, as specified; and (3) may include a written statement certifying that, in the 
certifying provider’s professional opinion, a 30-day supply of medical cannabis would be 
inadequate to meet the medical needs of the qualifying patient. 
 
State and Local Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 
 
General fund expenditures for MCCR increase by $67,766 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one civil rights officer to investigate an anticipated increase in complaints due to the bill. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Positions 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$58,625 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$67,766 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 797/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
MCCR advises that current staff are already working at capacity and unable to absorb 
additional complaints expected under the bill. MCCR further notes that it receives federal 
reimbursements for investigating complaints related to employment discrimination from 
the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), but that any employment 
discrimination complaints filed under the scope of the bill are not eligible for 
reimbursement under MCCR’s contractual relationship with EEOC, because federal statute 
does not afford the same protection as the bill. Accordingly, MCCR needs to ensure that 
investigating any additional cases under the bill does not negatively impact its case closure 
rate and potentially impact federal funding. 
 
State and Local Governments as Employers  
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) reports an indeterminate fiscal and 
operational impact based on the State’s role as an employer. According to DBM, even with 
the bill’s exclusions permitting employers to continue prohibiting impairment at work, the 
bill presents challenges for the employing entity to determine when the use of cannabis 
occurred and the level of any impairment of an employee on the job. The State may 
experience increased costs to the extent that employees challenge disciplinary or other 
adverse actions based on alleged violations of the protections afforded under the bill. DBM 
further notes that there may be an increase in litigation against the State (and enhanced 
exposure to liability) if a public safety employee is found to be impaired during the 
provision 
of 
services. 
Local 
governments 
experience 
similar 
impacts; 
the 
Maryland Association of Counties reports that the bill significantly expands counties’ 
exposure to liability and the Maryland Municipal League advises of the potential for 
administrative and legal challenges. Harford County also anticipates minor costs associated 
with updating existing drug-testing and human resources policies to align with the new 
protections. 
 
In addition, Baltimore City advises of the potential loss of significant federal grant funding, 
noting generally that grantees are required to maintain a drug free work environment 
(including the use of cannabis, even when medically prescribed). However, the bill 
explicitly includes the following:  (1) employers are not prohibited from adopting policies 
that ban employees from performing duties while impaired; (2) employers are not 
prohibited from banning employees from using cannabis while on duty; (3) employers are 
required to report employees who report to work while impaired to the EMS board; and 
(4) employers are not required to commit acts that would violate federal law or cause the 
employer to lose monetary or other benefits under federal law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 797/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1023 and HB 1408 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 439 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Maryland Institute for 
Emergency Medical Services Systems; Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 797/ Page 8 
Appendix – Adult-use Cannabis Sales and Use Tax and 
Revenues 
 
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established a 9% sales and use tax on the retail sale of 
adult-use cannabis, and the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 
(Chapter 604) increased the tax rate to 12% beginning in fiscal 2026. In the second year of 
adult-use cannabis sales (July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025), retail sales generated 
approximately $71.8 million in sales and use tax revenues. Adult-use cannabis sales and 
use tax collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2026, when the 12% sales and use tax rate 
went into effect, totaled $26.9 million; collections are on track to exceed $100.0 million in 
fiscal 2026. 
 
Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
Per statute, as amended by the BRFA of 2025, the Comptroller must distribute the first 
25% of sales and use tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis to the general fund. 
Of the remaining 75% of the sales and use tax revenues, the Comptroller must first 
distribute to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) and the Department 
of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) Fund an amount sufficient to defray the 
operating and administrative costs of the Maryland Cannabis Administration and the Office 
of Social Equity, respectively. Revenues remaining after those distributions to CREF and 
DoSEM are then distributed as follows:  50% to the State’s general fund (through 
fiscal 2028, after which the general fund distribution increases to 55%); 35% to 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund (through fiscal 2033 only), which is 
administered by the Comptroller’s Office with oversight assistance from the Office of 
Social Equity; 5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund, which is administered by the 
Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund (through 
fiscal 2028 only), which is administered by the Department of Commerce; and 5% as a 
separate direct allocation to counties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8