START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 742 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 742 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Growing Family Child Care Opportunities Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires, for fiscal 2028 through 2030, the Governor to include an appropriation 
of $450,000 in the annual budget bill for the Growing Family Child Care Opportunities 
Program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures are not anticipated to be affected, under the 
assumption discussed below concerning historic funding levels. No assumed impact on 
revenues. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028 through 2030. 
 
Local Effect:  Grant funding for local governments is guaranteed in FY 2028 through 2030 
due to the mandated appropriation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Growing Family Child Care Opportunities Pilot Program was 
established under Chapters 437 and 438 of 2021 to provide grants to establish and support 
local pilot programs in the State. Under the requirements of the Acts, the Governor was 
required to include $450,000 in the State budget for the program in fiscal 2023 and 2024. 
As originally enacted, the provisions of Chapters 437 and 438 were set to terminate 
June 30, 2025. Chapters 183 and 184 of 2024 repealed the termination date for the program, 
thereby establishing it as a permanent program within the Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE), and required the Governor, for fiscal 2026, to include a 
$450,000 appropriation in the annual budget bill for the program. To the extent authorized 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 742/ Page 2 
under federal law, the Governor must use federal funds to satisfy the mandated 
appropriation. 
 
MSDE must partner with the Maryland Child Care Resource Network to administer the 
program. To be eligible for a grant, a county governing body or multiple county governing 
bodies must sign a memorandum of understanding with a child care resource center that 
serves the child care licensing region that contains one of the counties. The county/counties 
and the child care resource center must jointly apply for the grant and administer the local 
pilot program. Grant recipients must: 
 
 
use the grants to (1) establish and support a local pilot program and (2) target the 
use of the grant to increase the supply and ensure the sustainability of family 
child care providers in areas with above average rates of poverty and unemployment 
or areas with a lack of available child care providers; 
 
raise local matching funds, including in-kind matching resources at a 1:1 match; 
 
collaborate with existing family child care providers during the implementation of 
the program; 
 
provide multilingual outreach to recruit individuals to become registered family 
child care providers within MSDE; 
 
provide technical assistance, financial incentives, and start-up assistance for 
recruited individuals as they navigate the process of becoming a registered family 
child care provider; 
 
assist newly registered and established family child care providers through technical 
assistance to achieve quality benchmarks, peer-to-peer mentoring, and financial 
incentives; and 
 
establish partnerships with local chambers of commerce, or other local or State 
organizations for family child care providers that support small businesses and 
women and minority-owned businesses, as specified. 
 
Each year, MSDE must develop and publish goals for the program and report to the 
General Assembly on the status of the program, as specified. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $450,000 in 
general funds for the program; however, as noted above, the mandated funding requirement 
terminated after fiscal 2026. Although funding for the program was not originally included 
in the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced (there was no associated mandated appropriation), 
the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly included funding ($450,000 in 
general funds – the funding was contingent on the aforementioned legislation that repealed 
the termination date of the program). Given the historical support for the program – even 
in years in which funding has not been mandated – this analysis assumes that even in the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 742/ Page 3 
absence of the bill, level funding would have been provided. Accordingly, based on this 
assumption, general fund expenditures are not anticipated to be affected. 
 
As noted above, federal funds must be used to satisfy the mandate if available. As historical 
support for the program has generally been met with general funds, this fiscal and policy 
note also does not reflect an impact on federal funds. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Although family child care providers are not direct recipients of 
grant funding, family child care providers in jurisdictions in which grant funding is 
received may benefit from continued support that is facilitated by the bill’s mandated 
appropriation. However, as noted above, this analysis assumes that, even absent the bill, 
funding would have been provided to the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 610 and HB 1492 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 503 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3