START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 750 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 750 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Obstruction or Interference With Exercise of Religious Beliefs - 
Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from using force, threat of force, or physical obstruction to 
interfere with or physically injure another person while the other person is lawfully 
exercising or attempting to exercise the right of religious freedom under the 
First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution at a place of religious worship. A violator is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction subject to a penalty of imprisonment for up to 
90 days and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Disturbing the Peace and Disorderly Conduct – § 10-201 of the Criminal Law Article  
 
Section 10-201 of the Criminal Law Article contains a variety of prohibitions that 
constitute disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct. 
 
Generally, a person may not (1) willfully and without lawful purpose obstruct or hinder the 
free passage of another in a public place or on a public conveyance; (2) willfully act in a 
disorderly manner that disturbs the public peace; or (3) willfully fail to obey a reasonable 
and lawful order that a law enforcement officer makes to prevent a disturbance to the public 
peace. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 750/ Page 2 
A person who enters the land or premises of another or a beach, as specified, may not 
willfully act in a disorderly manner or disturb the peace of persons on the land, premises, 
or beach by making an unreasonably loud noise. Additionally, a person from any location 
may not, by making an unreasonably loud noise, willfully disturb the peace of another on 
the other’s land or premises, in a public place, or on a public conveyance. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 60 days 
and/or a maximum fine of $500. 
 
“Public place” means a place to which the public or a portion of the public has access and 
a right to resort for business, dwelling, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. Places of 
public worship, educational institutions, and public streets, sidewalks, and rights of way 
are specifically included as public places under § 10-201. 
 
“Public conveyance” means a conveyance to which the public or a portion of the public 
has access to and a right to use for transportation, including specified modes of 
transportation. For purposes of a prosecution, a public conveyance or a public place need 
not be devoted solely to public use. 
 
Obstruction of Entry to or Exit from a Funeral, Burial, Etc. – § 10-205 of the Criminal 
Law Article  
 
A person may not knowingly obstruct, hinder, impede, or block another person’s entry to 
or exit from a funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral procession. A person also may 
not address speech to a person attending a funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral 
procession that is likely to incite or produce an imminent breach of the peace. 
Section 10-205 also prohibits a person from engaging in picketing activity within 500 feet 
of a funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral procession that is targeted at one or more 
persons attending the funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral procession. These 
provisions do not apply to a person who conducts a funeral, burial, memorial service, or 
funeral procession. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for 
up to 90 days and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
First-degree Assault  
 
A person commits a first-degree assault if the person (1) intentionally causes or attempts 
to cause serious physical injury to another person; (2) commits an assault with a firearm, 
as specified; or (3) intentionally strangles another. A violator is guilty of a felony and 
subject to imprisonment for up to 25 years. 
 
“Serious physical injury” means physical injury that (1) creates a substantial risk of death 
or (2) causes permanent or protracted serious disfigurement, loss of the function of any 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 750/ Page 3 
bodily member or organ, or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
“Strangling” is defined as impeding the normal breathing or blood circulation of another 
person by applying pressure to the other person’s throat or neck. 
 
Felony Second-degree Assault  
 
A person commits a felony second-degree assault if they intentionally cause “physical 
injury” to another if they know or have reason to know that the other person is a (1) law 
enforcement officer or parole or probation agent engaged in the performance of the 
officer/agent’s official duties or (2) a firefighter, an emergency medical technician, a rescue 
squad member, or any other first responder engaged in providing emergency medical care 
or rescue services. “Physical injury” means any impairment of physical condition, 
excluding minor injuries. A violator is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a 
maximum fine of $5,000. 
 
The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit courts over felony 
second‑degree assault cases. 
 
Misdemeanor Second-degree Assault 
 
The misdemeanor second-degree assault statute applies to assaults that are not considered 
to be felony assaults in the first or second degree. Under this statute, a person is prohibited 
from committing an assault. A violator is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or 
a maximum fine of $2,500. Assault means the crimes of assault, battery, and assault and 
battery, which are defined through case law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 177 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 750/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4