START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 774 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 774 
(Delegates Wilkins and Smith) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Residential Leases and Holdover Tenancies - Local Good 
Cause Termination (Good Cause Eviction) 
 
 
This bill authorizes a county to enact local laws (or ordinances) that prohibit a landlord 
from failing to renew a lease during the lease period or seeking to terminate a holdover 
tenancy without good cause, as specified. The bill establishes certain requirements and 
prohibitions for good cause laws adopted under the bill’s authority. The bill also 
(1) requires the Office of Tenant and Landlord Affairs (OTLA) within the Department of 
Housing and Community Development to develop and make certain disclosure/notice 
forms publicly available and (2) authorizes OTLA to adopt regulations to implement the 
bill’s provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
The bill’s requirements for OTLA can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Good Cause – Local Law or Ordinance 
 
The bill authorizes counties to adopt local laws or ordinances that prohibit a landlord from 
failing to renew a lease during the lease period or seeking to terminate a holdover tenancy 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 774/ Page 2 
without good cause. If a local jurisdiction adopts a local law or ordinance, it must only 
apply to landlords owning six or more residential rental units in the State, including those 
owned or controlled in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, or through one or more legal 
entities. The bill includes additional specifications for determining the number of units 
owned by a landlord (and whether an individual or entity has ownership or membership 
interest). 
 
The good cause provisions may not (1) apply to an owner-occupied residential rental unit; 
(2) require a landlord to demonstrate good cause if a tenant provides notice of intent not to 
renew the lease or continue the tenancy; or (3) conflict with general notice requirements 
for tenant holding over actions. 
 
A local law or ordinance adopted by a county under the bill’s provisions must apply 
uniformly thought the county, including municipalities. 
 
The following grounds must constitute good cause in a local law or ordinance adopted 
under the bill’s provisions: 
 
 
a tenant committing a substantial breach of the lease or causing substantial damage 
to the leased premises or another area of the property and, after receiving notice to 
cure or correct the breach or pay the reasonable cost of repairing the damage, failing 
to comply within 14 days; 
 
a tenant engaging in routine disorderly conduct that disturbs the peace and quiet of 
other tenants; 
 
a tenant engaging in illegal activity on the leased premises, another area of the 
property, or a public right-of-way abutting the leased premises; 
 
a tenant, without reasonable cause, refusing to grant the landlord access to the leased 
premises for the purpose of making repairs or improvements or inspecting the leased 
premises, or as otherwise authorized under the residential lease or applicable law; 
 
a holdover tenant failing to accept a landlord’s offer of a new lease agreement for a 
term of at least one month but no longer than the term of the lease agreement 
effective immediately before the holdover tenancy within one month after the 
landlord makes the offer or a greater period of time as otherwise established by law; 
 
a tenant repeatedly committing minor violations of the lease that (1) disrupt the 
livability of the leased premises; (2) interfere with the management of the property; 
or (3) have an adverse financial impact on the property; 
 
a tenant habitually failing to pay rent when due, if the tenant has been notified by 
the landlord in writing that the rent is more than 10 days late at least four times in a 
12-month period; 
 
a landlord, in good faith, seeking to recover possession of the leased premises for 
use by the landlord or the landlord’s family, as specified; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 774/ Page 3 
 
a landlord, after having obtained all necessary permits, seeking to undertake 
substantial repairs or renovations that cannot be completed while the leased 
premises are occupied; and 
 
a landlord, in good faith, seeking to remove the leased premises for at least one year 
from the rental market. 
 
A county may not adopt additional or alternative grounds for good cause by local law or 
ordinance. 
 
A landlord in a county that has adopted a local law or ordinance under the bill may seek 
relief in a tenant holding over action only after declining to enter into a new lease or 
continue a holdover tenancy in accordance with the provisions of the local law or 
ordinance. Otherwise, the bill may not be interpreted to alter the rights of a landlord that 
seeks relief under Title 8, Subtitle 4 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Lease Disclosure Requirements for Landlords 
 
In counties that enact local good cause laws or ordinances, leases, and lease renewals must 
include notice stating whether the landlord is subject to those provisions. A landlord 
asserting not to be subject to local good cause provisions must provide the tenant with 
specified information on a form prescribed by OTLA, including the full legal names and 
business names of entities with ownership or membership interest in the residential rental 
unit. If a landlord becomes subject to a good cause law or ordinance, the landlord must 
subsequently provide timely written notice to any applicable tenants (including any tenants 
holding over). 
 
Additional Notice Requirements 
 
Before or at the same time as other notices required if a landlord intends to terminate a 
tenancy, a landlord must use the form developed by OTLA to provide written notice by 
first-class, certified mail to a tenant stating (1) the good cause for nonrenewal or 
termination or (2) that the landlord is not subject to local good cause requirements. 
 
Tenant Holding Over Actions – Complaint Requirements 
 
A complaint in a tenant holding over action, in addition to any existing requirements, must 
state (1) the good cause for nonrenewal or termination or (2) that the landlord is not subject 
to local good cause requirements. Landlords must plead sufficient facts in the complaint to 
prove the statement by a preponderance of the evidence. If claiming exemption from good 
cause requirements, landlords must include a current disclosure form, along with an 
affidavit certifying the form’s accuracy, as specified. Failure to submit the form and 
affidavit subjects the landlord to local good cause requirements for that action. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 774/ Page 4 
Current Law: 
 
Repossession at End of a Lease Term or under a Tenancy at Will 
 
Generally, a landlord must provide notice of the intent to terminate a tenancy and repossess 
the property within timeframes established in statute; the timeframes and specific 
requirements of the notice depend, in part, on the term of the lease, the type of tenancy, 
and whether the lease is a written one. For example, if the parties have a written lease for 
a stated term in excess of one week or a tenancy from month to month, written notice is 
generally required 60 days before the expiration of the tenancy. In the case of tenancies 
from year to year (including tobacco farm tenancies but excluding all other farm tenancies), 
written notice is generally required 90 days before the expiration of the current year of the 
tenancy. After required notice is provided, if the tenant or person in actual possession 
refuses to comply, the landlord may file a complaint in the District Court under procedures 
specified in statute (tenant holding over).  
 
Repossession for Breach of Lease 
 
Generally, when a lease allows a landlord to repossess a property because a tenant breaches 
the lease, the landlord may file a complaint in the District Court of the county where the 
property is located if specified requirements are met. Once the tenant breaches the lease, 
the landlord is generally required to give the tenant 30 days’ written notice that the tenant 
is in violation of the lease and the landlord wants to repossess the premises. However, the 
landlord is required to give only 14 days’ written notice of a violation of the lease and that 
the landlord wants to repossess the premises if the violation involves dangerous behavior 
by a tenant or another person on the property with the tenant’s consent. The behavior must 
demonstrate a clear and imminent danger of the tenant or person doing serious harm to 
himself/herself, other tenants, the landlord, the landlord’s property or representatives, or 
any other person on the property. Once the notice period expires, the landlord may file the 
complaint if the tenant or person in actual possession refuses to comply. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Landlords in jurisdictions that enact local laws or ordinances as 
authorized by the bill are prohibited from taking specified actions regarding their property 
unless good cause can be demonstrated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 651 and HB 709 of 2025; SB 644 and HB 477 of 2024; and SB 504 
and HB 684 of 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 774/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 462 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Somerset counties; Office of the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5