START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 768 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 768 
(Delegates Simpson and Shetty) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Department of Human Services - Benefits for Children in Custody - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters requirements for the management and use of specified benefits, assets, and 
resources of children in the custody of the Department of Human Services (DHS). When 
DHS serves as the representative payee or in any other fiduciary capacity for a child 
receiving U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA) benefits, Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI), or Social Security benefits, DHS must use the benefits for the child’s current 
“unmet needs” in accordance with specified requirements. The bill removes the minimum 
percentage requirements for a child’s benefits that are not to be used to reimburse the State 
for specified costs of care. Within 60 days after a child enters the care of DHS, and annually 
thereafter, DHS must determine the child’s eligibility and, as appropriate, apply for 
VA benefits, SSI, and Social Security benefits. DHS must also seek coverage for the cost 
of this screening through the Medicaid Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and 
Treatment (EPSDT) benefit. DHS must apply for benefits on behalf of the child if DHS 
determines a child might be eligible. The bill also makes technical and clarifying changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHS general fund expenditures increase by $808,900 in FY 2027 for staff 
and administrative costs, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase beginning in 
FY 2027 to reflect additional Tile IV-E reimbursement for administrative costs. Future 
years reflect annualization. Any impact on Medicaid is indeterminate, as discussed below. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$197,300 
$265,600 
$268,300 
$271,000 
$273,700 
GF Expenditure 
$808,900 
$859,500 
$880,400 
$901,400 
$922,500 
Net Effect 
($611,600) 
($593,900) 
($612,100) 
($630,400) 
($648,900) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 768/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Unmet needs” means needs beyond those that DHS is required or agrees 
to pay, including:  (1) additional services, resources, or equipment related to a child’s 
disability; (2) housing expenses if a child is preparing to leave the custody of DHS for 
reasons related to the child’s age; (3) technology, special clothing, instruments, books, or 
other items related to a child’s hobbies or interests; (4) transportation expenses not 
otherwise paid by DHS; and (5) tuition, tutoring, or training, including application fees, 
books, equipment, and testing. 
 
Representative Payees 
 
The bill removes the requirement for DHS, when applying for benefits for a child in the 
department’s custody, to (in cooperation with the child’s attorney) identify a representative 
payee or fiduciary in accordance with the requirements of federal law. Instead, if a child 
was receiving VA benefits, SSI, or Social Security benefits before entering the 
department’s custody, or if DHS applies for benefits on behalf of the child, DHS must: 
 
 
attempt to identify, in consultation with the child and the child’s guardian ad litem 
or attorney, an appropriate representative payee in accordance with federal law; 
 
apply to become the representative payee only if no other suitable candidate is 
available; and 
 
document all efforts to locate a suitable candidate. 
 
DHS must periodically review whether a person other than the department is available to 
apply to assume the role of representative payee if the person could better serve the best 
interest of the child. 
 
Benefit Eligibility and Authorized Uses 
 
If DHS applies for benefits on behalf of a child and the benefits are denied, and DHS 
determines an appeal is in the best interest of the child, DHS must consult with the child’s 
attorney and appeal the denial. 
 
DHS must ensure that the child’s best interest is served by using or conserving the benefits 
in a way that would affect the child’s eligibility to receive the benefits, including using the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 768/ Page 3 
benefits in a manner that is in the best interest of the child for the child’s current unmet 
needs, as determined in consultation with the child and the attorney for the child, for costs 
not paid by DHS as part of the child’s care or by the health insurance of the child. 
 
When the child reaches age 16 years and 6 months, DHS must provide the child with 
information regarding:  (1) accessing, using, and maintaining benefits; (2) transition plans; 
(3) when the benefits are scheduled to end; and (4) eligibility for benefits after leaving the 
care of DHS. 
 
Additionally, a beneficiary who is at least 18 years old may request the court to allow the 
beneficiary’s benefits to be used for current unmet needs. If the court determines that it is 
in the best interest of the beneficiary to use the benefits for current unmet needs, the court 
must grant the request. 
 
Current Law:  DHS must establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor 
children (1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 
180 days, by a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who 
are abused, abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that 
continued residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has 
committed the child to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with 
the approval of DHS, are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under 
a voluntary placement agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a 
mental illness, as specified. An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, 
group and residential care, kinship care, and a treatment foster care home. 
 
The public foster care system is funded by the State and the federal government under Title 
IV-E of the Social Security Act. Generally, foster care maintenance payments are payments 
made on behalf of a child eligible for Title IV-E foster care to cover the cost of (and the 
cost of providing) food, clothing, shelter, daily supervision, school supplies, a child’s 
personal incidentals, liability insurance with respect to a child, and reasonable travel to the 
child’s home for visitation. 
 
Benefits for Children in State Custody 
 
Consistent with federal law, when applying for specified benefits for a child in its custody, 
DHS must, in cooperation with the child’s attorney, identify a representative payee or 
fiduciary. When DHS serves as the representative payee or in any other fiduciary capacity 
for a child receiving VA benefits, SSI, or Social Security benefits, DHS must: 
 
 
use the benefits or conserve the benefits in the child’s best interest, including using 
the benefits for services for special needs not otherwise provided by DHS or 
conserving the benefits for the child’s reasonably foreseeable future needs; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 768/ Page 4 
 
ensure that when the child attains the age of 14, and until DHS no longer serves as 
the representative payee or fiduciary, the child’s benefits are not used to reimburse 
the State for the costs of care and are instead conserved, as follows:  (1) from age 14 
through age 15, at least 40% of benefits may not be used to reimburse the State; 
(2) from age 16 through age 17, at least 80% of benefits may not be used; and 
(3) from age 18 through age 20, no benefits may be used for State reimbursements. 
 
DHS must appropriately monitor any federal asset or resource limits for the benefits and 
ensure that the child’s best interest is served by using or conserving the benefits in a way 
that avoids violating any federal asset or resource limits that would affect the child’s 
eligibility to receive the benefits. DHS must exercise discretion, for benefits or resources 
below or not subject to any federal asset or resource limit, to conserve or use the funds for 
services for special needs not otherwise provided by DHS. These options include: 
 
 
applying to the Social Security Administration (SSA) to establish a Plan for 
Achieving Self-Support account for the child and determining whether it is in the 
best interest of the child to conserve all or part of the benefits in the account; 
 
establishing an individual development account or a 529A plan for the child and 
conserving the child’s benefits within the accounts in a manner that appropriately 
avoids any federal asset or resource limits; 
 
establishing a special needs trust for the child and conserving the child’s benefits in 
the trust in a manner that appropriately avoids any federal asset or resource limits; 
and 
 
applying any other exclusions from federal asset or resource limits available under 
federal law and using or conserving the child’s benefits in a manner that 
appropriately avoids any federal asset or resource limits. 
 
DHS must also provide an annual accounting to the child and the child’s attorney of how 
the child’s resources have been used or conserved and provide the child with financial 
literacy training when the child reaches age 14. DHS must immediately notify the child, 
through the child’s attorney, of (1) any application for VA benefits, SSI, or Social Security 
benefits made on the child’s behalf or any application to become representative payee for 
those benefits on the child’s behalf; (2) any decisions or communications from the VA or 
SSA regarding an application for benefits; and (3) any appeal or other action requested by 
DHS regarding an application for benefits. 
 
When DHS serves as the representative payee or otherwise receives VA benefits, SSI, or 
Social Security benefits on the child’s behalf, DHS must provide notice to the child, 
through the child’s attorney, of the following before each juvenile court hearing regarding 
the child:  (1) the dates and the amount of benefit funds received on the child’s behalf since 
any prior notification to the child’s attorney; and (2) information regarding all of the child’s 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 768/ Page 5 
assets and resources, including the child’s benefits, insurance, cash assets, trust accounts, 
earnings, and other resources. 
 
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment 
 
The EPSDT Program is a federal requirement that mandates that states cover certain 
benefits for Medicaid recipients from birth through age 20 – benefits that are not 
necessarily covered for recipients who are aged 21 and older. Maryland’s EPSDT Program 
promotes access to, and ensures availability of, quality health care for Medicaid-eligible 
children, teens, and adults younger than 21. EPSDT assessments can be used to identify 
disabilities and serve as medical evidence for federal benefits applications. 
 
State Revenues: 
 
Department of Human Services 
 
The bill requires a child’s federal benefits to be used for the child’s current unmet needs in 
accordance with specified requirements, rather than permitting a portion of the benefits to 
be used toward the child’s total cost of care. Thus, special fund revenues that have in the 
past been designated as available for cost of care are no longer available for that use. 
Instead, the revenues must be used only for a child’s current unmet needs or conserved for 
the child. 
 
In fiscal 2024, there were 3,652 children in foster care, of which 5.15% entered foster care 
receiving federal benefits, and 2% were identified as eligible for federal benefits. DHS 
advises that 205 of these children had a portion of their federal benefits applied toward the 
total cost of their care (ranging from 20% to 100% based on the child’s age). The amount 
of federal benefits applied to the total cost of care was $557,735 in fiscal 2024. Thus, under 
the bill, approximately $557,735 in federal benefits may be used only for the child’s current 
unmet needs or conserved for the child. Funds cannot be used by DHS toward the child’s 
total cost of care. 
 
Although not required under the bill, to the extent that DHS must backfill for these federal 
benefits with general funds, general fund expenditures increase significantly beginning in 
fiscal 2027. DHS advises that in the absence of these funds, the standard of care would 
decrease for all children receiving federal benefits. 
 
To the extent that additional children receive federal benefits due to the enhanced screening 
and applications required under the bill, special fund revenues increase accordingly 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 768/ Page 6 
Title IV-E administrative costs for foster care, which include case management, eligibility 
determination, legal representation, and recruitment, are generally reimbursed at a 
50% federal matching rate. DHS anticipates approximately $526,000 in such 
administrative costs annually (as discussed below). Therefore, federal fund revenues 
increase beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Department of Human Services 
 
Among other things, the bill requires DHS, within 60 days after a child enters its care, to 
determine the child’s eligibility and, as appropriate, apply for VA benefits, SSI, and 
Social Security benefits. DHS advises that additional staff are required to determine each 
child’s eligibility, and if appropriate, apply for benefits. DHS estimates that approximately 
3,396 eligibility screenings will be conducted annually. 
 
DHS further advises that coordination between a child and their counsel to identify a 
representative payee, in addition to efforts by local department attorneys to appeal a denial 
of benefits, will create an additional administrative burden for the department. DHS 
estimates that general fund expenditures increase by approximately $526,000 annually to 
provide such services to approximately 260 children ($394,500 in fiscal 2027 to reflect the 
bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date). However, as noted above Title IV-E administrative 
costs for foster care are generally reimbursed at a rate of 50%. 
 
Thus, DHS general fund expenditures increase by $808,887 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
four human services specialists to determine eligibility for and apply for specified benefits 
and monitor specified trust accounts. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, ongoing operating expenses, one-time updates to the Child, Juvenile, and Adult 
Management System (CJAMS) to track benefits and assets, and Title IV-E administrative 
costs as noted above. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$246,784 
CJAMS Programming Costs 
131,040 
Title IV-E Administrative Costs 
394,500 
Other Operating Expenses 
    36,563 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$808,887 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 768/ Page 7 
Medicaid 
 
Under the bill, DHS must seek coverage for the cost of screening to determine a child’s 
eligibility for federal benefits through the Medicaid EPSDT program. While most children 
in foster care are automatically eligible for Medicaid, to the extent that this provision results 
in additional children receiving EPSDT benefits, Medicaid expenditures may increase. 
EPSDT screening information may also be used to document a child’s disability for certain 
federal benefits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 658 (Senator West, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7