START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 746 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 746 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Collaborative 
Care Model - Cost Sharing Prohibition and Coverage Requirements 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) from imposing a copayment, 
coinsurance, or deductible requirement on coverage for services provided in accordance 
with the Collaborative Care Model (CoCM). Certain insurers, nonprofit health service 
plans, and health maintenance organizations (collectively carriers) must provide coverage 
for services in accordance with the CoCM. By December 1, 2026, the Maryland Health 
Care Commission (MHCC) must conduct a study on the impact of eliminating health 
insurance cost sharing for CoCM services and report its findings and recommendations to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill’s provisions regarding MDH 
and MHCC take effect July 1, 2026; insurance provisions take effect January 1, 2027, 
and apply to all policies, contracts, and health benefits plans issued, delivered, or 
renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of 
filings can be handled with existing budgeted resources. MHCC can conduct the required 
study using existing budgeted resources. No impact on Medicaid or the State Employee 
and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program (State plan), as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 746/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  CoCM is an established evidence-based, patient-centered care model used 
to improve behavioral health in primary care settings. CoCM uses a team-based approach 
to integrate and increase the effectiveness of mental health and substance use disorder 
(SUD) treatment while reducing stigma around these conditions. CoCM is covered by some 
private insurance plans and commercial payers, as well as Medicaid and Medicare. 
 
Under Maryland law governing the Medicaid program, “Collaborative Care Model” means 
an evidence-based approach for integrating somatic and behavioral health services in 
primary care settings that includes (1) care coordination and management; (2) regular, 
proactive outcome monitoring and treatment for outcome targets using standardized 
outcome measurement rating scales and electronic tools; and (3) regular systematic 
psychiatric and SUD caseload reviews and consultation with specified providers. 
 
Chapters 683 and 684 of 2018 established a Collaborative Care Pilot Program to implement 
CoCM in primary care settings for HealthChoice Medicaid recipients. For fiscal 2020 
through 2023, the Governor was required to appropriate $550,000 annually for the pilot 
program. Chapters 284 and 285 of 2023 repealed the pilot program and required MDH to 
provide reimbursement for services provided in accordance with CoCM statewide in 
primary care settings that provide health care services to Medicaid recipients. 
 
State Medicaid programs may impose minimal copayments for certain services and 
populations. In Maryland, copayments are applied only to pharmacy services ($1 for 
generic/preferred drugs and $3 for brand-name/nonpreferred drugs). Copayments are 
waived for family planning services and supplies, individuals younger than age 21, 
pregnant women, individuals who are inpatients in long-term care facilities, and emergency 
services. Pharmacy services cannot be denied to an individual because of the individual’s 
inability to pay the copayment. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Medicaid 
 
As there is currently no cost sharing for Medicaid CoCM services, there is no fiscal impact 
on Medicaid revenues or expenditures at this time. 
 
MDH advises that the federal One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 requires states to impose 
cost sharing on certain services provided to adults in the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) expansion group. Beginning October 1, 2028, states must impose cost 
sharing on ACA adults that cannot exceed $35 for any care, item, or service. Aggregate 
out-of-pocket costs for a family cannot exceed 5% of the family’s income. While Maryland 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 746/ Page 3 
may have discretion in determining which services will require cost sharing, future federal 
guidance may require that ACA expansion adults pay cost sharing for CoCM services. 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The State plan is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, except for the 
one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is not subject to this bill. 
However, the program generally provides coverage for health insurance benefits as 
prescribed under Maryland law. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that it currently reimburses for CoCM 
services, with more than 1,100 patient encounters covered in each of plan years 2024 and 
2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 428 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3