START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 723 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 723 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Electric Companies - Cost Containment Plans - Requirement (Securing 
Affordable, Valuable Investments in Next Generation Grid Solutions (SAVINGS) 
Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each electric company to submit a cost containment plan to the Public 
Service Commission (PSC) by January 1, 2027, and every three years thereafter, except as 
specified. Among other requirements, the plan must combine to reduce the utility’s peak 
electric system load by at least 20% from 2025 levels by 2030. PSC must (1) approve, 
conditionally approve, or deny each electric company’s plan based on specified factors and 
(2) require an electric company to cure any deficiencies in the plan. The bill establishes 
related reporting requirements and authorizes PSC to impose specified penalties if an 
electric company fails to meet the peak load reduction goal established by the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $1.7 million in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs; special fund revenues for 
PSC increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public service companies. 
General/special fund expenditures for the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
increase by approximately $50,000 annually beginning in FY 2027. General fund revenues 
may increase beginning in FY 2030 from the bill’s penalty provisions. The potential effect 
on electricity prices is discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$1.70 
$1.83 
$1.87 
$1.91 
$1.95 
SF Expenditure 
$1.70 
$1.83 
$1.87 
$1.91 
$1.95 
GF/SF Exp. 
$0.05 
$0.05 
$0.05 
$0.05 
$0.05 
Net Effect 
($0.05) 
($0.05) 
($0.05) 
($0.05) 
($0.05)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 723/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government finances for municipal electric utilities may be 
significantly affected, as discussed below. The potential effect on electricity prices is 
discussed in the Additional Comments below. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of 
local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful, as discussed in the Additional Comments 
below. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
The bill establishes definitions for various types of technologies and processes for 
improving the reliability, resilience, and capacity of the electric transmission or distribution 
system, including the following:   
 
 
“advanced transmission technologies” means infrastructure, hardware, or software 
that increases the capacity, efficiency, reliability, or resilience of a new or existing 
transmission 
line 
facility, 
including 
(1) grid-enhancing 
technologies;  
(2) high-performance conductors; and (3) storage used as transmission; 
 
“demand flexibility” means the ability to shift energy demand to meet bulk power 
system or local distribution system needs in response to changing electric system 
conditions and prices in order to (1) integrate increased renewable energy supply; 
(2) improve reliability and energy system efficiency; (3) lower costs; and (4) reduce 
environmental impacts by decreasing net system peak demand or distribution 
system peak demand; and 
 
“nonwires solution” means a project or other solution that uses one or more 
distributed energy resources or leads to the introduction of new or modifications of 
existing energy management practices, standards, or protocols that address a system 
constraint or provide other electric gird services to the electric system. 
 
Cost Containment Plan Submission Deadlines 
 
Generally, by January 1, 2027, and every three years thereafter, each electric company 
must submit a cost containment plan to PSC. However, PSC may (1) allow electric 
companies to submit their respective plans on a staggered schedule and (2) adjust the 
submission plan deadline if PSC requires or allows an electric company to submit its cost 
containment plan as part of (1) a multiyear rate plan application; (2) a rate case filing; or 
(3) an electric system plan. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 723/ Page 3 
Content of Cost Containment Plans 
 
The cost containment plan must combine to reduce the utility’s peak electric system load 
by at least 20% from 2025 levels by 2030. In addition, the cost containment plan must 
include descriptions of: 
 
 
electric system constraint solutions in the utility’s most recent electric system plan 
that avoid or minimize capital expenditures, including all nonwires solutions and 
distributed energy resource integration that is included in the electric system plan; 
 
programs, offerings, or investments from other PSC filings that avoid or minimize 
capital expenditures on the electric distribution or transmission system while 
improving system reliability, resilience, and capacity that achieves operational and 
planning optimization, including (1) advanced transmission technologies; 
(2) automated 
load 
management; 
(3) 
demand 
flexibility; 
(4) 
flexible 
interconnection; (5) grid-enhancing technologies; (6) grid flexibility; (7) grid 
flexibility-enabled building electrification and efficiency; and (8) virtual power 
plants; 
 
how the electric company is coordinating electric distribution system investments 
with electric transmission system planning in the PJM region in a manner that is 
most cost-effective to ratepayers; and 
 
how the electric company is increasing its investments in regional transmission 
planning processes relative to its investment in local and supplemental transmission 
projects. 
 
Plan Review and Approval  
 
PSC must approve, conditionally approve, or deny each electric company’s cost 
containment plan based on whether the plan (1) adequately incorporates the required 
elements as described above; (2) meets or exceeds the peak-load reduction goal established 
by the bill; and (3) is projected to produce demonstrable and significant cost savings 
individually or in the aggregate, according to PSC’s unified benefit-cost analysis 
framework.  
 
PSC must require an electric company to cure any deficiency identified during its review 
of the cost containment plan.  
 
Progress Reports  
 
Each electric company must submit a progress report to PSC on its progress toward 
implementing an approved cost containment plan. The progress report must be submitted 
at the same time the electric company submits its electric system plan pursuant to current 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 723/ Page 4 
law. The progress report must include (1) a description of all ongoing and planned actions, 
initiatives, or projects included in the cost containment plan and (2) an analysis 
documenting the decision-making process for the selected actions, initiatives, or projects 
included in the plan and any rejected alternatives. 
 
Penalties for Failing to Meet Peak Load Reduction Goal 
 
If an electric company fails to meet the peak load reduction goal established by the bill, 
PSC may, by order, (1) impose one or more fines; (2) reduce the electric company’s return 
on equity; and (3) fully or partially deny the electric company’s cost recovery for 
implementing the approved cost containment plan. 
 
Current Law:  PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies, which includes 
electric companies, subject to its jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of 
the public and (2) promote adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services 
in the State without unjust discrimination. With limited exceptions, a public service 
company must file an annual report with PSC for the preceding calendar year, along with 
special reports, information, contracts, records, and copies as required by PSC.  
 
Electric System Planning – Generally 
 
The Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022 (Chapter 38), as altered by Chapter 540 of 2024, 
established the goal of the State that the electric system support, in a cost-effective manner, 
the State’s policy goals with regard to greenhouse gas reduction, renewable energy, 
decreasing dependence on electricity imported from other states, and achieving energy 
system resiliency, efficiency, and reliability.  
 
PSC must submit an annual report to the General Assembly with information regarding the 
current status of projects designed to promote several specified goals, including 
information on planning processes and implementation. By December 31, 2025, PSC was 
required to adopt regulations or issue orders to (1) implement specific policies for electric 
system planning; (2) require consideration of investment in, or procurement of, 
cost‑effective demand-side methods and technology to improve reliability and efficiency, 
including virtual power plants; and (3) implement specific policies for improvements in 
order to promote those goals.  
 
Regulatory Requirements for Electric System Plans 
 
Under current regulations, an electric system plan must promote the State policy goals and 
other applicable goals and targets as directed by PSC. An electric system plan must include 
a minimum of two scenarios (a baseline scenario and a goal scenario) to provide a range of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 723/ Page 5 
outcomes to inform planning analysis and the determination of the scale and pace of grid 
needs. Among other requirements, an electric company must: 
 
 
develop separate forecasts for each relevant distributed energy resource type, as 
specified, as well as a load forecast, as specified; 
 
conduct specified assessments, including a hosting capacity assessment, a grid 
needs assessment, and a locational value assessment;  
 
identify possible solutions for identified grid needs, including nonwires solutions;  
 
include the criteria used to evaluate possible solutions, including cost-effectiveness 
considerations; and 
 
choose a solution or solutions for each scenario and publish a plan for each planning 
cycle. 
 
Electric companies must publish a preliminary electric system plan and the electric system 
plan on their websites and file the plans with PSC, as specified. An electric company must 
file an annual electric system plan update during the years in which a complete electric 
system plan is not filed. 
 
An electric company must include the following planning metrics in its preliminary electric 
system plan and its annual update:  (1) State goals and targets; (2) reliability; (3) resilience; 
(4) distributed energy resource integration, by category; (5) load and demand management; 
(6) hosting capacity; (7) system constraint resolution, as specified; (8) nonwires solution 
incorporation; and (9) stakeholder and other person engagement.  
 
Public Service Company Rates - Generally 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that:   
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article;  
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and  
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 723/ Page 6 
Penalties for Violations 
 
Generally, PSC may impose a civil penalty of up to $25,000 for a violation of specified 
provisions of the Public Utilities Article or an effective and outstanding direction, ruling, 
order, rule, or regulation of PSC. Except in limited circumstances, civil penalties accrue to 
the general fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Public Service Commission 
 
PSC advises that the bill creates significant new and incremental requirements on its 
planning, analytical, and enforcement resources that cannot be absorbed within existing 
resources. Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $1,699,796 in  
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring three public utility engineers, two economists, one staff attorney, 
and one public utility law judge to (1) oversee the cost containment plan review process 
established by the bill; (2) formulate and apply new analytical methodologies for peak load 
assessment, cost-benefit analyses, and portfolio evaluation; (3) review progress reports; 
and (4) monitor compliance and conduct enforcement. The estimate also includes  
$1.0 million in costs to hire external consultants to develop peak load measurement and 
verification protocols, provide technical expertise, and support regulatory proceedings and 
hearings.  
 
Positions 
7.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$620,218 
Consultant Costs 
1,000,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
       79,578 
Total FY 2027 PSC Expenditures 
$1,699,796 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) ongoing consultant 
costs of $1.0 million annually.  
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
General fund revenues may increase beginning in fiscal 2030 to the extent PSC imposes 
any fines as authorized by the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 723/ Page 7 
Department of Natural Resources 
 
General/special fund expenditures for DNR’s Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) 
increase by approximately $50,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to hire a consultant 
to assist with the review of cost containment plans. This estimate assumes that PSC 
requests PPRP’s assistance with the review of plans under the bill. 
 
In general, special funds from the Environmental Trust Fund are used to fund PPRP’s 
operations. However, general funds may be required to cover part or all of the expenses 
that PPRP incurs under the bill because DNR anticipates a special fund revenue shortfall. 
 
Office of People’s Counsel 
 
The Office of People’s Counsel (OPC) advises that it is required to review all – and 
participate in most – matters before PSC. To the extent that the bill creates additional 
proceedings at PSC related to cost containment plans, OPC workloads increase. Depending 
on its overall caseload at the time, OPC may be able to absorb any increase in workload 
with existing resources. To the extent that it cannot, OPC may need to hire a consultant, 
resulting in an increase in expenditures. OPC is also funded through assessments on public 
service companies; thus, any additional special fund expenditures are funded through a 
corresponding increase in special fund revenues from assessments imposed on public 
service companies. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The State’s five municipal electric utilities are generally not exempt 
from any provisions in the bill and are, therefore, affected like any other electric company 
(i.e., developing and submitting cost containment plans and progress reports, meeting the 
bill’s peak load reduction goal, and being subject to specified PSC penalties for failure to 
meet that goal). Although a reliable estimate of the bill’s impact on municipal electric 
utilities cannot be made at this time, the bill may have a significant impact on the finances 
of affected municipalities.  
 
The five municipal electric utilities are located in Berlin (Worcester County), Easton 
(Talbot County), Hagerstown (Washington County), Thurmont (Frederick County), and 
Williamsport (Washington County).   
 
Additional Comments:  Electric utility rates may decrease – or future rate increases may 
be minimized – as a result of the establishment and implementation of the cost containment 
plans by electric companies. The extent to which the bill results in a decrease in rates cannot 
be reliably estimated at this time. In any event, electric utility customers, including the 
State, local governments, and small businesses, benefit from any decrease in rates that may 
result from the bill’s changes.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 723/ Page 8 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 598 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of Natural Resources; 
Office of People’s Counsel; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8