START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 769 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 769 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
State Board of Social Work Examiners - Provisional License to Practice Social 
Work - Established 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the State Board of Social Work Examiners (BSWE), 
beginning November 1, 2026, to issue a “provisional license” to an applicant who, except 
for passing a required examination, has otherwise met the appropriate education and 
experience requirements to practice bachelor social work or master social work. The holder 
of a provisional license and the supervising social worker are jointly responsible for 
ensuring compliance with supervision and expiration requirements. BSWE must issue a 
full license to a provisional licensee who has achieved a satisfactory score on the required 
examination. The board must adopt regulations to carry out the bill and, beginning 
December 31, 2027, submit an annual report on provisional licenses. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. BSWE special fund expenditures increase by $64,900 
in FY 2027 for staff. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. BSWE 
special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$64,900 
$74,600 
$78,200 
$81,800 
$85,400 
Net Effect 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 769/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Provisional license” means a license issued by BSWE under, and as 
limited by, specified provisions of the Maryland Social Workers Practice Act to practice 
bachelor social work or master social work. 
 
A provisional license (1) authorizes the holder to practice social work in the State only 
within the scope of the specific category of license (bachelor social work or master social 
work); (2) requires the holder to practice under the supervision of a board‑approved 
supervisor in accordance with specified regulations; (3) may be issued only to an initial 
applicant for licensure who has not previously been licensed by BSWE; and (4) does not 
qualify the holder for a multistate license under the Social Work Licensure Compact.  
 
A provisional license (1) expires on a date set by BSWE that is at least 12 months, but not 
more than 24 months, after the date of issuance; (2) may be renewed for an additional term 
not exceeding 24 months; and (3) must terminate automatically on the expiration date or 
the date that a full license is issued. 
 
Supervised hours completed under a provisional license may be counted toward the 
supervised experience required (1) for independent practice approval and (2) to qualify for 
a certified social worker‑clinical license.  
 
Required Regulations 
 
BSWE must adopt regulations that establish (1) minimum supervision requirements and 
reporting procedures; (2) standards for evaluating supervised practice; (3) requirements to 
ensure that the tracking of provisional licenses aligns with existing licensure cycles; and 
(4) a reasonable fee for the issuance of a provisional license sufficient to cover 
administrative costs. 
 
Required Report 
 
By December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, BSWE must report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health Committee the following information for the 
immediately preceding 12-month period:  (1) the total number of active licensees who were 
licensed without passing the required examination and the average number of years those 
licensees have practiced in the State; (2) the number of provisional licenses issued; (3) the 
number of holders of provisional licenses who obtained full licensure; and (4) any 
recommendations for improving the implementation of provisional licenses and the impact 
of such licenses on the health care workforce. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 769/ Page 3 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by BSWE to practice social work 
in Maryland. In general, to obtain a license, an applicant must (1) submit a written 
application; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) be of good moral character; (4) successfully 
pass required examinations pertinent to the license sought; (5) pay any applicable fees; 
(6) complete a criminal history records check; and (7) if required, complete a mental or 
physical examination by a board-appointed health care practitioner. Each license expires 
every two years, after which the licensee must pay a renewal fee, submit a renewal 
application, submit satisfactory evidence of compliance with any continuing education 
requirements, and otherwise be entitled to be licensed. 
 
Categories of Social Work Licensure 
 
A licensed bachelor social worker (LBSW) must have a bachelor’s degree in social work 
from an accredited social work program. A licensed master social worker (LMSW) must 
have, or be a candidate for, a master’s degree in social work from an accredited social work 
program. Generally, an LBSW or an LMSW must practice social work under the 
supervision of another social worker, unless given approval to engage in independent 
practice. 
 
A licensed certified social worker (LCSW) must have a master’s degree in social work 
from an accredited social work program and provide documentation of having completed 
two years of specified supervised experience. LCSW licenses are no longer issued but are 
renewed by BSWE. 
 
A licensed certified social worker-clinical (LCSW-C) must have a master’s degree in 
social work from an accredited social work program and documentation of 12 academic 
credits in clinical course work, as specified. An LCSW-C must also provide documentation 
of having completed two years as a licensee with specified supervised experience of 
face‑to‑face client contact, formulation of a diagnostic impression, and treatment of mental 
disorders and other conditions and the provision of psychotherapy. 
 
Conditional Licensure 
 
Chapter 317 of 2023 authorized BSWE to issue a conditional license to practice bachelor 
social work or master social work to an applicant who, except for passing the required 
examination, has met the appropriate education and experience requirements for licensure. 
The board may issue a conditional license if an administrative delay or an unforeseen 
circumstance, act, or occurrence prevents a required examination from being available to 
an applicant for at least 15 business days. A conditional license is valid until 180 days after 
the examination becomes readily available to the applicant. A conditional license 
authorizes the holder to practice bachelor or master social work in the State only under the 
supervision of a board-approved supervisor. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 769/ Page 4 
Social Worker Practice with Pending Licensure Application 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.42.01.13) an applicant may practice social work 
without a license if the applicant has otherwise met specified requirements, including paid 
applicable fees, and is (1) licensed in any other state, qualified in another county, or 
qualified by a federal entity of the United States; (2) submitted a complete written 
application for a license and the application is pending with the board; and (3) has passed, 
or expects to pass within five months of applying for licensure, an Association of Social 
Work Boards examination, as specified. An applicant may not practice with a pending 
application for more than six months or represent to the public by title or representation 
that the applicant is a social worker who is licensed in the State. 
 
Interstate Social Work Licensure Compact 
 
Chapters 9 and 10 of 2025 entered Maryland into the Interstate Social Work Licensure 
Compact. A multistate license authorizes a licensee to practice as a regulated social worker 
in all member states under multistate authorization to practice. 
 
To be eligible for a multistate license, an applicant must, among other requirements, 
(1) hold or be eligible for an active, unencumbered license in the home state; (2) pay 
applicable fees; (3) complete a specified criminal history records check; (4) notify the home 
state of any adverse action, encumbrance, or restriction on any professional license taken 
within 30 days from the date the action is taken; (5) meet any continuing competence 
requirements established by the home state; and (6) abide by the laws, regulations, and 
applicable standards in the member state where the client is located at the time care is 
rendered. 
 
To be eligible for a multistate license in a specific category of social work licensure 
(clinical, master’s, or bachelor’s), an applicant must fulfill specified competency 
requirements and attain the appropriate degree in social work. Clinical-category multistate 
license applicants must also fulfill a specified practice requirement. 
 
State Revenues:  As of March 2026, BSWE oversees approximately 20,500 active social 
work licensees and issues approximately 3,700 new licenses per year. 
 
The bill requires BSWE to promulgate regulations regarding provisional licensure, issue a 
provisional license, and submit an annual report. As an emergency measure, the bill takes 
effect upon the signature of the Governor (likely fiscal 2026). However, this analysis 
assumes that BSWE cannot issue provisional licenses until after regulations have been 
promulgated. The Maryland Department of Health has previously advised that it takes 
approximately six months to promulgate regulations. Therefore, this analysis assumes any 
fiscal impact is delayed until fiscal 2027. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 769/ Page 5 
Each new applicant for a social worker license currently pays a $100 application processing 
fee and a $75 initial license fee. Under the bill, BSWE must set a reasonable fee for the 
issuance of a provisional license sufficient to cover administrative costs. 
 
The number of individuals that may seek a provisional license under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. Further, the fee for a provisional license must be set in 
regulations. Therefore, the Department of Legislative Services notes that any increase in 
board special fund revenues from license fees cannot be reliably quantified. For illustrative 
purposes only, if 500 individuals seek provisional licensure and pay the current 
$100 application processing fee and the $75 initial license fee, special fund revenues 
increase by $87,500. As the bill requires the fee for a provisional license to cover 
administrative costs, special fund revenues are likely to cover expenditures discussed 
below. 
 
BSWE advises that provisional licensees would likely be required to pay an additional 
$75 license fee for a full license. 
 
State Expenditures:  BSWE anticipates that additional staff will be required to process 
provisional license applications, track provisional license holders’ examination or 
supervised experience progress, notify provisional licensees when their license is expiring, 
and convert provisional licenses to full licenses as necessary. 
 
Therefore, BSWE special fund expenditures increase by $64,900 in fiscal 2027. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one administrator (beginning October 1, 2026, following 
the promulgation of required regulations) to manage the additional workload associated 
with issuing provisional licenses. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$55,759 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$64,900 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Based on current social work application and license fees, if approximately 370 applicants 
apply for a provisional license in fiscal 2027, special fund revenues would be sufficient to 
cover these administrative expenses in fiscal 2027. The number of new applicants for a 
provisional license would have to increase to approximately 425 in fiscal 2028, and to 488 
by fiscal 2031, to continue to cover ongoing costs. Alternatively, BSWE could adjust 
provisional  license fees to sufficiently cover administrative costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 769/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 18 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6