START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 717 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 717 
(Delegate Edelson) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Baltimore City - Raffles - Organizations Affiliated With Professional Baseball 
and Football Teams 
 
 
This bill authorizes an organization located in Baltimore City that is affiliated with a 
professional National Football League (NFL) team that plays its home games in  
Baltimore City to conduct raffles. Additionally, the bill extends the June 30, 2026 
termination date of Chapter 372 of 2025, which authorized an organization located in 
Baltimore City that is affiliated with a professional Major League Baseball (MLB) team 
that plays its home games in Baltimore City to conduct raffles, to June 30, 2029. 
Requirements for a raffle conducted by an organization affiliated with a professional 
MLB team are generally applied to an organization affiliated with a professional 
NFL team. The bill specifies the times and the specific location for when and where raffles 
may be conducted by an organization affiliated with a professional NFL team. A permit to 
hold raffles expires one year after the permit is issued instead of at the end of the calendar 
year in which the permit is issued. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and terminates 
when Chapter 372 terminates. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. While the bill may potentially decrease lottery revenues due to 
substitution effects in FY 2026 through 2029, the impact is small enough that State finances 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances. The  
Baltimore City Police Department can issue permits in FY 2026 through 2029 using 
existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 717/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 372, which terminates June 30, 2026, authorizes an organization 
located in Baltimore City that is affiliated with a professional MLB team that plays its 
home games in Baltimore City to conduct raffles. The organization must spend a majority 
of its funds in Baltimore City for fraternal, civic, or charitable purposes, or for purposes 
related to a veterans’ hospital or amateur athletics. Before conducting a raffle, an 
organization must obtain a written permit from a designated Baltimore City government 
agency. A raffle ticket may be sold and received in-person or on an electronic device within 
a specified area of Baltimore City, and raffle tickets must be sold and received no earlier 
than one hour before the official start of the baseball game and no later than the  
seventh inning of that baseball game. 
 
Before issuing the permit, the designated Baltimore City government agency must 
ascertain the character of the applicant to determine if the permit should be issued. The 
agency may issue a single permit to an organization to hold raffles at multiple professional 
MLB games played in Baltimore City, and there is no limit on the number of raffles that 
an organization may conduct in conjunction with professional MLB games played in 
Baltimore City. A permit expires at the end of the calendar year in which the permit is 
issued. 
 
The organization conducting a raffle may set the price of raffle tickets and award prizes in 
any amount in money or in merchandise. The organization conducting a raffle may not 
allow an individual or group of individuals to benefit financially from the raffle or receive 
any of the raffle’s proceeds for personal use or benefit. 
 
An organization conducting a raffle must use a geofence to ensure that raffle tickets sold 
and received on an electronic device are sold and received within a specified area in 
Baltimore City. A raffle ticket may only be sold using age-verification measures to ensure 
that the buyer is at least 18 years old. 
 
An organization conducting a raffle is not subject to the prohibition of accepting credit 
under current law as long as an individual does not purchase more than $50 worth of tickets 
or make more than one credit transaction each day. 
 
A person may not knowingly conduct or attempt to conduct a raffle in violation of the Act, 
and a person who does so is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a 
maximum of one year in prison and/or a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 717/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 538 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Comptroller’s Office; Department of State 
Police; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3