START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 752 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 752 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Theft and Fraud Crimes - Valuation and Forgery of Gift Cards 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person, with the intent of defrauding another, from altering or 
tampering with a “gift card” or its packaging. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and 
subject to imprisonment for up to 18 months and/or $500 maximum fine. The bill also 
establishes a valuation method for gift cards for purposes of the theft statute.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Gift card” means an “open loop gift card” or a “closed loop gift card,” 
as those terms are defined in § 14-4901 of the Commercial Law Article. It does not include 
a credit card; an electronic funds transfer; or money, a check, a draft, or any other similar 
paper instrument. 
 
For purposes of the theft statute, the value of the gift card is the greatest of (1) the value 
represented on the face of the card; (2) the value that a defendant alleged to have violated 
Title 7, Subtitle 1 of the Criminal Law Article (Crimes Involving Theft) represented the 
gift card to be; or (3) the amount of loss incurred by any person involving the use of the 
gift card. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 752/ Page 2 
Current Law:   
  
 Definitions under § 14-4901 of the Commercial Law Article 
 
“Open-loop gift card” means a card, code, or device that is (1) issued to a consumer on a 
prepaid basis primarily for personal, family, or household purposes in a specified amount, 
regardless of whether that amount may be increased or reloaded in exchange for payment; 
(2) payment card network branded; and (3) redeemable on presentation at multiple 
unaffiliated merchants for goods or services within the payment card network or usable at 
an automated teller machine.  
 
A “closed-loop gift card” means a card, code, or device that is (1) issued to a consumer on 
a prepaid basis primarily for personal, family, or household purposes in a specified amount, 
regardless of whether that amount may be increased or reloaded in exchange for payment 
and (2) redeemable on presentation by a consumer at a single merchant or a group of 
affiliated merchants.  
 
Title 7, Subtitle 1 of the Criminal Law Article  
 
Title 7, Subtitle 1 of the Criminal Law Articles establishes a variety of theft offenses, 
including general theft. The value of property or services for offenses under Part I of the 
subtitle must be determined in accordance with § 7-103 of the Criminal Law Article 
(amended by the bill to address gift cards specifically). 
 
General Theft 
 
Under the general theft statute, a person may not, under specified circumstances,  
(1) willfully or knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over property; (2) obtain 
control over property by willfully or knowingly using deception; (3) possess stolen 
property knowing that it has been stolen or believing that it probably has been stolen;  
(4) obtain control over property knowing that the property was lost, mislaid, or delivered 
under a mistake as to the identity of the recipient or nature or amount of the property; or 
(5) obtain the services of another that are available only by compensation by deception or 
with knowledge that the services are provided without the provider’s consent. A violator 
is required to restore the owner’s property or pay the owner the value of the property or 
services and is subject to the penalties in Exhibit 1.  
 
Generally, “value” means the market value of the property or service at the time and place 
of the crime or if the market value cannot satisfactorily be ascertained, the cost of the 
replacement of the property or service within a reasonable time after the crime.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 752/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1  
Penalties for General Theft 
 
Value of Property and/or Services 
Maximum Penalty 
Less than $100* 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine 
 
At least $100 but less than $1,500* 
Misdemeanor – 6 months imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine (first conviction) or 1 
year imprisonment and/or $500 fine 
(second or subsequent conviction) 
 
Less than $1,500 (four or more prior theft 
convictions)** 
 
Misdemeanor – 5 years imprisonment 
and/or $5,000 fine 
At least $1,500 but less than $25,000 
Felony – 5 years imprisonment and/or 
$10,000 fine 
 
At least $25,000 but less than $100,000 
Felony – 10 years imprisonment and/or 
$15,000 fine 
 
$100,000 or more 
Felony – 20 years imprisonment and/or 
$25,000 fine 
 
* Subject to two-year statute of limitations.  
** Subject to specified notice requirements. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 437 (Senator Folden) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 752/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4