START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 737 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 737 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Maintenance Organizations - Payments to Nonparticipating Providers - 
Reimbursement Rate 
 
 
This bill alters the reimbursement rate that a health maintenance organization (HMO) must 
pay a nonparticipating provider. Specifically, if an HMO pays a nonparticipating provider 
125% of the average rate the HMO paid, reimbursement must be based on the rate paid as 
of January 31, 2019, indexed for inflation as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Any 
additional workload for MIA can be absorbed within existing resources. Expenditures for 
the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program (State plan) increase 
by at least $112,500 in FY 2027 and more than $150,000 annually thereafter, as discussed 
below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/SF/FF Exp. 
$112,500 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($112,500) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 737/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Section 19-710.1 of the Health-General Article specifies 
how much an HMO must pay for a covered service rendered to an enrollee by a 
noncontracting provider. 
 
 
For an evaluation and management (E&M) service, an HMO must pay the greater 
of (1) 125% of the average rate the HMO paid as of January 1 of the previous 
calendar year, in the same geographic area, for the same covered service, to similarly 
licensed contracting providers or (2) 140% of the Medicare rate for the same 
covered service, to a similarly licensed provider, in the same geographic area as of 
August 1, 2008, inflated by the change in the Medicare Economic Index from 
2008 to the current year. 
 
For a service that is not an E&M service, an HMO must pay at least 125% of the 
average rate the HMO paid as of January 1 of the previous calendar year, in the 
same geographic area, to a similarly licensed contracting provider for the same 
covered service. 
 
An HMO must pay a noncontracting trauma physician the greater of (1) 140% of 
the Medicare rate or (2) the rate the HMO paid, as of January 1, 2001, in the same 
geographic area, for the same covered service, to a similarly licensed provider. 
 
Under the bill, for an E&M service, an HMO must pay the greater of (1) 125% of the 
average rate the HMO paid as of January 31, 2019, in the same geographic area, for the 
same covered service, to similarly licensed contracting providers, inflated by the change in 
the Medicare Economic Index from 2019 to the current year or (2) 140% of the Medicare 
rate for the same covered service, to similarly licensed contracting providers. 
 
Under the bill, for a service that is not an E&M service, an HMO must pay at least 125% of 
the average rate the HMO paid as of January 31, 2019, in the same geographic area, to a 
similarly licensed contracting provider for the same covered service, inflated by the change 
in the Medicare Economic Index from 2019 to the current year. 
 
The bill does not alter the rate that an HMO must pay a noncontracting trauma physician. 
 
Federal No Suprises Act 
 
The federal No Surprises Act, which took effect January 1, 2022, requires health plans to 
cover surprise bills for emergency services, as well as out-of-network (OON) provider bills 
rendered at in-network hospitals and facilities. Balance billing is prohibited, with specified 
exceptions, and OON providers may not send patients bills for excess charges. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 737/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  The State plan is largely self-insured for its medical contracts, except 
for the one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser). The Department of 
Budget and Management advises that, under the bill, Kaiser’s costs increase to provide 
additional reimbursement to nonparticipating providers by an estimated $150,000 in the 
first full year. Given the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, this analysis assumes the 
requirement for payment applies for three quarters of fiscal 2027. Thus, costs for the 
State plan increase by at least $112,500 in fiscal 2027. Annually thereafter, expenditures 
increase by more than $150,000 as the estimate must be adjusted to reflect inflation. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that consumers may see an increase in the amount 
of reimbursement for services received from noncontracting providers, but given existing 
balance billing protections for HMO members there should be no direct impact on 
consumer out-of-pocket costs.  
 
According to a January 2025 report from the Maryland Health Care Commission, adopting 
preferred provider organization (PPO) payment rules for HMO OON services would result 
in higher reimbursements across most specialties, particularly for hospital-based services. 
The report concludes that, while a single OON formula might simplify administration for 
payers, higher OON payments could incentivize providers to leave networks, creating a 
cyclic effect as OON payments are derived from in-network rates. MIA notes that adopting 
PPO payment rules for HMO OON services would increase average reimbursement for 
OON providers by 50%, impacting approximately 0.6% of claims on average, and 
increasing premiums by about 0.3%. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 437 and HB 418 of 2025, and SB 487 and HB 570 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 416 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3