START OF PAGE 1
HB0738/253527/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 738
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “and Young” and substitute “Young,
Conaway, Embry, McComas, Moreno, Nkongolo, Simmons, Stinnett, Taylor,
and Woods”; and in lines 9 and 10 and 11 and 12, in each instance, strike “life estate
deeds with powers” and substitute “transfer–on–death deeds”.

On page 2, in line 11, strike “14–1013” and substitute “14–1014”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 13, strike beginning with “1.” in line 24 down through “2.” in line 26.

On page 14, in line 9, after “TENANT;” insert “AND”; strike beginning with “AN”
in line 10 down through “(III)” in line 12; and strike beginning with “OR” in line 13 down
through “SURVIVORSHIP” in line 14.

On page 15, in line 1, before “AN” insert “(A)”; and after line 3, insert:

“(B) (1) A TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED THAT DESIGNATES MULTIPLE
BENEFICIARIES MAY TRANSFER OWNERSHIP OF THE PROPERTY TO THE
BENEFICIARIES UNDER ANY FORM OF TENANCY INDICATED IN THE TRANSFER-
ON-DEATH DEED.

(2) IF THE TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED DOES NOT INDICATE A
FORM OF TENANCY, TITLE TO THE PROPERTY SHALL BE CONVEYED TO THE
DESIGNATED BENEFICIARIES ON THE DEATH OF THE OWNER OR, IF THERE ARE
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 2 of 10

MULTIPLE OWNERS, ON THE DEATH OF THE LAST SURVIVING OWNER, AS JOINT
TENANTS WITH RIGHTS OF SURVIVORSHIP.”.

On page 16, in lines 16 and 17, strike “PRIOR TO THE DEATH OF THE
TRANSFEROR,”; in line 22, after “INCONSISTENCY” insert “AND THAT IS RECORDED
BEFORE THE DEATH OF THE TRANSFEROR”; in line 24, after the second “DEED”
insert “AND THAT IS RECORDED BEFORE THE DEATH OF THE TRANSFEROR”; in line
25, strike “EXPRESSLY”; and in line 26, after the second “DEED” insert “EXPRESSLY

OR BY INCONSISTENCY AND THAT IS DELIVERED BEFORE THE DEATH OF THE
TRANSFEROR”.

On page 17, in line 21, after “REVOCATION” insert “BY SUBSEQUENT
MARRIAGE FOLLOWED BY A CHILD OR”.

On page 18, strike beginning with “IF” in line 26 down through “(E)” in line 30.

On page 19, in line 1, after “EFFECTIVE” insert “ON THE DEATH OF THE LAST
SURVIVING JOINT OWNER”; in line 23, strike “THE OTHER SIDE OF”; in line 24, after
“FORM” insert “AND THE “COMMON QUESTIONS ABOUT THE USE OF THIS
FORM” DOCUMENT”; after line 25, insert:

“THIS FORM IS FOR CURRENT PROPERTY OWNERS. IF NOT ALL CURRENT
OWNERS ARE SIGNING THIS FORM, YOUR NAME HAS CHANGED SINCE YOU
ACQUIRED THE PROPERTY, OR YOU WISH TO NAME MULTIPLE PEOPLE TO OWN
THE PROPERTY IN THE FUTURE, CONSULTATION WITH A LAWYER IS STRONGLY
ADVISED. USE OF THIS FORM FOR MORE COMPLEX SITUATIONS THAN PROVIDED
FOR IN THE FORM MAY HAVE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES.”;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 3 of 10

in line 28, strike “WITNESSES AND”; in line 29, strike “RELATIVES OR BENEFICIARIES
OF THE OWNER(S) OR NAMED BENEFICIARIES” and substitute “A RELATIVE OF ANY
BENEFICIARY OR OWNER”; and after line 29, insert:

“PLEASE ATTACH AND RECORD ADDITIONAL PAGES IF THE REQUESTED
INFORMATION DOES NOT FIT ON THIS FORM.”.

On page 20, after line 4, insert:

“_____________________________ _________________________________
PRINTED NAME MAILING ADDRESS”;

after line 6, insert:

“_________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________”;

in line 12, after “BENEFICIARY” insert “OR BENEFICIARIES”; in line 13, strike
“BENEFICIARY IF THE BENEFICIARY SURVIVES” and substitute “BENEFICIARY OR
BENEFICIARIES IF THE BENEFICIARY OR BENEFICIARIES SURVIVE”; after line 16,
insert:

“________________________ _________________________________
PRINTED NAME MAILING ADDRESS, IF AVAILABLE”;

and in line 18, strike “DOES” and substitute “OR BENEFICIARIES DO”.

On page 21, after line 4, insert:

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 4 of 10

“_________________________ (SEAL) _________________
SIGNATURE DATE

_______________________________
PRINTED NAME

PREPARER

I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS REVOCABLE TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED
WAS PREPARED BY _______________________, (OWNER/PRIMARY
BENEFICIARY/ALTERNATE BENEFICIARY), A PARTY TO THIS INSTRUMENT.

SIGNATURE: ____________________________

PRINTED NAME: _________________________”.

On page 22, in line 14, after “PROPERTY” insert “AND MAY BE FOUND IN A
PARAGRAPH THAT STARTS WITH THE WORDS “BEGINNING” OR “BEING””; after line
25, insert:

“WHICH CONTROLS AT MY DEATH, MY WILL OR THE TRANSFER-ON-DEATH
DEED? THE TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED CONTROLS OVER A CONTRARY
INSTRUCTION IN A WILL.”;

and after line 31, insert:

“DOES A TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED HELP AVOID INHERITANCE TAXES?
NO. YOUR BENEFICIARY MAY NEED TO PAY INHERITANCE TAXES AS A RESULT OF
THE TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED. IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS RELATED TO
INHERITANCE TAXES, CONSULT A LAWYER.”.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 5 of 10

On page 23, in line 13, after “IS” insert “STRONGLY”; in the same line, strike
“SECRECY” and substitute “NON–DISCLOSURE”; after line 14, insert:

“COULD A TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED I RECORD TODAY BE AFFECTED IF
I DIVORCE LATER OR GET MARRIED AND HAVE CHILDREN? YES. IF YOU CREATE
A TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED THAT NAMES YOUR SPOUSE AS THE BENEFICIARY
WHILE YOU ARE MARRIED AND YOU LATER DIVORCE OR YOUR MARRIAGE IS
ANNULLED, THE TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED WILL BE CONSIDERED TO BE
AUTOMATICALLY REVOKED. ADDITIONALLY, IF YOU RECORD A TRANSFER-ON-
DEATH DEED NAMING ANY BENEFICIARY AND LATER MARRY AND HAVE
CHILDREN WITH YOUR FUTURE SPOUSE BY BIRTH, ADOPTION, OR LEGITIMATION,
YOUR TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED WILL BE CONSIDERED TO BE
AUTOMATICALLY REVOKED.

AS A BENEFICIARY, WHAT DO I DO ONCE THE OWNER HAS DIED? YOU WILL
AUTOMATICALLY RECEIVE THE PROPERTY WHEN THE OWNER DIES, UNLESS YOU
FOLLOW MARYLAND’S PROCEDURE TO DISCLAIM YOUR INTEREST. YOU MAY
WISH TO EXECUTE AND RECORD A TRANSFER-ON-DEATH NOTIFICATION OF
DEATH FORM TO SHOW THAT YOU ARE NOW THE RIGHTFUL OWNER OF THE
PROPERTY.”;

and in line 31, after “OWNER” insert “OR OWNERS”.

On page 24, after line 2, insert:

“_____________________________ _____________________________
PRINTED NAME MAILING ADDRESS”;

after line 4, insert:

(Over)
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 6 of 10

“____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________”;

and after line 12, insert:

“_______________________________ (SEAL) _______________
SIGNATURE DATE

_______________________________
PRINTED NAME”.

On page 25, after line 23, insert:

“(A) (1) ON THE DEATH OF A TRANSFEROR, A BENEFICIARY OR THE
BENEFICIARIES OF A TRANSFER–ON–DEATH DEED MAY RECORD NOTICE OF THE
DEATH OF A TRANSFEROR IN THE LAND RECORDS OF THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE
PROPERTY IS LOCATED.

(2) NOTICE OF THE DEATH OF THE TRANSFEROR IS NOT REQUIRED
TO EFFECTUATE THE TRANSFER OF THE PROPERTY, WHICH IS DEEMED TO HAVE
OCCURRED AT THE DEATH OF THE TRANSFEROR.

(3) THE CLERK OF THE COURT SHALL FORWARD NOTIFICATION OF
THE DEATH OF A TRANSFEROR TO THE MARYLAND STATE DEPARTMENT OF
ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION IN THE SAME MANNER AS A DEED OR A LEASE.

(B) THE FOLLOWING FORM MAY BE USED AND RECORDED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO PROVIDE NOTICE OF THE DEATH OF A
TRANSFEROR:
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 7 of 10

“TRANSFER-ON-DEATH DEED NOTIFICATION OF DEATH

THE UNDERSIGNED HEREBY AFFIRMS, UNDER THE PENALTIES OF
PERJURY, THAT THE FOLLOWING IS TRUE REGARDING A TRANSFER-ON-DEATH
DEED (TODD) RECORDED ON THE SUBJECT PROPERTY:

NAME OF TRANSFEROR(S): ____________________________________________

RECORDING REFERENCE OF TODD:

BOOK/LIBER NUMBER: _______, PAGE/FOLIO: _______, DATED THE ___ DAY OF
____________, 20___, AND RECORDED AMONG THE LAND RECORDS OF
____________________ CITY/COUNTY.

COMPLETE ADDRESS OF SUBJECT PROPERTY AS IT APPEARS IN RECORDS OF
MARYLAND STATE DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION (SDAT):
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________

SDAT TAX IDENTIFICATION NUMBER: _______________________________________
NOTE: THE INFORMATION ABOVE MAY BE AVAILABLE ON SDAT’S WEBSITE.

TODD TRANSFEROR INFORMATION

DATE OF TRANSFEROR’S DEATH: ___________________________

STATE WHERE DEATH CERTIFICATE ISSUED: ______________________

(Over)
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 8 of 10

DEATH CERTIFICATE FILE OR REGISTRATION NUMBER: _____________________

TODD BENEFICIARY INFORMATION

NAME OF BENEFICIARY OR BENEFICIARIES IDENTIFIED ON TODD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________

MAILING ADDRESS OF BENEFICIARY WHO WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR REAL
PROPERTY TAXES:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________

RELATIONSHIP(S) OF BENEFICIARY OR BENEFICIARIES TO TRANSFEROR:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________

IF A BENEFICIARY OR BENEFICIARIES DIED AFTER THE TRANSFEROR’S DEATH,
PROVIDE THE DATE OF DEATH, DEATH CERTIFICATE STATE AND
FILE/REGISTRATION NUMBER HERE. IF THE BENEFICIARY OR BENEFICIARIES
DIED PRIOR TO THE TRANSFEROR, THEIR INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY HAS
LAPSED.
__________________________________________________________________________
_____________

BENEFICIARY SIGNATURE: __________________________
DATE: ______________________________

BENEFICIARY SIGNATURE: __________________________
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 9 of 10

DATE: ______________________________

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

STATE OF ____________ COUNTY OF ______________

THIS RECORD WAS ACKNOWLEDGED BEFORE ME ON THE ___ DAY OF ___, 20__, BY

___________________________________

SIGNATURE OF NOTARIAL OFFICER

TITLE OF OFFICE

STAMP

MY COMMISSION EXPIRES: ________

CERTIFICATION OF OCCUPANCY STATUS

SELECT ONE OF THE BELOW OPTIONS THAT CORRECTLY DESCRIBES THE
PROPERTY’S OCCUPANCY STATUS:

OPTION ONE:

____ NONE OF THE BENEFICIARIES INHERITING THE SUBJECT PROPERTY UNDER
THE DEED REFERENCED IN THIS NOTIFICATION LIVE AT THIS PROPERTY AS
THEIR PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

OR

(Over)
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
HB0738/253527/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 738
Page 10 of 10

OPTION TWO:

____ AT LEAST ONE OF THE BENEFICIARIES INHERITING THE SUBJECT PROPERTY
UNDER THE DEED REFERENCED IN THIS NOTIFICATION LIVES AT THIS PROPERTY
AS THEIR PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

IF YOU SELECTED OPTION TWO AND YOU ARE THE BENEFICIARY OCCUPYING THE
PROPERTY, PLEASE COMPLETE THE FOLLOWING:

I, ______________________ (PRINT NAME), DO HEREBY CERTIFY AND AFFIRM UNDER
THE PENALTIES OF PERJURY THAT I CURRENTLY LIVE AT AND WILL CONTINUE
TO LIVE AT THE ABOVE-REFERENCED PROPERTY, FOLLOWING THE RECORDING
OF THIS NOTIFICATION. I SHALL OCCUPY THE PROPERTY AS MY PRINCIPAL
RESIDENCE FOR AT LEAST 7 OF THE NEXT 12 MONTHS.

_______________________________________
SIGNATURE”.

14–1014.”.
END OF PAGE 10