START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 798 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 798 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Economic Development - Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Business 
Accounts - Management Fees (Small Business Increased Access to Capital Act) 
 
   
This bill allows for an additional means of covering the management and administrative 
costs of eligible fund managers under the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Business 
Account (SMWOBA). Specifically, the bill establishes that the Department of Commerce 
(Commerce) may authorize an eligible fund manager to receive, use, and retain a 
management fee – calculated as a percentage of each loan made – of at least 1.5% but no 
more than 3% of the total loan principal. Any such authorized management fee must be 
paid from SMWOBA and may be retained by the eligible fund manager for administrative 
purposes related to lending activities. A management fee may be in addition to or in lieu 
of monies from grants already allowed to be used by an eligible fund manager. Further, the 
department may establish an annual cap on the cumulative amount of management fees an 
eligible fund manager may receive. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If Commerce uses the authority in the bill, it can likely do so with existing 
resources; otherwise, general fund expenditures may increase for oversight. Funding for 
SMWOBA is not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may be affected beginning as early as 
FY 2027, as discussed below.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 798/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SMWOBA, established in 2007, is a special, nonlapsing fund that is 
administered by Commerce. SMWOBA is used to provide loans and grants to small, 
minority, and women-owned businesses in the State. A small percentage of gross video 
lottery terminal proceeds is distributed to SMWOBA each fiscal year.  
 
Commerce provides grants from SMWOBA to eligible fund managers – in practice, mostly 
a mixture of county development corporations and private firms. The fund managers then 
provide loans and grants to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the State. 
Generally, grants are limited to $10,000 per recipient and, except in the case of certain 
disasters or emergencies, must be issued in conjunction with a loan. Fund managers must 
allocate at least 50% of available funds to eligible businesses in the jurisdictions and 
communities surrounding the State’s video lottery facilities. Funds repaid to the fund 
managers over time do not accrue to SMWOBA – they are held by the fund managers, 
outside of the State budget, to be used to provide additional rounds of assistance. 
 
The program enables fund managers to set the interest rate and any fee structure pricing on 
originated loans. As fund managers collect the loan payments, they are permitted to keep 
the interest and fees collected. A fund manager may apply for reimbursement of 
administrative expenses to establish their program. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Many eligible fund managers for SMWOBA are local economic 
development entities. These fund managers may be authorized to receive a management 
fee of 1.5% to 3.0% of the total loan principal, potentially in addition to existing fees. As 
any such management fee must come from SMWOBA, the total amount of funding 
available for making loans and awarding grants is reduced, which in turn reduces the 
amounts available for additional rounds of assistance. For illustrative purposes only, as 
much as $600,000 could be diverted as management fees, based on funding of 
approximately $20.0 million a year. 
 
Given the additional means of covering administrative costs, the bill may spur additional 
entities to become fund managers. If so, the amount of grant funding available each year 
to existing fund managers could be negatively affected.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 920 (Senator Harris, et al.) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 798/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3