START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 734 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 734 
(Delegate Roberson) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Agricultural Use Assessment - Community Solar Energy 
Generating Systems 
 
 
This bill extends the deadline by which a community solar energy generating system must 
be approved by the Public Service Commission (PSC) in order to qualify for an agricultural 
use assessment from December 31, 2025, to December 31, 2030. The bill also establishes 
a process for the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to determine in 
advance of construction whether a proposed agrivoltaics project will qualify for the 
agricultural use assessment. The department may rescind a preconstruction determination 
under specified circumstances. The bill authorizes SDAT to charge an application fee to 
cover administrative costs. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable 
years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential decrease in Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues beginning in 
FY 2027 depending on the number of additional community solar energy generating 
systems that are placed in service between December 31, 2025, and December 31, 2030. 
Expenditures incurred by SDAT are offset by application fees. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential decrease in local property tax revenues beginning in FY 2027 
depending on the number of additional community solar energy generating systems that 
are placed in service between December 31, 2025, and December 31, 2030. Expenditures 
are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 734/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 658 and 659 of 2022 provided several tax benefits for a 
community solar energy generating system that is placed in service after June 30, 2022, 
and approved on or before December 31, 2025, by PSC. One of the tax benefits required 
SDAT to assess and qualify land that is used by a community solar energy generating 
system for agrivoltaics as land that is actively used for farm or agricultural purposes. 
 
Agricultural Land Use Assessment 
 
Land that is actively used for farm or agricultural use must be valued on the basis of that 
use and may not be valued as if subdivided. Land that is valued as agricultural use must be 
assessed on the basis of its use value. SDAT must establish in regulations criteria to 
determine if land that appears to be actively used for farm or agricultural purposes  
(1) is actually used for farm or agricultural purposes and (2) qualifies for an agricultural 
use assessment. The criteria must include (1) the zoning of the land; (2) the present and 
past use of the land including land under the Soil Bank Program of the United States;  
(3) the productivity of the land, including timberlands and reforested lands; and (4) the 
gross income that is derived from the agricultural activity. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 depending on 
the number of additional community solar energy generating systems that are placed in 
service between December 31, 2025, and December 31, 2030. The bill authorizes SDAT 
to charge an application fee to cover the department’s administrative costs. As a result, any 
costs incurred by the department to administer the provisions of the bill may be offset with 
applications fees.  
 
The department reports that no community solar generating systems are currently receiving 
an agricultural use assessment. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 
depending on the number of additional community solar energy generating systems that 
are placed in service between December 31, 2025, and December 31, 2030. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 344 (Senators King and Hester) - Budget and Taxation., 
HB 112 (Delegate Crosby) - Ways and Means. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 734/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Public Service 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3