START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 720 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 720 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq 
Conflicts Scholarship - Repeal of Termination Date 
 
 
This bill repeals language preventing the Maryland Higher Education Commission 
(MHEC) from issuing an initial Douglas J.J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq 
Conflicts Scholarship award after June 30, 2030. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for Douglas J.J. Peters Veterans of the 
Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship are maintained beyond FY 2030; thus, general 
fund expenditures increase by an estimated $750,000 beginning in FY 2031. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
750,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
($750,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Veterans and active service members who served in Afghanistan and Iraq, 
and members of the reserve who were activated as a result of the conflicts, are eligible for 
the scholarships, as are their children, stepchildren, and spouses. To qualify, an applicant 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 720/ Page 2 
must also be a Maryland resident and must be accepted for admission or enrolled in a 
regular undergraduate program at a Maryland institution of higher education or a two-year 
terminal certificate program in which the course work is eligible for transfer into a 
baccalaureate program at a Maryland institution of higher education. 
 
An individual is considered to have served in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict if the 
individual was an active service member who served in (1) Afghanistan or contiguous air 
space, as defined in federal regulations on or after October 24, 2001, or (2) Iraq or 
contiguous waters or air space as defined in federal regulations on or after March 19, 2003. 
 
A recipient is not required to file for financial aid; however, a recipient who does file for 
financial aid must file by March 1. A scholarship may supplement, but is not contingent 
on, any federal education benefits for which a recipient qualifies as a result of an 
individual’s military or military dependent status. Recipients must maintain a grade point 
average of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale and may hold the scholarship for up to five years of 
full-time study or eight years of part-time study. 
 
The annual amount of a scholarship may not exceed 50% of the equivalent annual tuition, 
mandatory fees, and room and board at the University System of Maryland institution with 
the highest annual expenses for full-time resident undergraduates, excluding the 
University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus and the University of Maryland Global 
Campus. The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) in MHEC may not award an 
initial scholarship under the program after June 30, 2030, although existing scholarships 
may be renewed after that date. 
 
Funding for the scholarship program is as provided in the annual State budget. In addition, 
senators and delegates may authorize OSFA to award their senatorial and delegate 
scholarship funds to eligible recipients of the scholarships. There is a Veterans of the 
Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship Fund. MHEC may accept gifts or grants for the 
fund and must report annually on the status of the fund. 
 
State Expenditures:  Funding for the Douglas J.J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and 
Iraq Conflicts Scholarship is as provided in the State budget. This analysis assumes the 
program continues to be funded at its historic funding level, $750,000 in general fund 
appropriations for the program, indefinitely beginning in fiscal 2031. Actual expenditures 
depend on annual legislative appropriations. 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a $750,000 general fund appropriation to the 
Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship. In 
fiscal 2023, the program made 196 awards totaling $1.0 million for an average award 
amount of approximately $5,200, in fiscal 2024, the program made 108 awards totaling 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 720/ Page 3 
$613,959 for an average award amount of approximately $5,685, and in fiscal 2025, the 
program made 87 awards totaling $521,566 for an average award amount of nearly $6,000. 
 
Additionally, MHEC advises that, although extending the scholarship would maintain 
ongoing administrative responsibilities, such responsibilities would not create a fiscal or 
operational impact on the agency. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 7 (Senator Simonaire) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3