START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 733 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 733 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Transit Administration - Fixed-Route Transit Services - 
Announcements 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) to provide real-time audible 
and text-based announcements that announce all stops and other critical information on all 
fixed-route transit services. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) capital 
program is fully subscribed, MDOT must redirect millions of dollars (likely at least  
$8.0 million) from other projects in FY 2027 for equipment upgrades, as discussed below. 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures likely increase by at least $200,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2028 for ongoing maintenance costs for the newly installed equipment, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MTA is a modal unit within MDOT, and it operates a comprehensive transit 
system throughout the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area. MTA’s fixed-route transit 
services include more than 50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, such as the 
light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter buses, and Maryland Area Regional 
Commuter (MARC) trains. Its only non-fixed route service is its mobility/paratransit 
program. Aside from the District of Columbia transit system, MDOT and MTA are 
generally the agencies responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the 
State. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 733/ Page 2 
State Expenditures:  MTA advises that many of its transit vehicles do not have the proper 
equipment installed to make the audio and/or text-based announcements required by the 
bill; specifically, MTA estimates that 70 buses and 61 MARC railcars must be retrofitted 
with new technology to meet the bill’s requirements. Therefore, because MDOT’s capital 
program is fully subscribed, significant funding, totaling millions of dollars in fiscal 2027, 
must be redirected from other projects to complete the upgrades and ensure the transit 
vehicles have the capability to make the required audible and text-based announcements. 
TTF expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2028 for ongoing maintenance costs for the 
new technology. 
 
Although a precise estimate of the increase in costs resulting from the bill cannot be made 
at this time, based on a preliminary analysis by MTA, the total cost to install the required 
equipment on its buses and railcars is likely to exceed $8.0 million in fiscal 2027, with 
ongoing costs for maintenance of approximately $200,000 annually thereafter. This 
preliminary estimate reflects the cost to ensure the vehicles can provide basic information 
about planned stops; however, if the bill is interpreted to require the announcements to 
include information about detours and travel disruptions in real time, additional equipment 
upgrades would also be necessary for MTA’s light rail and Metro railcar transit vehicles, 
significantly increasing initial equipment and ongoing maintenance costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2