START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 738 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 738 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Transfer-on-Death Deed - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Transfer-on-Death Deed Act in State law. The bill 
includes provisions relating to (1) the elements, recordation, and effects of a  
transfer-on-death (TOD) deed; (2) revocation of a TOD deed; (3) the effect of a transferor’s 
death; (4) forms and informational documents for TOD deeds; (5) recordation of a notice 
of the death of a transferor; (5) exemption of TOD deeds from recordation and transfer 
taxes; and (6) interpretation and enforcement of the bill. The bill applies to any TOD deed 
made before, on, or after the bill’s effective date by a transferor who dies on or after the 
bill’s effective date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $15,700 in FY 2027 only, for 
one‑time programming costs for the Judiciary. General fund revenues may decrease and 
special fund revenues may increase, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
General Provisions and Elements, Recordation, and Effects 
 
The bill creates a new subtitle within the Real Property Article (Title 14, Subtitle 10, 
“Maryland Transfer-on-Death Deed Act”) specifying that a TOD deed, a nontestamentary 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 738/ Page 2 
instrument, may be used by an owner to transfer a property to one or more beneficiaries 
upon the transferor’s death. A TOD deed that designates multiple beneficiaries may 
transfer ownership of the property to the beneficiaries under any form of tenancy indicated 
in the TOD deed. If the TOD deed does not indicate a form of tenancy, title to the property 
must be conveyed to the designated beneficiaries on the death of the owner, or, if there are 
multiple owners, on the death of the last surviving owner, as joint tenants with rights of 
survivorship. A TOD deed is effective if, prior to the death of the transferor, it is recorded 
in the land records of the county where the property is located, in accordance with 
prerequisites, under the Real Property Article, to recording an instrument that effects a 
change of ownership. The bill makes specified changes to those prerequisite provisions 
relating to the fact that ownership of a property that is the subject of a TOD deed transfers 
on the death of the transferor and not as of the date of recordation. 
 
A TOD deed must (1) comply with existing requirements for a deed under § 4-101 of the 
Real Property Article and (2) state that the transfer to the designated beneficiary is to occur 
at the transferor’s death. A TOD deed does not require (1) notice or delivery to or 
acceptance by a designated beneficiary during the transferor’s life or (2) consideration. 
 
The Maryland Transfer-on-Death Deed Act does not (1) affect any method of transferring 
property otherwise allowed under existing State statute or (2) limit the right of any person 
to maintain a civil action for damages or other remedies otherwise available under any 
other provision of law. A TOD deed may be made or revoked by an individual if they have 
the same capacity required for making a will. 
 
During a transferor’s life, the TOD deed does not:   
 
 
affect an interest or right of the transferor or any other owner, including the right to 
transfer or encumber the property; 
 
affect an interest or right of a transferee, even if the transferee has actual or 
constructive notice of the TOD deed; 
 
affect an interest or right of a secured or unsecured creditor or future creditor of the 
transferor, even if the creditor has actual or constructive notice of the TOD deed; 
 
affect the transferor’s or designated beneficiary’s eligibility for any form of public 
assistance; 
 
create a legal or equitable interest in favor of any designated beneficiary; or 
 
subject the property to claims or process of a creditor of any designated beneficiary. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 738/ Page 3 
Revocation 
 
The transferor may revoke a previously recorded TOD deed, or any part of that recorded 
TOD deed, by recording in the land records of the county in which the property is located 
an executed and acknowledged:   
 
 
TOD deed that revokes the deed or part of the deed expressly or by inconsistency 
and that is recorded before the death of the transferor; 
 
instrument of revocation that expressly revokes the deed or part of the deed and that 
is recorded before the death of the transferor; or 
 
inter vivos deed that revokes the TOD deed or part of the deed expressly or by 
inconsistency and that is delivered before the death of the transferor. 
 
After a TOD deed is recorded, it may not be revoked by (1) a revocatory act on the deed or 
(2) a testamentary document executed by the transferor, even if the testamentary document 
is executed after the date of recordation of the TOD deed.  
 
If a TOD deed is made by more than one transferor (1) revocation by a transferor does not 
affect the deed as to the interest of another transferor and (2) a deed by joint owners is 
revoked only if it is revoked by all living joint owners.  
 
“Joint owner” means an individual who owns property concurrently with one or more other 
individuals with a right of survivorship, including a joint tenant and a tenant by the entirety. 
“Joint owner” does not include a tenant in common.  
 
The provisions above related to revocation of a TOD deed do not limit the effect of an  
inter vivos transfer of the property.  
 
Transferor’s Death 
 
Subject to specified limitations, if a beneficiary survives the transferor, on the death of a 
transferor that executed a TOD deed, the interest in the property is transferred to the 
designated beneficiary in accordance with the TOD deed. The interest of any designated 
beneficiary who fails to survive the transferor lapses. If the designated beneficiary does not 
survive the transferor and the transferor has provided for an alternate designated 
beneficiary in the TOD deed, the interest in the property is transferred to a surviving 
alternate designated beneficiary in accordance with the TOD deed on the death of the 
transferor. A TOD deed may provide for successive alternate designated beneficiaries. 
 
A beneficiary takes the property transferred by the TOD deed subject to all conveyances, 
encumbrances, assignments, contracts, mortgages, liens, and any other security agreements 
to which the property is subject at the transferor’s death. A TOD deed transfers property 
without covenant or warranty of title even if the TOD deed contains a contrary provision.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 738/ Page 4 
If a transferor is a joint owner and is survived by one or more joint owners, the property 
that is the subject of the TOD deed belongs to the surviving joint owner or owners with 
right of survivorship. If a transferor is the last surviving joint owner, the TOD deed is 
effective on the transferor’s death.  
 
A beneficiary may disclaim all or part of the beneficiary’s interest, as provided under the 
Maryland Uniform Disclaimer of Property Interests Act, Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the Estates 
and Trusts Article. The bill modifies the Maryland Uniform Disclaimer of Property 
Interests Act to require that in the case of a disclaimer of an interest created by a beneficiary 
designation (such as a TOD deed) that is disclaimed after the designation becomes 
irrevocable, the disclaimer of an interest in real property must be recorded in the land 
records of the county where the real property that is the subject of the disclaimer is located. 
 
Forms and Informational Documents 
 
The bill specifies a form that may be used to create a TOD deed, a form that may be used 
to create an instrument of revocation, and informational sheets for each. The bill also 
specifies a form that may be used and recorded to provide notice of the death of a transferor 
(discussed below). An individual may establish a TOD deed by executing, acknowledging, 
and recording a form TOD deed. The form TOD deed must (1) be recorded in accordance 
with the policies and procedures established by the clerk of the circuit court before the 
transferor’s death and (2) state that the transfer to the beneficiary occurs at the transferor’s 
death.  
 
Notice of the Death of a Transferor 
 
On the death of a transferor, a beneficiary or the beneficiaries of a TOD deed may record 
notice of the death of a transferor in the land records of the county in which the property is 
located. However, notice of the death of the transferor is not required to effectuate the 
transfer of the property, which is deemed to have occurred at the death of the transferor. 
The clerk of the court must forward notification of the death of a transferor to the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) in the same manner as a deed or a lease.  
 
Exemption from Recordation and Transfer Taxes 
 
A real property TOD deed is not subject to recordation tax or State or county transfer tax 
if the property is a primary residence or a secondary residence of the transferor. 
 
Interpretation and Enforcement of the Bill 
 
The bill must be interpreted and enforced by a court in accordance with existing law 
governing life estates with powers of alienation, to the extent practicable and so long as the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 738/ Page 5 
interpretation and enforcement does not conflict with the uniform application of the 
Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act promulgated by the Uniform Law 
Commission.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Property of a Deceased Person 
 
Under the Estates and Trusts Article, all property of a decedent (deceased person) is subject 
to the estates of decedents law, and upon the person’s death must pass directly to the 
personal representative (a fiduciary who settles and distributes the estate of the decedent in 
accordance with the terms of any will and the estates of decedents law) for administration 
and distribution. “Property” is all real and personal property of the decedent and any right 
or interest in the property, which does not pass, at the time of the decedent’s death, to 
another person by the terms of the instrument under which it is held, or by operation of 
law. 
 
Exemption from Recordation and Transfer Taxes 
 
When estate assets are distributed in kind to beneficiaries, the personal representative must 
execute and deliver an instrument or deed of distribution assigning, transferring, or 
releasing the assets to the beneficiary as evidence of the title of the beneficiary to the 
property. A recordation tax, transfer tax, or any other State or local excise tax may not be 
imposed on the transfer by a personal representative of property or an interest in property 
without consideration or on the recordation of an instrument executed by a personal 
representative that transfers property or an interest in property without consideration. 
 
Disclaimer 
 
Under the Maryland Uniform Disclaimer of Property Interests Act, a person may disclaim 
(i.e., refuse to accept) in whole or in part any interest in or power over property, including 
a power of appointment, regardless of whether the creator of the interest or power imposed 
a restriction upon the transfer of, or a restriction or limitation on the right to disclaim, the 
interest or power. 
 
A disclaimed interest passes according to the terms of the instrument creating the interest 
if it provides for the disposition of the interest if it is disclaimed, or of disclaimed interests 
in general. If the instrument does not provide for the disposition of a disclaimed interest, 
the interest passes, if the disclaimant is an individual, as if the individual had died 
immediately before the time of distribution of the interest, or if the disclaimant is not an 
individual, as if the disclaimant did not exist. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 738/ Page 6 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
General Fund Expenditures 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $15,696 in fiscal 2027 only, to cover costs incurred 
by the Judiciary for programming changes related to the recording of TOD deeds by clerks 
of the circuit court. 
 
SDAT can implement the bill with existing resources.  
 
General Fund Revenues 
 
General fund revenues may decrease each fiscal year, beginning in fiscal 2027, due to 
reduced probate fee and inheritance tax revenues collected by the registers of wills, which 
oversee administration of decedents’ estates. Real property transferred under the bill is 
transferred outside of the probate estate, removing property from the probate estate, and 
probate fees are collected by the registers of wills based on the value of the probate estate. 
The transfers will still be subject to inheritance tax if the beneficiary is a taxable individual, 
but if the decedent has no other probate assets, the transfer may not be reported, and the 
tax may not be collected. The extent of any decrease in general fund revenues cannot be 
reliably estimated but may only be minimal. Registers of wills’ salaries and office expenses 
are paid from fees and inheritance tax revenues collected by the registers, with the 
remainder of the revenues deposited in the State general fund. 
 
Special Fund Revenues 
 
To the extent recordation of a TOD deed, an instrument of revocation, or a notice of the 
death of a transferor is subject to the $40 surcharge imposed on recordable instruments by 
clerks of the circuit court under § 13‑604 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, 
special fund (Circuit Court Real Property Records Improvement Fund) revenues increase 
each fiscal year by an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill is a modified version of the Uniform Real Property 
Transfer on Death Act drafted by the Uniform Law Commission. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 625 of 2025 and SB 146 and HB 986 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 651 (Senator Henson, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 738/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2026 
 
me/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7