START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 870 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 870 
(Delegates Korman and Boafo) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards - Energy Conservation 
Requirements (Large Buildings for Tomorrow Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) by October 1, 2028, to 
adopt, as part of the Maryland Building Performance Standards (MBPS), regulations 
establishing energy conservation requirements for the new construction of “covered 
buildings” subject to the Building Energy Performance Standards (BEPS) adopted by the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). A local jurisdiction may adopt 
requirements more stringent than the bill’s requirements, and a covered building in any 
local jurisdiction that has done so must meet the more stringent requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $264,700 in FY 2027; future years 
reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. No effect on total capital spending, 
which is established annually through the capital budget process, but any increase in 
individual project costs – which could be significant – means that fewer projects receive 
funding in a given year. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
264,700 
300,500 
218,200 
128,200 
133,400 
Net Effect 
($264,700) 
($300,500) 
($218,200) 
($128,200) 
($133,400) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in local expenditures for capital projects and 
enforcement activities, as discussed below. Local revenues are not directly affected. This 
bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 870/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Energy conservation measure” means a physical installation in a building or a connection 
to a district energy system that enhances the building’s energy efficiency or minimizes the 
building’s energy use or greenhouse gas emissions at the lowest practicable cost. 
“Fuel type” means the combination of energy sources planned for a use in a building, 
including electricity and mixed fuel. 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards – Covered Buildings 
 
The bill applies only prospectively to new construction for which a complete commercial 
or residential service request is made to the local utility or a development application or 
building permit application is filed with a local government after the bill’s effective date. 
 
By October 1, 2028, as part of MBPS, MD Labor must adopt regulations establishing 
energy conservation requirements for covered buildings. In developing the regulations, 
MD Labor must: 
 
 
adopt provisions that require (1) predicted annual net direct greenhouse gas 
emissions of zero and (2) predicted annual site energy use intensity (EUI) 
performance targets, as determined by MDE; 
 
for the purposes of MBPS authorizing compliance via the attainment of energy 
efficiency credits or achievement of performance thresholds, calculate and adopt 
credits and performance thresholds in a manner that compares site EUI changes 
from energy efficiency measures to a Maryland-specific baseline model that does 
not vary according to fuel type of the proposed building for relevant building types; 
 
in consultation with MDE, adopt provisions that allow an owner of a covered 
building to request a waiver from implementing an energy conservation measure 
that is necessary to comply with the bill’s requirements if the measure cannot be 
reasonably implemented, including due to lack of existing technology; and 
 
make best efforts to align regulations impacting the new construction with 
regulations adopted by MDE regarding existing buildings. 
 
Credits or performance thresholds may not be calculated in a manner that authorizes 
buildings of a certain fuel type to comply with MBPS while achieving a lower energy 
efficiency on average than buildings of a different fuel type. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 870/ Page 3 
If the version of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) in effect at the time 
of a building permit application is received requires the building to meet energy 
conservation requirements that are more stringent than the requirements under MDE’s 
BEPS regulations for calendar 2040, the building must be required to meet the more 
stringent requirements. However, this requirement may not be construed to require a 
building to meet any requirements that are more stringent than the requirements under 
MDE’s BEPS regulations. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Covered building” means a building that (1) is a commercial or multifamily residential 
building in the State, or is owned by the State, and (2) has a gross floor area of  
35,000 square feet or more, excluding the parking garage area. “Covered building” does 
not include (1) a building designated as a historic property under federal, State, or local 
law; (2) a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school building; (3) a hospital;  
(4) a manufacturing building; or (5) an agricultural building. 
 
“District energy” means thermal energy generated at one or more central facilities that 
produce hot water, steam, or chilled water that then flows through a network of insulated 
underground pipes to provide hot water, space heating, air conditioning, or chilled water 
to nearby buildings. 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards 
 
MD Labor currently incorporates by reference the International Building Code  
(2021 Edition), including IECC (2021 Edition), with modifications, as MBPS. In general, 
the standards apply to all buildings and structures within the State for which a building 
permit application is received by a local government. The Climate Solutions Now Act 
(CSNA) (Chapter 38 of 2022) required MD Labor to adopt IECC (2018 Edition) by  
January 1, 2023, and to adopt each subsequent version of IECC within 18 months after it 
is issued. Each local jurisdiction must implement and enforce the most current version of 
MPBS and any local amendments to MPBS. In addition, any modification to MBPS 
adopted by the State after December 31, 2009, must be implemented and enforced by a 
local jurisdiction no later than 12 months after the modifications are adopted by the State. 
 
Energy Conservation Building Standards 
 
The Energy Conservation Building Standards under Title 7, Subtitle 4 of the Public 
Utilities Article generally require a builder of any building that is constructed after  
July 1, 1982, to certify under oath that the building is in compliance with the latest edition 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 870/ Page 4 
of the Energy Code. If a builder fails to comply with the energy conservation standards 
required for certification, the builder is liable to the first purchaser who either occupies or 
rents the building for an amount up to $2,000 and for the cost of bringing the building into 
compliance with the energy conservation standards. 
 
High-performance Buildings 
 
Chapter 124 of 2008 requires most new or renovated State buildings to be constructed as 
high-performance buildings, subject to waiver processes established by the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM) and the Department of General Services (DGS).  
Chapter 124 defines a high-performance building as one that: 
 
 
meets or exceeds the U.S. Green Building Council Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) certification criteria for a silver rating; 
 
achieves a comparable numeric rating according to a nationally recognized, 
accepted, and appropriate standard approved by DBM and DGS; or 
 
complies with a nationally recognized and accepted green building code, guideline, 
or standard reviewed and recommended by Maryland Green Building Council 
(MGBC) and approved by DBM and DGS. 
 
Based on a unanimous recommendation from MGBC, in 2017, DGS and DBM approved 
the use of the Green Globes rating system developed by the Green Building Initiative as an 
alternative to LEED silver. 
 
Only new or renovated State buildings that are at least 7,500 square feet and are built or 
renovated entirely with State funds are subject to the high-performance requirement. 
Additionally, building renovations must include the replacement of heating, ventilation, air 
conditioning, electrical, and plumbing systems and must retain the building shell. 
Unoccupied buildings are exempt from the high-performance mandate, including 
warehouses, garages, maintenance facilities, transmitter buildings, and pumping stations. 
Also, community college capital projects and public schools must be constructed or 
renovated as high-performance buildings. 
 
Climate Solutions Now Act – In General  
 
CSNA made broad changes to the State’s approach to reducing statewide greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions and addressing climate change. Among other things, CSNA accelerated 
previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets originally established under the 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the State to develop plans, adopt 
regulations, and implement programs to (1) reduce GHG emissions by 60% from  
2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 870/ Page 5 
Building Energy Performance Standards 
 
To accomplish these goals, among other things, CSNA requires MDE to develop BEPS for 
covered buildings that achieve (1) a 20% reduction in net direct GHG emissions by  
January 1, 2030, as compared with 2025 levels for average buildings of similar construction 
and (2) net-zero direct GHG emissions by January 1, 2040. To facilitate the development 
of these BEPS, MDE must require covered building owners to measure and report direct 
emissions data to the department each year beginning in 2025. The provision requiring 
MDE to set a standard that achieves net-zero direct GHG emissions for covered buildings 
terminates December 31, 2029. 
 
Implementing Regulations 
 
CSNA also required MDE to adopt regulations to implement BEPS by June 1, 2023. The 
regulations must meet several specified requirements. As altered by Chapter 844 of 2025, 
among other things, the regulations must (1) include EUI targets by building type, as 
specified; (2) include specified special provisions, exceptions, and exemptions from BEPS 
requirements; (3) include an alternative compliance pathway allowing an owner of a 
covered building to pay a fee for GHG emissions attributable to the building’s failure to 
meet direct GHG emissions reduction targets; (4) to the extent authorized by law, include 
financial incentives recommended by the Building Energy Transition Implementation Task 
Force; and (5) include an annual reporting fee of $100 per covered building, adjusted for 
inflation, to cover the administrative costs of the BEPS program. MDE adopted regulations 
that went into effect December 23, 2024, that establish BEPS and related benchmarking 
and reporting requirements. 
 
Beginning in 2030, covered buildings are required to meet the first level of interim 
standards, which includes reduced direct emissions based on building type. By 2035, 
covered buildings must meet the second level of interim standards, which includes 
additional reduced direct emissions based on building type. By 2040, covered buildings 
will be required to meet the final net-zero direct GHG emissions standard. 
 
Of note, the regulations do not include site EUI standards, which are required under statute. 
The fiscal 2025 budget as enacted included language restricting funding for the final 
development and submission of regulations that address site EUI targets and standards until 
MDE submits, among other things, a report on site EUI costs and alternatives to site EUI 
for meeting GHG targets. The required report components were incorporated into a larger 
report required under Chapter 844. MDE anticipates that the report will be submitted by 
December 31, 2026, and that the other related requirements will be completed in 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 870/ Page 6 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
MD Labor advises that it does not have the technical expertise to develop the new 
requirements for MBPS, particularly with respect to the bill’s requirements relating to 
estimating energy efficiency outcomes and calculating and adopting credits and 
performance thresholds to compare site EUI changes from energy efficiency measures to 
a Maryland-specific average baseline model, as specified. As a result, MD Labor advises 
that four full-time positions are needed to implement the bill and to oversee the adoption 
of subsequent updates to MBPS every three years. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) agrees in part and notes that the additional workload resulting from the bill is most 
burdensome in the first few years, as MD Labor adopts the new requirements for MBPS, 
and that future updates will likely require only minor adjustments. Moreover, pursuant to 
current law, MD Labor must already adopt subsequent updates to MBPS every three years. 
Nevertheless, DLS acknowledges that updating MBPS to account for additional energy 
conservation requirements does result in compounding complexity, necessitating some 
ongoing support. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures for MD Labor increase by $264,721 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one full-time engineer and three temporary contractual employees (two engineers 
and one attorney) to perform research, evaluations, and adopt the necessary updates to 
MBPS. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses, including rent. 
 
Full-time Position 
1.0 
Temporary Contractual Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$219,248 
Operating Expenses 
    45,473 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$264,721 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) the termination of 
the contractual employees midway through fiscal 2029, following the completion of the 
necessary updates to MBPS. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 870/ Page 7 
The bill requires MD Labor to adopt provisions that allow an owner of a covered building 
to request a waiver from implementing an energy conservation measure, as specified, but 
it does not indicate who awards such waivers. If the provisions adopted by MD Labor 
require it to process waiver requests, MD Labor may require additional staff to do so, which 
it can request through the budget process once the provisions are adopted. Alternatively, 
the provisions may require local governments, which are responsible for enforcing 
compliance with MBPS, to process waiver requests, in which case local governments may 
require additional staff, as discussed below. 
 
MDE advises it can assist MD Labor with making the necessary changes to MBPS using 
existing resources. 
 
State Building Construction 
 
Maryland’s Climate Pollution Reduction Plan, which was developed to implement CSNA 
and published in December 2023, includes provisions relating to all-electric new 
construction and other emission reduction measures for State-owned buildings. DGS 
advises that, as a result of CSNA, it created a policy that all new buildings and major 
renovations be designed and constructed to meet the energy demands of the buildings 
without the use of fossil fuels. However, this policy does not apply to institutions of higher 
education and potentially other buildings that receive State construction funding. 
 
However, MDE advises that the bill establishes an accelerated timeline compared to what 
is required under CSNA. Accordingly, the bill could result in an increase in project costs 
for affected State-funded building construction projects. However, the bill has no effect on 
total spending under the capital budget, which is determined annually by the Governor and 
General Assembly through the capital budget process and subject to debt affordability 
limits. As total capital spending is fixed each year, any increase in individual project costs 
– which could be significant – means that fewer projects receive funding in a given year. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  “Covered buildings” includes all State buildings, but it also includes 
commercial and multifamily residential buildings owned by local governments. Therefore, 
beginning in fiscal 2027, local expenditures increase (1) to meet the updated MBPS for the 
construction of locally owned commercial buildings; (2) for additional staff to enforce the 
updated MBPS requirements in local jurisdictions; and (3) potentially, to grant waivers (as 
discussed above). A reliable estimate of the increase in local expenditures is not feasible, 
as it depends on the number of future building construction projects and other unknown 
variables; however, the increase in local expenditures may be significant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses involved in the provision, installation, and 
maintenance of heating, cooling, and electrical systems for buildings are significantly 
affected by the bill’s changes to MBPS for new buildings. In addition, any small business 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 870/ Page 8 
involved in construction (e.g., architects, engineers, and general contractors) must comply 
with the new standards and requirements. Small businesses involved in energy 
conservation work may benefit from an increase in the demand for their services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 804 and HB 973 of 2025 and SB 1023 and HB 1279 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Prince George’s County; City of Annapolis; 
Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Interagency 
Commission on School Construction; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of General Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Maryland Stadium Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8