START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 851 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 851 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Human Services - Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council - Legal 
Status 
 
 
This bill clarifies that the Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council (MSILC) is a 
tax‑exempt body politic and corporate. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None.     
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Statewide Independent Living Council 
 
An executive order in 1993 formally created MSILC to work in conjunction with the 
Maryland State Division of Rehabilitation Services in submitting, monitoring, and 
evaluating the implementation of the State Plan for Independent Living (SPIL) and to carry 
out other duties as stipulated in the Federal Rehabilitation Act. To receive assistance under 
the Act, federal law requires that a state submit a SPIL, which must stipulate that the state 
will provide independent living services, directly and/or through grants and contracts, with 
federal, state, or other funds, and must describe how and to whom those funds will be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 851/ Page 2 
disbursed for this purpose. The Act also requires a state to establish and maintain an 
independent living council that meets specified requirements, including those related to the 
composition and appointment of members. The duties and authorities of MSILC are set 
forth in federal regulations. 
 
Pursuant to federal requirements, MSILC must not be established as an entity within a State 
agency (including the designated State entity) and must be independent of and autonomous 
from the designated State entity and all other State agencies  
 
Chapters 43 and 44 of 2023 generally codified MSILC as an instrumentality of the State. 
MSILC must (1) work in conjunction with Centers for Independent Living, defined as 
community‑based organizations that are designed and operated by people with disabilities, 
in submitting, monitoring, implementing, and evaluating SPIL and (2) carry out other 
duties as required under State and federal law to support the implementation of SPIL.  
 
A debt, claim, obligation, or liability of MSILC is not (1) a debt, claim, obligation, or 
liability of the State or (2) a pledge of the credit of the State. MSILC is exempt from State 
and local taxes.  
 
State Oversight of Nonprofit Organizations  
 
The Secretary of State (SOS) registers and oversees charitable organizations in the State 
and maintains an online database of registered entities. A charitable organization is a 
person that:  
 
 
is or holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, eleemosynary, humane, 
patriotic, philanthropic, or religious organization; and  
 
either (1) solicits or receives charitable contributions from the public or (2) is an 
ambulance, firefighting, fraternal, rescue, or police or other law enforcement 
organization when it solicits charitable contributions from the public.  
 
A charitable organization must register and receive a registration letter from SOS before it 
(1) solicits charitable contributions in the State; (2) has charitable contributions solicited 
on its behalf in the State; or (3) solicits charitable contributions outside the State if the 
organization is in the State. A registered charitable organization must submit an annual 
report to SOS, as specified. 
 
Federal Tax-Exempt Status 
 
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code requires a nonprofit entity to be a 
separately organized entity, a corporation, trust, or association. The separately organized 
entity requirement is generally met if the organization is incorporated as a not‑for‑profit 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 851/ Page 3 
entity under state corporation law. The organizational test may create a problem when an 
organization is created pursuant to a state statute, because the statute may contain neither 
the required exempt purpose language nor a standard dissolution clause. 
 
A nonprofit entity may be created by state legislation that may authorize the creation of an 
organization as a “public body corporate and politic,” which typically implies a direct 
connection to government or a public, state‑chartered, or public‑purpose role.  
 
Additional Comments:  The following entities are distinguished as a tax‑exempt body 
politic and corporate entity in the State in the Economic Development Article:  Tri‑County 
Council for the Lower Eastern Shore of Maryland, Tri‑County Council for Southern 
Maryland, Tri‑County Council for Western Maryland, Mid‑Shore Regional Council, 
Upper Shore Regional Council, Regional Advanced Manufacturing Partnership of 
Maryland.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 731 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Disabilities; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3