START OF PAGE 1
HB0816/813525/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 816
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “and Young” and substitute “Young,
Simmons, Moreno, and Conaway”; strike beginning with “– Purpose” in line 2 down
through “Program” in line 3 and substitute “Program and Industry Automobile
Insurance Association Assessments”; strike beginning with “altering” in line 4 down
through “affordable;” in line 6 and substitute “altering the cap on a certain assessment
allocation percentage required to be calculated by the Board of Directors of the Industry
Automobile Insurance Association;”; in line 6, after the second “the” insert “Maryland
Automobile Insurance”; in line 7, after “program” insert “subject to certain requirements
and modification under certain circumstances”; in line 11, after “20–101(a),” insert “(b),
(d),”; in line 16, strike “20–301(a)” and substitute “20–405(d)”; and after line 18, insert:

“BY adding to
Article – Insurance
Section 20–521
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, after line 23, insert:

“(b) “Association” means the Industry Automobile Insurance Association.

(d) “Board of Directors” means the Board of Directors of the Association.”.

On page 2, strike in their entirety lines 3 through 6, inclusive, and substitute:
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0816/813525/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 816
Page 2 of 4

“20–405.

(d) (1) The Board of Directors shall calculate assessment allocation
percentages for commercial auto and private passenger auto divisions by dividing the
most recent certified assessment for commercial auto and private passenger auto
divisions by the total of:

(i) the respective aggregate net direct written premiums
obtained under subsection (c) of this section; and

(ii) the respective total net direct written premiums of the Fund
for the same period.

(2) The assessment allocation percentage for the private passenger auto
division may not exceed [3%] 1%.”;

and strike beginning with “THAT” in line 23 down through “ARTICLE” in line 25 and
substitute “IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 20–521 OF THIS SUBTITLE”.

On page 3, after line 3, insert:

“20–521.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM
THAT LIMITS THE MAXIMUM PREMIUM RATE FOR A POLICY OF PRIVATE
PASSENGER AUTO INSURANCE ISSUED BY THE FUND IN AN AMOUNT THAT MAY BE
INADEQUATE.

(B) SUBJECT TO REVIEW AND APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSIONER, THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY ESTABLISH AN AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM IF:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0816/813525/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 816
Page 3 of 4

(1) RATES ARE NOT EXCESSIVE OR UNFAIRLY DISCRIMINATORY;

AND

(2) THE AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM DOES NOT RESULT IN:

(I) AN OVERALL INADEQUACY GREATER THAN 20% OF THE
FUND’S NET WRITTEN PREMIUM; OR

(II) AN ASSESSMENT ALLOCATION PERCENTAGE THAT
EXCEEDS THE LIMIT ESTABLISHED IN § 20-405(D) OF THIS TITLE.

(C) AN INDIVIDUAL IS ELIGIBLE FOR A POLICY THROUGH THE
AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM IF THE INDIVIDUAL:

(1) MEETS THE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR
POLICYHOLDERS UNDER § 20-502 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) HAS A HOUSEHOLD INCOME THAT IS NOT MORE THAN 250% OF
THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL.

(D) THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE THE FUND TO MODIFY THE
AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM IF THE COMMISSIONER DETERMINES THAT:

(1) THE RATES OFFERED THROUGH THE AFFORDABILITY
PROGRAM DO NOT MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION;

(2) THE AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM WILL NO LONGER MEET THE
CONDITION ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(2)(I) OR (II) OF THIS SECTION;
OR

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB0816/813525/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 816
Page 4 of 4

(3) THE AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM VIOLATES OTHER PROVISIONS
OF THIS ARTICLE TO WHICH THE FUND IS SUBJECT.

(E) THE COMMISSIONER MAY NOT DISAPPROVE OR REQUIRE THE
MODIFICATION OF AN AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM BASED ON THE FUND’S
NONCOMPLIANCE WITH § 20–306 OF THIS TITLE.”;

in line 5, strike “October” and substitute “July”; and in the same line, strike “2026” and
substitute “2027”.
END OF PAGE 4