START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 846 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 846 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - City of Hagerstown and the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and 
Events Facility, Inc. - Exemption 
 
 
This bill exempts real and personal property that is owned by the City of Hagerstown and 
used primarily for public social, recreational, and entertainment purposes from State, 
county, and municipal property taxes. The property tax exemption for property owned by 
the City of Hagerstown or the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility must apply 
retroactively to fiscal 2024. The State, Washington County, and the City of Hagerstown 
must provide a refund for any excess property tax paid due to the retroactive property tax 
exemption. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues decrease by approximately $80,300 in 
FY 2027 due to the retroactive tax refund for the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events 
Facility. ABF revenues decrease by an additional amount ($22,300 annually) reflecting the 
property tax exemption for the City of Hagerstown. State expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues in Washington County decrease by 
approximately $1.3 million in FY 2027 due to the retroactive tax refund for the Hagerstown 
Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility. Washington County property tax revenues decrease 
by an additional amount ($160,000 annually) reflecting the property tax exemption for the 
City of Hagerstown. Local expenditures are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on 
a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 846/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 428 of 2025 provided a State and local property tax exemption for 
property owned by the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility that is used 
primarily for public social, recreational, and entertainment purposes. The property tax 
exemption became effective in fiscal 2026. The facility is authorized to provide a payment 
in lieu of taxes to both Washington County and the City of Hagerstown to offset the 
property tax exemption.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues decrease by approximately $80,300 in fiscal 2027 due 
to the retroactive tax refund for the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility. ABF 
revenues decrease by an additional amount ($22,300 annually) reflecting the property tax 
exemption for the City of Hagerstown. 
 
Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility 
 
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) indicates that there are 
five real property accounts belonging to the Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events 
Facility, all of which are located in the City of Hagerstown (Washington County). These 
accounts have a fiscal 2025 taxable assessment of $35.8 million. As a result of the 
retroactive property tax exemption under the bill, ABF revenues will decrease by $80,300 
in fiscal 2027, which covers the annual property tax payments for both fiscal 2024  
and 2025. This estimate is based on the State property tax rate of $0.112. 
 
City of Hagerstown Property 
 
The Hagerstown Field House is an indoor sports and fitness facility located at  
290 East Memorial Boulevard in Hagerstown. Property tax records indicate that the facility 
is owned by the City of Hagerstown and is currently leased to a for profit entity. SDAT 
indicates that the city-owned property has a fiscal 2027 taxable assessment of 
$19.9 million. As a result, ABF revenues could decrease by $22,300 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027. At this time, it is not known whether the City of Hagerstown has made any 
prior property tax payments to the State that would require a refund under the bill. 
 
Impact on Debt Service Payments 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s general obligation (GO) bonds are paid from ABF. 
Revenue sources for the fund include State property taxes, premium from bond sales, and 
repayments from certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General 
funds may be appropriated directly to ABF to make up any differences between the debt 
service payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. The  
fiscal 2027 budget assumes $1.3 billion in State property tax revenues to ABF. In addition, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 846/ Page 3 
$177.7 million in general funds and $0.8 million in federal funds are budgeted to ABF, 
since the State property tax rate is not set high enough to cover the full cost of the debt 
service payments on the State’s GO bonds.  
 
To offset the reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could 
increase in an amount equal to the decrease in ABF revenues, or the State property tax rate 
would have to be increased to meet debt service payments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues in Washington County decrease by 
approximately $1.3 million in fiscal 2027 due to the retroactive tax refund for the 
Hagerstown Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility. Of this amount, $575,700 represents 
county property tax refunds and $718,300 represents municipal property tax refunds. This 
estimate is based on the fiscal 2025 taxable assessment and county-city property tax rates. 
 
In addition, Washington County property tax revenues decrease by $160,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 reflecting the property tax exemption for the City of Hagerstown. 
At this time, it is not known whether the City of Hagerstown has made any prior property 
tax payments to the county government that would require a refund under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 497 (Washington County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Washington 
County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3