START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 862 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 862 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Railroads - Required Crew for Movement of Freight 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits a railroad train used in connection with the movement of 
freight that shares the same corridor as a high-speed passenger or commuter train from 
operating in the State unless it has a crew of at least two individuals. A person who willfully 
violates this provision is subject to a fine up to $10,000 for a first violation or $25,000 if 
the person committed a willful violation within the preceding three years. A railroad 
company is solely responsible for the actions of the employees who violate the provisions. 
Enactment of the bill is contingent on the enactment of similar legislation in the 
State of New York, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Commonwealth of 
Virginia, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  In the absence of changes to federal law and/or regulations, the bill has no 
material effect on governmental operations or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Railroad train” means any locomotive or any other car, rolling stock, 
equipment, or other device, that alone or coupled to others, is operated on stationary rails. 
 
The bill does not apply to a train or light engine used in connection with the movement of 
railroad freight involving hostler service or utility employees in yard service.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 862/ Page 2 
Current Law: 
 
Federal and State Regulation of Railroad Laws 
 
In general, state regulatory authority over railroads is preempted by federal regulatory 
authority, because most remaining railroads in the United States are inherently a form of 
interstate transportation. Federal law requires that laws, regulations, and orders related to 
railroad safety or security be nationally uniform to the extent practicable. However, a state 
may adopt or continue in force a law, regulation, or order related to railroad safety or 
security until the U.S. Secretary of Transportation (with respect to railroad safety matters), 
or the U.S. Secretary of Homeland Security (with respect to railroad security matters), 
prescribes a regulation or issues an order covering the subject matter of the state 
requirement. 
 
A state may adopt or continue in force an additional or more stringent law, regulation, or 
order related to railroad safety or security when the law, regulation, or order (1) is necessary 
to eliminate or reduce an essentially local safety or security hazard; (2) is not incompatible 
with a law, regulation, or order of the federal government; and (3) does not unreasonably 
burden interstate commerce. 
 
Maryland’s Railroad Safety and Health Program 
 
The Railroad Safety and Health Program in the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor) monitors the safety practices of each railroad company in the State by 
conducting inspections of areas of railroad track, operating practices, and locomotive and 
railcar equipment. The program supplements the national program established by the 
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA). The program also enforces Maryland‑specific 
requirements for track clearances and health and safety standards. Statute requires that the 
Public Service Commission (PSC) pay the costs of the program from money PSC receives 
through its annual assessment of public service companies. The fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced includes $518,159 in special funds for the program, which funds four positions. 
 
Regulations Requiring Two-person Crews Reproposed 
 
In March 2024, FRA issued a final rule regarding train crew size safety requirements. The 
final rule establishes minimum crew size safety standards for all trains, including a risk 
assessment requirement to evaluate hazards and ensure risk mitigation for those railroads 
looking to initiate one-person train crew operations. Railroad operations are required to 
have a minimum of two crew members except for certain identified one-person train crew 
operations that do not pose significant safety risks to railroad employees, the public, or the 
environment. This includes requirements for railroads seeking to continue certain existing 
one‑person train crew operations and a special approval process for railroads seeking to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 862/ Page 3 
initiate certain new one-person train crew operations. Each railroad receiving special 
approval for a one-person train crew operation must submit to FRA an annual report 
summarizing the safety of the operation. 
 
Payment for Incremental Staffing Costs for CSX 
 
The Maryland Transmit Administration (MTA) and CSX Transportation have an 
Access Agreement that provides MARC trains access to CSX-owned tracks and 
infrastructure on the MARC Camden and Brunswick Lines. According to MTA, when 
negotiating the most recent Access Agreement, which went into effect on July 1, 2021, 
CSX required the following language:   
 
In the event that the State of Maryland modifies its laws or regulations to 
mandate an increase in crew size in the operation of freight trains than is 
currently required by law or regulation, the Administration shall reimburse 
CSX for labor costs actually incurred due to the adoption of the laws or 
regulations up to $6.0M annually during the term of the Agreement; provided 
however the Administration shall not be required to make any such payments 
if:   
 
(i) 
the applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement(s) require operation 
of trains with two person crews, until CSX demonstrates that it has 
modified such agreements in accordance with federal law to permit 
operation of trains with fewer than a two-person crew, or 
(ii) 
applicable federal law or regulations are changed to mandate 
two person crews; provided however that if the labor cost actually 
incurred due to the enactment of state law exceeds the labor cost 
actually incurred due to the enactment of federal law, the 
Administration shall pay the difference. 
 
If the actual labor costs are projected to exceed $6.0M annually, the Parties 
shall meet and negotiate promptly to determine what additional 
compensation, if any, shall be paid to CSX for any additional labor costs 
actually incurred. 
 
The agreement is for five years and has a one-time renewable option for five years. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
MD Labor advises that a minimal operational impact can be absorbed with existing 
resources. Because the State inspectors already perform inspections for compliance with 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 862/ Page 4 
FRA rules and regulations, including the two-crewmember requirement, the inspection 
process does not change. 
 
Due to the Access Agreement between MTA and the freight railroad CSX, MTA is required 
to pay the cost of CSX’s compliance with any state law that alters crew size requirements, 
unless such requirements are already in effect per federal law or regulation. If the federal 
requirement of two-person crews is repealed or invalidated by a court, this bill could trigger 
State Transportation Trust Fund expenditures up to $6.0 million to cover CSX’s expenses. 
 
Additional Comments:  The FRA’s Final Rule on Train Crew Size Safety Requirements 
became effective June 10, 2026. This federal rule is intended to create a single federal 
standard and effectively "occupies the field," replacing the patchwork of state laws. Under 
the Federal Railroad Safety Act, once the federal government prescribes a regulation 
“covering” the subject matter of a state law, that state law is preempted.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 855 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 156 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4