START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 855 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 855 
(Delegates Holmes and Healey) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Common Ownership Communities – Candidate or Proposition Signs – Display 
Period 
 
 
This emergency bill alters statutory provisions authorizing a cooperative housing 
corporation, condominium, or homeowners association (HOA) (commonly referred to as 
common ownership communities or COCs) to regulate the display of candidate or 
proposition signs by limiting the display of signs to a specified time period. Subject to 
existing provisions, the bill authorizes COCs to limit the display to a period beginning no 
earlier than 45 days before the start of early voting or, if early voting is not conducted, no 
earlier than 45 days before the primary election, general election, or vote on the 
proposition. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: Generally, State statute includes the Maryland 
Condominium Act, the Maryland Homeowners Association Act, and the Maryland 
Cooperative Housing Corporation Act, all of which regulate various aspects of COC 
operations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 855/ Page 2 
A “candidate sign” means a sign supporting a candidate or slate of candidates for public 
office. Generally, certain documents governing COC operations may not restrict or prohibit 
the display of candidate signs or signs advocating for or against ballot questions. 
 
However, COCs may restrict the display of candidate signs (1) within common 
elements/areas; (2) in accordance with applicable federal, State, and local law; or (3) if a 
limitation is not otherwise specified by a law governing the relevant jurisdiction, to a time 
period no less than 30 days before the primary election, general election, or vote on the 
proposition and 7 days after the primary election, general election, or vote on the 
proposition. Under the bill, COCs may limit the display of candidate signs to a period of 
no less than 45 days prior to the commencement of early voting or no less than 45 days 
prior to the election or vote if there is no early voting. 
 
For more information on condominiums, HOAs, and cooperative housing corporations, 
commonly known as COCs, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 817 and HB 363 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 758 (Senator Watson, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 855/ Page 3 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 3