START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 816 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 816 
(Delegate Taylor, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund - Affordability - Purpose of Fund and 
Authorized Program 
 
   
This bill expands the purpose of the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) to 
encompass providing the financial security required under § 17-103 of the Transportation 
Article (i.e., the minimum insurance requirements for private passenger motor vehicles) at 
affordable rates to those eligible persons that are unable to obtain it from an Industry 
Automobile Insurance Association (IAIA) member (i.e., another insurance company). The 
bill authorizes MAIF to establish an affordability program, even if it is inconsistent with 
the rate making provisions of Title 11, Subtitle 2 or 3 of the Insurance Article, which, 
among other things, prohibit insurers from charging inadequate or excessive premiums or 
charging rates that are unfairly discriminatory.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
MAIF Effect:  MAIF revenues are likely affected beginning in FY 2028 because the bill 
allows MAIF to continue its current practice of charging reduced premium rates for certain 
policyholders, as discussed below. Expenditures are not materially affected.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances.      
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 816/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Insurance Administration and Rate Making by Insurers 
 
Insurance in the State is regulated by the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA), an 
independent agency headed by the Insurance Commissioner, whom the Governor appoints 
with the advice and consent of the Senate. MIA and the Insurance Commissioner’s 
statutory and regulatory duties include, among other things, certifying insurers to operate 
in the State, reviewing and approving the rates and forms used by insurers, and licensing 
and certifying insurance professionals. MIA and the Commissioner have broad authority 
to enforce the requirements and prohibitions that apply to insurers and insurance 
professionals. For example, depending on the type of violation and following the 
administrative processes required by Insurance Law and regulations, the Commissioner is 
authorized to issue orders directing insurers or insurance professionals to take certain 
actions, impose administrative penalties, and suspend or revoke certifications and/or 
licenses. 
 
Insurance Law includes guidelines and instructions related to the manner in which insurers 
calculate and apply their premium rates to ensure such rates do not become excessive, 
inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory. With limited exception, rates must generally be 
filed with MIA prior to being used. Among other requirements, Insurance Law includes 
ratemaking specifications that only apply to automobile insurance, processes MIA must 
follow when disapproving of a rate filing, and special ratemaking principles that must be 
followed by an insurer under certain circumstances. When determining premium rates, due 
consideration must be given to:   
 
 
past and prospective loss experienced within and outside of the State; 
 
conflagration or catastrophic hazards; 
 
a reasonable margin for underwriting profit and contingencies; 
 
dividends, savings, or unabsorbed premium deposits allowed or returned by insurers 
to their policyholders, members, or subscribers; 
 
past and prospective expenses, both countrywide and those specially applicable to 
the State; 
 
investment income earned or realized by insurers both from their unearned premium 
income and from their loss reserve funds; and 
 
all relevant factors within and outside the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 816/ Page 3 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Generally 
 
Created by the General Assembly in 1972, MAIF is an independent nonbudgeted State 
agency. Through its Insured Division, MAIF provides automobile liability insurance to 
residents of the State who are unable to obtain policies in the private insurance market. As 
the insurer of last resort, MAIF is not in direct competition with the private insurance 
industry because a customer must generally have been turned down by other insurers (and 
meet other requirements) in order to obtain a policy with MAIF.  
 
Like other insurers, MAIF is primarily funded through premiums on the insurance policies 
it issues; however, MAIF is authorized to issue an assessment paid by other motor vehicle 
insurers in the State if it experiences a significant operating loss (as defined by State law) 
and meets other specified conditions. This is to ensure MAIF’s continued viability as the 
insurer of last resort. The assessment is grouped and paid separately by private passenger 
automobile insurers and commercial automobile insurers. Once an insurer pays the 
assessment, it is authorized to recoup the cost from policyholders.  
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Rate Making 
 
Chapter 395 of 2025 requires MAIF to, among other things, receive approval from MIA 
prior to implementing rates for its policies (whereas most other automobile insurers can 
“file and use” their rates before approval is given by MIA). Specifically,  
Chapter 395 establishes that the provisions of the Insurance Article that apply for prior 
approval rate making (Title 11, Subtitle 2 of the Insurance Article) apply to the 
determination of MAIF’s premiums by the Executive Director of MAIF and the filing of 
rates with the Insurance Commissioner: 
 
 
between July 1, 2025, and December 31, 2025, both inclusive; and 
 
beginning January 1, 2026, if MAIF’s total adjusted capital is less than its company 
action level risk-based capital. 
 
Chapter 395 also made several technical changes to specify that existing requirements that 
apply to MAIF’s rate making apply for prior approval rate making in addition to 
competitive rate making (i.e., file and use rate making). 
 
MIA reviews MAIF’s premium rates pursuant to the same statutory standards that apply to 
any other automobile insurer’s premium rates, meaning that MIA reviews MAIF’s 
premium rates to ensure that they are not inadequate, excessive, or unfairly discriminatory. 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Premium Discount 
 
MAIF currently uses an affordability index to determine a premium discount for its 
insureds based on the median household income of the zip code in which the insured is 
located. However, on December 18, 2024, MIA issued an order requiring MAIF to raise 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 816/ Page 4 
its rates to an “adequate” level and eliminate the affordability index within two years (by 
December 31, 2026). The affordability index is 3.3% of the median household income in a 
zip code and effectively operates to alleviate the impacts of high base rates on insureds 
from low-income areas. The average median household income for the zip codes where the 
affordability index applies was $64,724 in calendar 2024, while the statewide median was 
$91,373 in the same year. 
 
In March 2025, the order was revised to give MAIF until the end of calendar 2027 to 
comply.  
 
Industry Automobile Insurance Association and Assessment Processes 
 
MAIF is authorized to issue an assessment paid by other motor vehicle insurers in the State 
if it experiences a significant operating loss (as defined by State law) and meets other 
specified conditions. This is to ensure MAIF’s continued viability as the insurer of last 
resort. As noted above, the assessment is grouped and paid separately by private passenger 
automobile insurers and commercial automobile insurers. Once an insurer pays the 
assessment, it is authorized to recoup the cost from policyholders. 
 
IAIA is an association that consists of all insurers in the State (except for MAIF) that are 
licensed to issue motor vehicle liability insurance or motor vehicle physical damage 
insurance. Any such insurer must join IAIA as a condition of selling insurance in the State. 
IAIA is governed by its Board of Directors, and it is responsible for, among other things, 
working with the Insurance Commissioner and MAIF to calculate, assess, and collect the 
MAIF assessment. Chapter 535 of 2023 modified the assessment process, much of which 
is statutorily required. The process generally takes place in the following manner:   
 
 
When notified that an assessment is necessary by MAIF, the IAIA Board of 
Directors must calculate the assessment in the manner specified by State law. 
 
IAIA first obtains from the Commissioner the net direct written premium for all 
association members. 
 
Using the information from the Commissioner, IAIA calculates the assessment 
allocation percentages and gives notice of the assessment allocation percentages to 
MAIF, the Commissioner, and all IAIA members. 
 
The Commissioner must promptly review the assessment allocation percentages 
and, unless the Commissioner finds them to be inaccurate, authorize each IAIA 
member to impose the assessment on its policyholders, as specified. 
 
The IAIA Board of Directors must promptly assess and collect the assessment from 
its members in the manner specified by State law. 
 
MAIF must also assess its own policyholders in the manner specified by State law. 
 
Funds collected from the assessment must be deposited in the Insufficiency 
Assessment Reserve Fund and then paid to MAIF in one sum, as specified. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 816/ Page 5 
 
Any money in the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund from a previous year 
must be paid to MAIF on December 31 of each year. 
 
Prior to the enactment of Chapter 535, there were additional processes to handle 
overassessment payments from IAIA members; however, Chapter 535 repealed these 
processes and instead requires IAIA members to immediately be reimbursed for any 
overassessment. 
 
Premium Tax 
 
Title 6 of the Insurance Article imposes a 2% premium tax on each authorized insurance 
company, surplus lines broker, or unauthorized insurance company that sells, or an 
individual who independently procures, any type of insurance coverage upon a risk that is 
located in the State. Revenues accrue to the general fund. However, MAIF is exempt from 
paying this tax.  
 
MAIF Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, absent the bill, MAIF is required to begin 
charging “adequate” rates and is no longer authorized to use its affordability index to offer 
discounts to certain low-income policyholders beginning in fiscal 2028. Under the bill, 
however, MAIF advises that it intends to continue using the affordability index to limit rate 
increases in low-income communities that have historically faced prohibitively expensive 
insurance premiums. Therefore, beginning in fiscal 2028, MAIF revenues decrease 
compared to current law as MAIF continues to charge the discounted premium rates.  
 
As discussed in more detail below, MAIF has recently issued an assessment to increase its 
revenues and ensure its solvency, and MAIF may be required to issue an additional 
assessment within the next year. The bill may result in additional assessments issued by 
MAIF in future fiscal years as well, increasing its revenues, accordingly; however, any 
such impact cannot be reliably predicted at this time.  
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that, because of rate inadequacies in its private 
passenger automobile insurance line of business, MAIF’s surplus level has eroded over the 
past several years and, as a result, MAIF issued an assessment of more than $19.4 million 
against the standard private passenger automobile insurance market in fiscal 2025 (based 
on fiscal 2024 operating losses). MIA further advises that MAIF will likely assess the 
market again in 2026 for about $14.9 million (based on 2025 operating losses), and is 
anticipated to assess the market in 2027 as well (based on 2026 operating losses). 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 816/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 469 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6