START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 861 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 861 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Information Technology - Statewide Information Technology 
Master Plan - Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires the Secretary of Information Technology to post the statewide 
Information Technology (IT) Master Plan publicly on the Department of Information 
Technology’s (DoIT) website within one year after the date the Governor is inaugurated in 
each gubernatorial term. If the Secretary is unable to meet the deadline, the Secretary must 
notify the Governor, in writing, and specified committees of the General Assembly within 
10 days after the missed deadline. The notice must include an explanation of why the plan 
is delayed and provide a date for its publication, not to exceed three months after the initial 
deadline. Additionally, each year, the Secretary, or the Secretary’s designee, must provide 
a briefing to the General Assembly on the implementation of the plan, any material changes 
made to the plan, and how the State intends to manage and deploy the initiatives included 
in the plan across the Executive Branch of State government.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DoIT can handle the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DoIT and the Secretary of Information Technology are responsible for, 
among other things:  (1) developing, maintaining, revising, and enforcing information 
technology policies, procedures, and standards; (2) providing technical assistance, advice, 
and recommendations to the Governor and any unit of State government concerning 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 861/ Page 2 
IT matters; (3) reviewing agency project plans to make information and services available 
to the public over the Internet; and (4) developing and maintaining a statewide IT Master 
Plan. The statewide IT Master Plan must: 
 
 
centralize the management and direction of IT policy within the Executive Branch 
of State government under the control of DoIT; 
 
include all aspects of State IT including telecommunications, security, data 
processing, and information management; 
 
consider interstate transfers as a result of federal legislation and regulation; 
 
ensure that the State IT plan and related policies and standards are consistent with 
State goals, objectives, and resources, and represent a long-range vision for using 
IT to improve the overall effectiveness of State government; 
 
include standards to assure nonvisual access to the information and services made 
available to the public over the Internet; and 
 
allow a State agency to maintain the agency’s own IT unit that provides for IT 
services to support the mission of the agency. 
 
 “IT” 
means 
all 
electronic 
information 
processing, 
including 
maintenance, 
telecommunications, hardware, software, and associated services. Generally, the State’s IT 
and IT policies and standards must be consistent with the statewide Master Plan. The 
statewide IT Master Plan was last updated in July 2025 and can be found on DoIT’s 
website.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 581 (Senator Jennings, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2