START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 810 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 810 
(Delegate Taylor, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Study to Evaluate Blockchain-Based Real Property Lease and Title Recordation 
and Verification 
 
 
This bill requires the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT), in 
coordination with the Judiciary, the Department of State Police, local law enforcement 
agencies, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), Maryland Legal Aid, the 
Public Justice Center, and any third-party technology vendors to conduct a study to 
(1) evaluate the use of “blockchain” technology for securely recording and verifying real 
property ownership and leases and (2) assess its potential use in assisting law enforcement 
and the courts in resolving real property disputes involving “squatting.” By  
December 31, 2026, SDAT must report to the Governor and General Assembly on the 
results of the study. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any potential minimal costs associated with the workgroup are not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Blockchain” means a distributed ledger technology that provides a 
secure, immutable, and transparent method of recording and storing data.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 810/ Page 2 
“Squatting” means the unauthorized occupation of real property by an individual who does 
not have legal title, a lease, or the right of possession. 
 
Current Law:  Clerks of the circuit courts are responsible for the recording of land records. 
Generally, the Maryland Uniform Real Property Electronic Recording Act – Title 3, 
Subtitle 7 of the Real Property Article – establishes that requirements for documents to be 
signed as a condition for recording are met by an electronic document or electronic 
signature under specific circumstances. The Act also requires the clerks of the circuit courts 
and SDAT to coordinate with appropriate entities on procedures and processes to facilitate 
the electronic satisfaction of prior approvals and conditions precedent to recording 
documents or the electronic payment of fees or taxes. 
 
State Expenditures:  OAG advises that the bill likely results in an increase in workload to 
provide guidance to SDAT during the course of the study, thus requiring one part-time 
contractual assistant Attorney General. The Department of Legislative Services advises 
that the bill does not necessitate additional staff for OAG.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 168 (Senator Watson) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Office of the Attorney 
General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2