START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 856 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 856 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Local School Systems - Educator Screening - Educator Identification 
Clearinghouse (School Personnel Vetting and Hiring Transparency Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to register each 
local school system in the State as an associate member of a national membership 
organization that provides access to the Educator Identification Clearinghouse and to pay 
any applicable fees and dues associated with the membership. Each local school system 
must utilize the clearinghouse through the national membership organization to screen each 
individual who receives, on or after August 1, 2026, an offer of employment for an educator 
position that requires a license. In addition, each local school system must ensure that each 
individual who receives such an offer (1) applies for the appropriate license after the offer 
of employment and before the start of employment and (2) obtains the appropriate license. 
Nothing in the bill may be construed to impair or affect existing statutory prohibitions 
against hiring or retaining individuals convicted of specified crimes, including child sexual 
abuse. The bill takes effect on July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Beginning in FY 2027, MSDE general fund expenditures increase annually 
by approximately $28,600 for subscription fees. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures decrease minimally ($2,400 or less) each year beginning in 
FY 2027 for local school systems that currently use and pay for the clearinghouse. Local 
school systems can otherwise screen applicants through the clearinghouse using existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 856/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MSDE advises that the National Association of State Directors of Teacher 
Education and Certification (NASDTEC) is the only national membership organization 
that meets the bill’s criteria, and MSDE is already a member. Associate membership in 
NASDTEC may be granted to institutions of higher education, local school systems, 
schools, organizations, or individuals ineligible for Jurisdictional Membership, as 
specified. Annual dues for an associate member are $500. In addition to the membership 
dues, there is an annual subscription fee based on the number of full-time equivalent (FTE) 
teachers in the district, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local School System Clearinghouse Fee Schedule 
 
FTE Teachers 
Membership Dues 
Subscription Fee 
Total Annual Fee 
< 300 
$500 
$100 
$600 
300 - 599 
500 
200 
700 
600 - 999 
500 
300 
800 
1000 - 1999 
500 
400 
900 
2000 - 2999 
500 
500 
1,000 
3000 - 3999 
500 
600 
1,100 
4000 -9,999 
500 
700 
1,200 
>9,999 
500 
.12 per FTE teacher 
 
 
FTE:  full-time equivalent 
 
Note:  Only one local school system (Montgomery County) pays total fees exceeding $1,200; it pays $2,400 
annually. 
 
Source:  National Association of State Directors of Teacher Education and Certification 
 
 
Hiring Prohibition for Individuals Convicted of Sexual Crimes or Crimes of Violence 
 
A local board of education may not knowingly hire or retain any individual who has been 
convicted of specified crimes, including child sexual abuse. Further, a local school system 
contract must provide that a contractor or subcontractor for the local school system may 
not knowingly assign an employee to work on school premises with direct, unsupervised, 
and uncontrolled access to children, if the employee has been convicted of specified crimes, 
including child sexual abuse. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 856/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Based on the current NASDTEC fee schedule for local school system 
associate memberships, general fund expenditures increase by an estimated $28,596 
beginning in fiscal 2027 for MSDE to pay all membership and subscription fees. Future 
costs depend on the NASDTEC fee schedule and the number of FTE teachers in each of 
the 24 local school systems each year. MSDE advises that costs may increase minimally 
each year if the number of teachers increase or fees increase. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures decrease minimally ($2,400 or less per school system) 
for school systems already using NASDTEC, as they will no longer have to pay  
annual subscription and membership fees. Several local school systems report  
using the NASDTEC clearinghouse, including Anne Arundel County Public Schools, 
Frederick County Public Schools, and Montgomery County Public Schools. 
 
Additional Comments:  The NASDTEC Educator Identification Clearinghouse is the 
national collection point for professional educator discipline actions taken by the 50 states, 
the District of Columbia, U.S. Department of Defense Educational Opportunity schools, 
and Guam. NASDTEC, through the clearinghouse, maintains a database of all disciplinary 
actions reported by NASDTEC members and disseminates this information to all 
participating NASDTEC jurisdictions. The goal of the clearinghouse is to provide each 
NASDTEC member state/jurisdiction with a notification of an action taken against the 
certificate/license of an educator by other member states/jurisdictions and in doing so, to 
protect the interests of children served by the professional education community within the 
United States and beyond. 
 
Once an educator’s misconduct case is final and the results made public, the prosecuting 
jurisdiction reports to the clearinghouse information on the adverse action taken against a 
license or certificate, including public reprimands and denials. The clearinghouse organizes 
the data and makes it accessible to NASDTEC members who can then compare the 
information to their current lists of licensed educators and applicants. In addition, the 
clearinghouse enables its members to maintain a comprehensive database, so every 
licensure applicant in a given jurisdiction can be checked against records in the 
clearinghouse. While the presence of a name in the database does not necessarily preclude 
an individual from successfully obtaining a license in a jurisdiction, it does provide the 
governing agency a safety net enabling officials to review the nature of the adverse action 
before issuing the certificate or license. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 856/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 845 and HB 1025 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 648 (Senator Hettleman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4