START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 866 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 866 
(Delegates Kaufman and Taveras) 
Health 
 
 
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing - Case Management Services 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (ODHH), in coordination 
with relevant units of State government, to provide specialized case management services 
to deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals. ODHH must include at least 
three positions to provide specialized case management services to assist deaf, deafblind, 
and hard of hearing individuals. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  ODHH general fund expenditures increase by $212,500 in FY 2027 to hire 
three case managers, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing 
costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
212,500 
246,200 
257,900 
269,600 
281,400 
Net Effect 
($212,500) 
($246,200) 
($257,900) 
($269,600) 
($281,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  ODHH was established in 2001 to promote the general welfare of deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals in the State. ODHH must fulfill the following duties and 
responsibilities:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 866/ Page 2 
 
provide, advocate, and coordinate the adoption of public policies, regulations, and 
programs that will benefit deaf and hard of hearing individuals;  
 
improve access to communication and to existing services and programs for deaf 
and hard of hearing individuals;  
 
provide direct services to deaf and hard of hearing individuals, as appropriate; 
 
increase public awareness of the needs and issues affecting deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals;  
 
work with State and local agencies to ensure access for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals to safety and emergency services;  
 
develop a referral service for deaf and hard of hearing individuals;  
 
serve as an information clearinghouse on the needs and issues affecting deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals; 
 
increase access for deaf and hard of hearing individuals to educational, health, and 
social opportunities;  
 
work with private organizations, the federal government, and other units of 
State government to promote economic development for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals; 
 
work to eliminate the underemployment and unemployment of deaf and hard of 
hearing individuals;  
 
provide a network through which services provided by State and federal programs 
serving deaf and hard of hearing individuals can be channeled; and  
 
promote compliance with State, local, and federal laws and policies protecting and 
serving deaf and hard of hearing individuals. 
 
Pursuant to Title 9 of the State Government Article, ODHH must be given adequate staff 
and funding to carry out its duties. The Director of ODHH may establish, reorganize, or 
consolidate areas of responsibility in the office as necessary to fulfil the responsibilities 
assigned by the Director. 
 
Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing  
 
Chapters 442 and 443 of 2024 established the Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and 
Hard of Hearing to study and make recommendations regarding services, programs, 
advocacy, outreach, and other efforts to improve the quality of life of individuals who are 
deaf, deafblind, or hard of hearing. The workgroup’s May 2025 final report recommended, 
among other things, implementation of a deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing unit within 
ODHH for three case managers to provide case management and advocacy services to the 
deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing community. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 866/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires ODHH to include at least three positions to provide 
specialized case management services to assist deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing 
individuals. ODHH advises that existing staff are unable to provide case management 
services required by the bill and that additional staff are needed. 
 
Therefore, ODHH general fund expenditures increase by $212,509 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring three case managers to develop individualized plans, 
coordinate with agencies, ensure culturally competent communication, monitor outcomes, 
and provide ongoing support to assist deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$185,087 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$212,509 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Office of the Deaf and 
Hard of Hearing; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3