START OF PAGE 1
SB 534/ Page 1 
  HB 839 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 839 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Frederick Community College - Board of Trustees - Meeting and Training 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill establishes a requirement that the Board of Community College Trustees for 
Frederick County include an opportunity for public comment at each meeting. The board 
must also make an audio or video recording of each meeting and make the recording 
available to the public on the board’s website without charge and, to the extent practicable, 
within two business days after the recording is made. Additionally, as part of ongoing 
training and at least every two years, board members must undergo training specific to 
board governance, structure, responsibilities, and roles. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. This bill is directed at Frederick Community College (FCC).  
  
Local Effect:  FCC expenditures may increase minimally to record and post board 
meetings online. FCC can provide the required training make a recording available to 
public within existing resources. Frederick County revenues and expenditures are not 
affected, as funding formulas are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit 
of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Board of Community College Trustees for Frederick County consists 
of seven members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. 
Each member be a resident of Frederick County at the time of appointment. Members serve 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 839/ Page 2 
five-year term and may not serve more than three consecutive five-year terms. 
Additionally, a member of the Frederick County Board of Education may not serve on the 
Board of Community College Trustees. Each member is entitled to $500 a year for 
expenses.  
 
State law generally establishes that community college boards have seven members serving 
staggered six-year terms, with several specified exceptions. Therefore, there are variations 
in the number and terms of board members. Appendix 1 shows characteristics of the 
various boards. With one exception, the boards are appointed by the Governor with the 
advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. For Chesapeake College, the board is 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland House of 
Delegates.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  If FCC lacks sufficient recording infrastructure, including recording 
equipment, technology support, and online hosting, costs may increase. However, FCC 
may minimize expenses by using low-cost options, such as recording on an existing 
computer and posting to free or low-cost online video platforms. 
 
Training can likely be handled using existing resources. Members of the board serve 
without compensation but may be entitled to reimbursement for certain authorized 
expenses. Any such reimbursement is assumed to be minimal and absorbable with existing 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 534 (Frederick County Senators) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
 
 
 
Appendix 1 
Selected Community College Board Member Requirements 
 
Community College 
Number of Members 
Board Terms 
(Years) 
Term Limits 
Residency 
Requirements 
Allegany 
7 
6 
No 
Limit 
None 
Anne Arundel 
101 
4 
32 
Yes3 
Baltimore City 
91 
6 
24 
Some5 
Baltimore 
15 
5 
24 
See Note6 
Carroll 
7 
6 
No 
Limit 
None 
Cecil 
7 
6 
No 
Limit 
None 
Chesapeake 
10 
5 
3 
Yes7 
Frederick 
7 
5 
3 
Yes8 
Garrett 
7 
6 
No 
Limit 
None 
Hagerstown 
7 
6 
No 
Limit 
Yes9 
Harford 
9 
5 
24 
Yes10 
Howard 
9 
6 
No 
Limit 
Some11 
Montgomery 
101,12 
6 
No 
Limit 
Some13 
Prince George’s 
91 
5 
24 
Yes14 
Southern Maryland 
9 
5 
24 
Yes15 
Wor-Wic 
7 
6 
No 
Limit 
None 
 
1 The board includes a student member serving a one-year term. The student body elects the student board member in Prince George’s County. 
2 Consecutive full terms. 
3 All members must be a resident of Anne Arundel County. 
4 Consecutive terms. 
5 All members must be a resident of the State. The majority must be residents of Baltimore City. 
6 Of the members, 1 serves at large and the other 14 serve from the seven councilmanic districts in Baltimore County, 2 from each district. 
7 Two members from each county that supports Chesapeake College (Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot). 
8 All seven members must be a resident of Frederick County. 
9 All members must be a resident of Washington County at the time of appointment and maintain residency in Washington County throughout their 
term of appointment. 
10 All members must be a resident of Harford County for the duration of their term. 
11 Of the nine members, at least eight must be residents of Howard County at the time of appointment and maintain residency in Howard County 
throughout the term of appointment. 
12 A local nominating committee must submit to the Governor the names of two to four candidates per vacancy, from which the Governor must 
appoint a new member. 
13 The student member must be a resident of the county. 
14 All members must be a resident of Prince George’s County. 
15 Members must be a resident of the State. Each of the southern Maryland counties must be represented by at least three members who are residents 
of the county. 
 
Source:  Annotated Code of Maryland 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3