START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 883 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 883 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Economic Matters and Health 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Artificial Intelligence - Behavioral Health Care 
Prohibitions 
 
 
This bill prohibits a “developer” from making (or knowingly causing artificial intelligence 
(AI) to make) any representation or statement that explicitly or implicitly indicates that the 
AI is (1) a behavioral health care provider or (2) capable of providing behavioral health 
care. Additionally, the bill prohibits a developer from offering, selling, leasing, giving, or 
otherwise providing to consumers in the State, AI that is specifically programmed or 
designed to provide a service or an experience that would constitute the practice of 
behavioral health care if provided by a behavioral health care provider. AI sold, leased, 
given, or otherwise provided to a consumer in the State must include a specified notice and 
adhere to certain protocols. A person that violates these requirements is subject to a  
civil penalty of up to $1.0 million for each violation. The Office of the Attorney General 
(OAG) may investigate and bring an action against any person for an alleged violation of 
the bill. Penalty revenues must be distributed to the Behavioral Health Workforce 
Investment Fund, as specified.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase, at least minimally beginning in 
FY 2027, for OAG to enforce the bill, as discussed below. Special fund revenues increase 
to the extent successful enforcement actions are taken as a result of the bill. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 883/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Behavioral health care provider” means an individual who is licensed or 
otherwise authorized to provide behavioral health care services under the Health 
Occupations Article and includes (1) a counselor; (2) a psychiatrist; (3) a psychologist; 
(4) a social worker; and (5) a therapist.  
 
“Developer” means a person that offers for sale, sells, leases, gives, or otherwise provides 
AI to a consumer in the State.  
 
AI regulated under the bill’s provisions must include clear and conspicuous notice that the 
consumer is not communicating with a human (displayed at the beginning of each use) and 
include protocols that (1) take reasonable steps to detect and address suicidal ideations or 
expressions of self-harm by a consumer and (2) refer the consumer to behavioral health 
services or the Maryland Behavioral Health Crisis Response System’s services when the 
AI detects a consumer’s suicidal ideations or expressions of self-ham.  
 
The bill may not be construed to prohibit (1) any advertisement, statement, or 
representation for (or relating to) any product meant to provide advice and guidance 
relating to behavioral health if the product does not claim to offer or provide behavioral 
health care or (2) a behavioral health care provider from offering or operating AI 
programmed or designed to be used to support administrative tasks. 
 
Current Law:  “Behavioral health” includes substance-related disorders, addictive 
disorders, and mental disorders. “Behavioral health care” includes prevention, screening, 
early intervention, treatment, recovery, support, wraparound, and rehabilitation services 
for individuals with substance-related disorders, addictive disorders, mental disorders, or a 
combination of these disorders.  
 
Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund  
 
The Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund was established to provide 
reimbursement for costs associated with educating, training, certifying, recruiting, placing, 
and retaining behavioral health professionals and paraprofessionals. It consists of money 
appropriated in the State budget, interest earnings, and any other money from any source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. Each year, the Maryland Department of Health must 
report, for the immediately preceding fiscal year (1) the amount of funds transferred and 
distributed from the fund; (2) the number of behavioral health professionals and 
paraprofessionals educated, trained, recruited, certified, placed, or retained with money 
from the fund, aggregated as specified; (3) the amount of any unspent funds; and (4) the 
reason why any unspent funds were not spent. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 883/ Page 3 
Artificial Intelligence 
 
“AI” means a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of human-defined 
objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual 
environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual 
environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an automated 
manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or action. 
 
For additional information on the status of AI in the State and nation, please see the 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence. 
 
State Expenditures:  OAG advises that it requires additional staff to investigate and 
enforce the bill. Specifically, OAG anticipates the need for one assistant Attorney General 
and one technologist, with estimated personnel expenditures of more than $334,800 on an 
annual basis. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) acknowledges that enforcement of the bill 
is likely to require specialized knowledge of the relevant industries. This analysis assumes, 
therefore, that OAG incurs at least minimal contractual costs to facilitate training and the 
development of technical expertise. However, DLS advises that without experience under 
the bill, it is unclear to what extent developers will be noncompliant and whether there will 
be a significant enough volume of related complaints to necessitate additional staff. To the 
extent OAG receives a significant number of complaints from consumers under the bill 
that it is unable to handle with existing staff, OAG may request additional resources 
through the annual budget process. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the bill specifies that penalty revenues must be 
deposited into the Behavioral Health Workgroup Investment Fund, this analysis assumes 
the requirement applies to the Behavioral Health Workforce Investment Fund, as 
established under Section 10-1502 of the Health-General Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 883/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 883/ Page 5 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 
Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise 
provide additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some 
students use AI to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 
Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems 
that host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased 
energy costs; 
 
Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 
Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to 
make “deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to 
differentiate from actual events; 
 
AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data 
privacy. 
 
Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 
Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 883/ Page 6 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human‑defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State 
government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 883/ Page 7 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 883/ Page 8 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 8