START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 875 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 875 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Distribution of Literature to Purchasers of Firearms and 
Ammunition 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to (1) prepare literature with 
specified information relating to firearms and ammunition and (2) distribute the literature 
to all county health departments in the State. Each county health department must then 
distribute the literature to all establishments that sell firearms or ammunition within the 
county. An establishment that receives such literature must make the literature visible and 
available at the point of sale for any firearm or ammunition purchase and distribute the 
literature to each person who purchases a firearm or ammunition. Each county health 
department must authorize a representative to issue citations to establishment owners who 
are in violation of the bill’s requirements. A person who violates the bill is subject to 
specified maximum civil penalties payable to the county that issued the citation.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $41,800 in FY 2027. Future year 
expenditures reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
41,800 
46,700 
48,600 
50,400 
52,200 
Net Effect 
($41,800) 
($46,700) 
($48,600) 
($50,400) 
($52,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local health department (LHD) expenditures increase to distribute the 
required literature and conduct enforcement. Potential increase in county revenues to the 
extent that civil penalties are imposed and collected. This bill imposes a mandate on a 
unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 875/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A violator is subject to a maximum civil penalty of (1) $500 for a 
first violation and (2) $1,000 for a second or subsequent violation. A civil penalty imposed 
under the bill must be paid to the county that issued the citation. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Handgun Qualification License 
 
A handgun qualification license (HQL) authorizes a person to purchase, rent, or receive a 
handgun. A licensed firearms manufacturer; a specified active or retired law enforcement 
officer; a member or retired member of the armed forces or the National Guard; and a 
person purchasing, renting, or receiving an antique, curio, or relic firearm (as defined under 
federal law) are exempt from the requirements of the licensing provisions. 
 
Generally, the Secretary of State Police must issue an HQL to a person who (1) is at least 
age 21; (2) is a State resident; (3) has completed a firearms safety training course; and (4) is 
not prohibited by federal or State law from purchasing or possessing a handgun. 
 
The firearms safety training course must include (1) a minimum of four hours of instruction 
by a qualified handgun instructor; (2) classroom instruction on State firearm law, home 
firearm safety, and handgun mechanisms and operation; and (3) a firearms orientation that 
demonstrates that the person can safely operate and handle a firearm. An applicant is not 
required to complete an approved firearms safety training course if the applicant has 
previously completed a certified firearms training course, has completed a hunting safety 
course prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources, is currently a qualified handgun 
instructor, is an honorably discharged member of the U.S. Armed Forces or the 
National Guard, is a certain employee of an armored car company, or lawfully owns a 
regulated firearm. Renewal applicants are not required to complete the firearms safety 
training course or submit to a State and national criminal history records check. 
 
Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention 
 
Chapters 706 and 707 of 2024 established the Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and 
Intervention in MDH. The purpose of the center is to reduce firearm violence, harm from 
firearm violence, and misuse of firearms in the State by partnering with federal, State, and 
local agencies and affected communities to implement a public health approach to firearm 
violence reduction.  
 
The center must (1) work in consultation with the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy (GOCPP), the Department of State Police (DSP), and any other relevant State 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 875/ Page 3 
or local agency to ensure a multi-departmental approach to reducing firearm violence and  
(2) solicit and consider recommendations from communities disproportionately impacted 
by firearm violence, public health experts, individuals or organizations with expertise in 
firearm safety and training, and any other experts, groups, or organizations the executive 
director determines to be appropriate and necessary. 
 
The center may: 
 
 
apply for, receive, and spend federal funds made available to MDH for use in 
carrying out the powers and duties of the Secretary or MDH; 
 
offer training and technical assistance to State and local agencies, health care 
professionals, and community and faith-based organizations to increase capacity to 
implement evidence-based firearm violence prevention and intervention strategies; 
 
issue best practice guidance and model processes in consultation with affected 
communities regarding implementation of evidence-based firearm violence 
prevention and intervention strategies; 
 
facilitate cross-jurisdictional data and information sharing in consultation with 
GOCPP; 
 
conduct public awareness campaigns; 
 
share data and collaborate with higher education and research institutions regarding 
the prevention of firearm violence; 
 
promote the development of evidence-based firearm violence prevention initiatives 
in affected communities throughout the State; and 
 
engage in any other activity consistent with the center’s mission. 
 
State Expenditures:  According to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives, there are approximately 785 dealers with federal firearms licenses in the State; 
however, many licensed dealers do not have a formal establishment. According to DSP, 
in 2025, there were approximately 100,000 applications for firearm sales in the State. 
Ammunition can be sold at establishments that do not hold a federal firearms license, and 
ammunition purchases are not tracked in the State. Thus, MDH needs to develop and 
publish enough literature to distribute to LHDs in the State for further distribution to all 
establishments that sell firearms or ammunition within each county. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $41,766 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one part-time (25%) health analyst to develop and publish the required literature and 
distribute it to LHDs in the State. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including printing costs. The estimate assumes that 
existing staff within MDH do not have the capacity to absorb the additional workload 
resulting from the bill. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 875/ Page 4 
Position 
0.25 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$22,937 
Literature Printing Costs 
11,250 
Other Operating Expenses 
    7,579 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$41,766 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, including ongoing printing 
costs. As information included in the literature may change each year, this analysis assumes 
that MDH needs to update and publish new copies of the literature annually. Actual 
expenditures in any given year could vary depending on the demand for the literature and 
the need to publish literature in languages other than English. 
 
Local Revenues:  To the extent that LHDs issue citations for violations, county revenues 
increase from any civil penalties imposed and collected. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase for LHDs to distribute the required literature 
and conduct enforcement. The Maryland Association of County Health Officers advises 
that LHDs do not currently have sufficient staff to distribute the required literature and 
conduct the compliance checks; therefore, LHDs likely need to hire additional staff to meet 
the bill’s requirements. A reliable estimate of the resulting increase in expenditures for 
LHDs cannot be made at this time.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 713 and SB 577 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
State Police; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4