START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 888 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 888 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Washington County - Property Tax Credit for Disabled Veterans - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill expands the eligibility of a local option property tax credit for disabled veterans 
in Washington County by including individuals from the uniformed services as defined in  
10 U.S.C. § 101. As a result, members of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) and the Public Health Service (PHS) are explicitly eligible for the 
property tax credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years 
beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill codifies current practice with regards to the implementation 
of the property tax credit in Washington County. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Washington County is authorized to grant a property tax credit for a 
dwelling house owned by a disabled veteran who is honorably discharged or released under 
honorable circumstances from active military, naval, or air service as defined in  
38 U.S.C. § 101. To be eligible for the property tax credit, the individual must have been 
declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs to have a permanent 
service-connected disability that results from blindness or other disabling cause that is 
reasonably certain to continue for the life of the veteran and was not caused or incurred by 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 888/ Page 2 
misconduct of the veteran. Disabled veteran includes an individual who qualifies 
posthumously for a service-connected disability. 
 
A surviving spouse of a disabled veteran is also eligible to receive the property tax credit 
if the dwelling house was owned by the disabled veteran at the time of the disabled 
veteran’s death, the dwelling house received the property tax credit, and the surviving 
spouse currently owns and resides in the dwelling house. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Washington County indicates that disabled members of NOAA and 
PHS have been eligible for the property tax credit since at least 2016. As a result, the bill 
codifies the county’s current practice in issuing the property tax credit. 
 
Property Tax Collections in Washington County 
 
The Washington County fiscal 2026 budget assumes that $550,000 in property tax credits 
will be provided to eligible disabled veterans in fiscal 2026. Washington County is 
projected to collect approximately $164.2 million in property tax revenues in fiscal 2026, 
as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. The Guide to Local Government Taxing 
Authority provides an overview on each county government’s statutory authority to 
establish property tax credits and exemptions. A copy of both reports are available on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1333 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 500 (Washington County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2