START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 848 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 848 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Public Safety – State Fire Prevention Code – Trash and Recyclable Materials 
 
 
This bill requires the State Fire Prevention Commission (SFPC), as part of the State Fire 
Prevention Code, to (1) incorporate by reference in regulations specified provisions of the 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101 Life Safety Code (2024 Edition) and 
(2) allow valet trash and recycling materials awaiting scheduled collection to be placed in 
the corridors and exits of new and existing apartment buildings. The bill also makes a 
stylistic change. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SFPC can implement the bill with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Fire Marshal must enforce all laws of the State relating to, among 
other things, the prevention of fire and the installation and maintenance of equipment 
intended to control, detect, or extinguish fire. The State Fire Marshal must also enforce 
regulations adopted by SFPC. SFPC within the Department of State Police must adopt 
comprehensive regulations as a State Fire Prevention Code. The commission adopted by 
reference, subject to some exceptions noted in the regulations, the NFPA 1 Fire Code 
(2024 Edition), the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2024 Edition), and some requirements of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 848/ Page 2 
the International Building Code as the State Fire Prevention Code. The State Fire 
Prevention Code has the force and effect of law in the political subdivisions of the State, 
and enforcement is the responsibility of the State Fire Marshal, a legally designated fire 
official of a county or municipality of the State, or other persons legally appointed by the 
State Fire Marshal (as specified under the Public Safety Article).  
 
The State Fire Prevention Code explicitly excludes provisions from NFPA 101 Life Safety 
Code (2024 Edition) pertaining to valet trash collection services in new and existing 
apartment buildings. The excluded provisions generally allow placement of trash 
containers in corridors but place limitations on the container size, construction, placement, 
and amount of time a container is allowed to be placed in a corridor to address the risk 
associated with placing combustible materials in a corridor. The limitations vary for 
placement in corridors with sprinklers.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last  
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 621 (Senators Watson and Salling) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; National Fire Protection Association; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2