START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 874 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 874 
(Delegate Simmons) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Board of License Commissioners - Alterations 
 
   
This bill increases, from three to five, the number of members of the Anne Arundel County 
Board of License Commissioners. Members must be appointed by the Governor from a list 
of individuals recommended by the Anne Arundel County House and Senate delegations, 
as specified. The Governor may request a new list of recommendations at any time. No 
more than three members of the board may belong to the same political party and no more 
than two members of the board may be residents of the same legislative district. The board 
must also adopt and publish a written policy related to conflicts of interest and the recusal 
of board members from board matters. The initial terms of the two additional board 
members must begin May 2, 2027. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by $39,995 annually beginning 
in FY 2027 for salaries, fringe benefits, and incidental expenses for two new board 
members. Anne Arundel County revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 874/ Page 2 
The Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners has three members appointed 
by the Governor. If the Senate is in session, board members are appointed with the advice 
and consent of the Senate. If the Senate is not in session, appointments are made by the 
Governor alone. Each member of the board must be (1) a resident and voter of the county 
and (2) an individual of high character, integrity, and recognized business capacity. No 
more than two members of the board may be of the same political party.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Anne Arundel County advises that county expenditures will 
increase by $39,995 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. This estimate includes  
two $15,000 salaries for the new board members, as well as fringe benefits and incidental 
expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 398 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Governor’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2