START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 838 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 838 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Pharmacy - Prescriber-Pharmacist Agreements 
 
 
This bill authorizes a pharmacist to enter into a prescriber-pharmacist agreement to treat 
an opioid use disorder (OUD) using controlled dangerous substances (CDS) drug therapy 
if the pharmacist (1) individually registers with both the Maryland Office of Controlled 
Substances Administration (OCSA) and the federal Drug Enforcement Agency; 
(2) completes any required training; and (3) follows a specified protocol. A protocol 
authorizing CDS drug therapy must require the pharmacist to request relevant data from 
the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) before initiating or modifying CDS 
drug therapy. The bill also repeals specified authorizations and requirements related to 
prescriber-pharmacist agreements. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase 
by $58,600 in FY 2027 for personnel and a one-time only software update. Future year 
expenditures reflect ongoing costs. MDH general fund revenues increase by approximately 
$72,000 in FY 2027 from CDS registration fees. Future year revenues reflect growth in 
CDS registration applications and renewal fees beginning in FY 2030. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$72,000 
$7,200 
$7,200 
$79,200 
$14,400 
GF Expenditure 
$58,600 
$49,000 
$51,500 
$54,000 
$56,400 
Net Effect 
$13,400 
($41,800) 
($44,300) 
$25,200 
($42,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 838/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals the requirement for a prescriber who enters into a 
prescriber-pharmacist agreement to submit a copy of the agreement and any subsequent 
modifications to the health occupations board that regulates the prescriber. The bill also 
repeals the authorization for a health occupations board to enter into an agreement with the 
Board of Pharmacy that requires authorized prescribers to submit documentation to the 
Board of Pharmacy that otherwise would be required to be submitted to the health 
occupations board that regulates the prescriber. 
 
However, a licensed pharmacist who enters into a prescriber-pharmacist agreement must 
still submit a copy of the agreement and any subsequent modifications to the Board of 
Pharmacy. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Prescriber-pharmacist Agreements 
 
Chapter 249 of 2002 established the Drug Therapy Management Program, which 
authorizes a physician and a pharmacist to enter a therapy management contract that 
specifies treatment protocols that may be used to provide care to a patient. A pharmacist 
may authorize certain patient care measures related to monitoring or improving the 
outcomes of drug or device therapy based on disease-specific, mutually agreed-upon 
protocols. Those measures include ordering laboratory tests or initiating, modifying, 
continuing, or discontinuing drug therapy. A protocol may not authorize acts that exceed 
the scope of practice of the parties in the therapy management contract, and it must prohibit 
the substitution of a chemically dissimilar drug product for the product prescribed, unless 
permitted in the contract. 
 
Generally, an authorized prescriber who has entered a prescriber-pharmacist agreement 
must submit a copy of the agreement and any subsequent modifications made to the 
agreement or protocol to the health occupations board that oversees the prescriber. A health 
occupations board may enter an agreement with the Board of Pharmacy that would require 
authorized prescribers to submit documentation to the Board of Pharmacy instead of the 
health occupations board that oversees the prescriber. 
 
A licensed pharmacist who enters a prescriber-pharmacist agreement must submit a copy 
of the agreement and any subsequent modifications made to the agreement or protocols to 
the Board of Pharmacy. 
 
A pharmacist is authorized to enter into a prescriber-pharmacist agreement if the 
pharmacist (1) is licensed; (2) has a Doctor of Pharmacy degree or equivalent training; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 838/ Page 3 
(3) is approved by the Board of Pharmacy to enter into a prescriber-pharmacist agreement 
with an authorized prescriber; and (4) meets any other requirements established by 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.34.29.04). 
 
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program 
 
Chapter 166 of 2011 established PDMP to assist with the identification and prevention of 
prescription drug abuse and the identification and investigation of unlawful prescription 
drug diversion. PDMP must monitor the prescribing and dispensing of CDS schedules II 
through V and naloxone medication. In general, PDMP data (1) are confidential, 
privileged, and not subject to discovery, subpoena, or other means of legal compulsion in 
civil litigation; (2) are not public records; and (3) may not be disclosed to any person, 
subject to specified exceptions. One of the specified exceptions requires that PDMP 
disclose prescription monitoring data to a dispenser, or a licensed health care practitioner 
authorized by the dispenser, in connection with the dispensing of a monitored prescription 
drug. 
 
Opioid Use Disorders 
 
For more information about OUD and the opioid crisis in the State, please see  
Appendix – Opioid Crisis. 
 
State Revenues:  OCSA advises that a CDS registration costs $120 for a 
three-year registration period. Based on current participation in drug therapy management 
programs, OCSA estimates that about 600 pharmacists may initially apply for 
CDS registration under the bill. As the program continues, OCSA anticipates about 
60 new applicants annually in subsequent years. 
 
Thus, OCSA estimates that general fund revenues from CDS registration fees may increase 
by up to $72,000 in fiscal 2027. Assuming about 60 applicants annually in subsequent 
years and renewal applications beginning in fiscal 2030, general fund revenues increase by 
$79,200 in fiscal 2030 and by $14,400 in fiscal 2031. 
 
State Expenditures:  OCSA advises that the anticipated increase in applications may 
require additional staff, as well as a one-time $1,750 programming expenditure to update 
the online database portal. Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $58,635 in 
fiscal 2027, which reflects the cost to hire one part-time (50%) administrative specialist to 
process increased applications for CDS registrations and the one-time only programming 
expenses. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 838/ Page 4 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$48,438 
One-time Programming Expenses 
1,750 
Operating Expenses 
    8,447 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$58,635 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Pharmacists at small business pharmacies may enter into new 
prescriber-pharmacist agreements under the bill but must obtain specified registrations and 
training. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 562 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 838/ Page 5 
Appendix – Opioid Crisis 
 
 
Opioid Overdose Deaths 
 
Between April 2016 and April 2025, nearly 23,000 individuals died from overdose in 
Maryland, with approximately 88% of the deaths involving opioids. During the same 
period, approximately 780,000 individuals died from overdoses nationally, with 72.2% of 
those fatalities involving opioids. Since 2021, there has been a gradual decrease in overdose 
deaths both in Maryland and nationally. According to preliminary data covering April 2024 
through April 2025, overdose deaths have decreased in both the United States and 
Maryland by approximately 26% and 33%, respectively. 
 
In Maryland, disparities in overdose fatalities persist across race, age, gender, and 
jurisdiction. Statewide, Black men, particularly those aged 55 and older, have the 
highest overdose fatality rate, which is nearly double that of white men, the group with the 
second highest overdose fatality rate. Across race groups, more than twice the number of 
males die by overdose compared to females, and individuals aged 55 and older comprise 
the highest number of overdose deaths among each race and gender category except for 
white females. The Maryland Overdose Response Advisory Council voted in June 2024 to 
reinstate the Racial Disparities in Overdose Task Force to study the causes of 
racial disparities and recommend solutions. 
 
Although opioid overdose fatalities are problematic statewide, Baltimore City is 
disproportionately impacted. Between calendar 2018 and 2022, Baltimore City 
experienced an overdose fatality rate nearly twice that of any other U.S. city. According to 
the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), there were 1,296 overdose-related fatalities 
across the State from October 2024 to September 2025, of which 536 occurred in 
Baltimore City, representing approximately 41% of the State’s total overdose fatalities but 
just 9% of the State’s population. 
 
Maryland Actions to Address the Opioid Crisis 
 
Legislative Response:  The General Assembly has passed legislation to address the opioid 
crisis, including prevention, treatment, overdose response, and prescribing guidelines. 
 
 
Chapters 573 and 574 of 2017 expand drug education in public schools to include 
heroin and opioid addiction prevention; require local boards of education to require 
each public school to store overdose-reversing medication; and require institutions 
of higher education that receive State funding to establish a policy that addresses 
heroin and opioid addiction and prevention. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 838/ Page 6 
 
Chapter 570 of 2017 requires a health care provider to prescribe the lowest effective 
dose of an opioid and a quantity that is no greater than that needed for the expected 
duration of pain severe enough to require an opioid that is a controlled dangerous 
substance, with specified exceptions. 
 
 
Chapters 215 and 216 of 2018 require a health care provider to advise a patient of 
the benefits and risks of a prescribed opioid or co-prescribed benzodiazepine. 
 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 establishes the Opioid Restitution Fund (ORF), a special fund 
to retain revenues received by the State relating to specified opioid judgments or 
settlements, which may be used only for opioid-related programs and services. 
 
 
Chapter 82 of 2022 requires MDH to adopt a reporting system to monitor the 
prescribing of medications to treat opioid use disorders (OUDs), identify and reach 
out to prescribers who regularly prescribe nonpreferred medications, and identify 
barriers to individuals who need medication to treat an OUD to obtaining the 
medication in a timely manner. 
 
 
Chapter 224 of 2022 requires the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program to monitor 
the dispensing of naloxone and maintain confidentiality of naloxone data. 
 
 
Chapter 239 of 2022 broadens existing requirements and protections relating to the 
administration or provision of naloxone to encompass any opioid overdose reversal 
drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and authorizes 
specified providers and organizations across the State to offer naloxone free of 
charge to individual community members. 
 
 
Chapter 408 of 2024 requires MDH to report until 2026 on (1) current opioid 
overdose reversal drugs approved by the FDA and (2) whether MDH has added each 
current FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to a standing order. 
 
 
Chapter 764 of 2024 expands the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator 
(AED) Program to include an initiative to locate up to two doses of naloxone with 
each AED in a public building. 
 
 
Chapter 886 of 2024 requires hospitals, beginning January 1, 2025, to establish 
protocols to provide appropriate care for patients admitted for opioid-related 
conditions, including overdose, possess specified medication for the treatment of 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 838/ Page 7 
OUD, and treat a patient who presents in an emergency room for opioid-related 
overdose or emergency medical condition, as specified. 
 
 
Chapter 759 of 2025 establishes a Buprenorphine Training Grant Program to 
support counties in training paramedics in administering buprenorphine. 
 
Maryland has a statewide standing order for opioid overdose reversal drugs that authorizes 
any Maryland-licensed pharmacist to dispense unlimited prescriptions and refills of 
naloxone and devices for its administration to any individual, as specified. A pharmacist 
must provide consultation with the individual regarding the naloxone dosage that is most 
appropriate, select and dispense two doses of naloxone, and provide directions for use. If a 
patient cannot afford naloxone or related copayments, or does not wish to use insurance 
coverage, pharmacists are instructed to refer them to the nearest Overdose Response 
Program, a community organization providing overdose prevention education and 
supplies, where individuals can obtain a naloxone kit free of charge. 
 
Opioid Manufacturer and Distributor Settlements:  In October 2020, the U.S. Department 
of Justice announced a global resolution of its criminal and civil investigations of opioid 
manufacturer Purdue Pharma. After multiple rejected settlements and appeals, Purdue 
agreed to a $7.4 billion national settlement that was approved by a federal judge in 
November 2025. 
 
The State was part of several other settlements, including ones with McKinsey & 
Company, Johnson & Johnson, Walmart, Walgreens, Allergan, Teva, and Publicis Health. 
All settlement revenues are allocated to ORF, as described below. 
 
Opioid Restitution Fund:  Through the end of fiscal 2025, Maryland has received more 
than $245.8 million from opioid settlements. By October 2038, the State is projected to 
receive more than $670.8 million in opioid settlement revenue, which is split between local 
jurisdictions and ORF. 
 
While each Maryland county will receive block grant funding through ORF, 
Baltimore City will receive ORF funds from just one settlement, as it opted out of all other 
settlements to pursue separate litigation in pursuit of higher award amounts. As of 
September 2025, Baltimore City has announced nearly $580 million in separate settlement 
awards, with additional settlements in progress. 
 
Under the National Opioid Settlement, Maryland’s settlement revenues are directed into 
four distinct funding streams for expenditure; the amount in each stream must ultimately 
reach a specified percentage of total awards, with only 75% flowing through ORF, as 
follows: 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 838/ Page 8 
 
Local Direct Funds (25%):  Direct payments from settlement administrators to 
participating subdivisions. As of the end of fiscal 2025, this accounts for 
approximately $53.6 million in revenues paid directly to local jurisdictions. 
 
Targeted Abatement Grant Funds (45%):  Funds deposited into ORF that must 
be used for formula-based grants for participating subdivisions. As of the end of 
fiscal 2025, this accounts for approximately $97.0 million in ORF revenues. 
 
 
State Discretionary Abatement Fund (15%):  Funds that must be made available 
for competitive grants. As of the end of fiscal 2025, this accounts for approximately 
$38.0 million in ORF revenues. 
 
 
State Allocation Funds (15%):  Funds that may be spent at the State’s discretion, 
within allowable parameters. As of the end of fiscal 2025, this accounts for 
approximately $57.3 million in ORF revenues. 
 
Generally, legislative mandates and initiatives are funded with State Allocation Funds. 
Through the end of fiscal 2025, $14.4 million of the $57.3 million in State Allocation Funds 
received has been expended; another $34.5 million is allocated for future spending through 
2038. Thus, approximately $8.4 million of State Allocation Funds received remains 
available for future discretionary spending. In addition, the Maryland Office of Overdose 
Response (MOOR) anticipates receiving an additional $64.7 million in State Allocation 
Funds through 2038. 
 
Recent legislative initiatives funded through this revenue stream include co-location of 
naloxone with AED units (per Chapter 764); operating and personnel expenses for the 
Office of the Attorney General’s Opioids Enforcement Unit related to investigation and 
enforcement of opioid settlements (per Chapters 700 and 701 of 2025); and development 
of an interactive dashboard to report on settlement revenue and the use of ORF (per 
Chapters 690 and 691 of 2025). Other current uses of this funding include salaries for 
MOOR staff and the Opioid Policy Advisor in the Lieutenant Governor’s Office and a 
Medicaid waiver for medications for opioid use disorder (MOUD). Additionally, 
provisions in the fiscal 2026 budget temporarily expanded the allowable uses of ORF to 
supplement general funds for the buprenorphine initiative under the Behavioral Health 
Administration and MOUD in correctional and pre-trial detention facilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 8