START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 808 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 808 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Step Therapy, Fail-First Protocols, and 
Prior Authorization - Prescription Drugs to Treat Serious Mental Illness 
 
 
This bill prohibits Medicaid, beginning July 1, 2026, from applying a prior authorization 
requirement, fail-first protocol, or step therapy protocol for a prescription drug used to treat 
a diagnosis of specified mental health conditions. A prior authorization requirement may 
be imposed if required under specified federal law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and 
terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by a significant amount (50% general funds, 
50% federal funds) in FY 2027 through 2029, as discussed below; federal fund revenues 
increase correspondingly. This bill increases the cost of an entitlement program in 
FY 2027 through 2029. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A prior authorization requirement, fail-first protocol, or step therapy 
protocol may not be imposed for a prescription drug used to treat a diagnosis of (1) bipolar 
disorder; (2) schizophrenia; (3) major depression; (4) post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD); or (5) a medication-induced movement disorder associated with the treatment of 
a serious mental illness. A prior authorization requirement may be applied if required under 
42 U.S.C. § 1396(a) (State plans for medical assistance). 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 808/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Under § 15-103 of the Health-General Article, a Medicaid managed care 
organization (MCO) may not apply a prior authorization requirement for a prescription 
drug used as postexposure prophylaxis for the prevention of HIV if the prescription drug 
is prescribed for use in accordance with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
guidelines. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Behavioral health drugs associated with the treatment of a serious 
mental illness, including those used to treat bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, major 
depression, and PTSD, are carved out of the Medicaid MCO pharmacy benefit, and paid 
for on a fee-for-service (FFS) basis. Medication-induced motion disorder drugs are covered 
by both FFS and MCOs. These drugs often have prior authorization requirements. 
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) currently allows for a 30-day emergency 
supply of atypical antipsychotic drugs not on the preferred drug list to ensure that 
individuals will not have a gap in their medications while prior authorization issues are 
being resolved. In addition, MDH also has a policy in place to ensure that individuals who 
have been on a prescribed drug before they enroll in Maryland Medicaid are able to receive 
a supply of that drug while their prescription undergoes the prior authorization process. 
 
Many drugs used primarily for serious mental health diagnoses are also prescribed for other 
conditions or off-label use. At this time, prescriptions as presented to the pharmacy do not 
include diagnosis, and this information is not otherwise readily available at the time a 
prescription is filled. To implement the bill, MDH advises that it would need to eliminate 
all prior authorization requirements from these classes of drugs so that, whenever such a 
drug is prescribed, it would automatically be authorized. MDH advises that this will result 
in an increase in the number of prescriptions being filled and, accordingly, increased 
Medicaid expenditures. 
 
By removing step therapy, fail-first, and prior authorization for specified drugs, MDH 
anticipates that utilization will shift from generic to brand-name drugs or from lower net 
cost brand-name drugs to higher net cost brand-name drugs, increasing the overall cost per 
prescription. MDH also anticipates a decrease in supplemental rebates as manufacturers 
will no longer have an incentive to offer such rebates to have their brand-name drugs 
included on the Medicaid preferred drug list. Receipt of fewer supplemental rebates results 
in higher net expenditures for Medicaid prescription drugs. 
 
An estimated 479,411 Medicaid recipients (including 426,386 adults) have been diagnosed 
with one of the conditions specified in the bill. Total net costs for Medicaid for prescription 
drugs used to treat those diagnoses are $81.2 million per year (or an estimated $72.2 million 
for adults). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 808/ Page 3 
Under the bill, MDH projects significant cost increases as discussed above (an estimated 
$120.1 million in total funds in fiscal 2027). This does not reflect any costs associated with 
movement disorder medications. Thus, MDH expenditures increase by a significant but 
indeterminate amount (50% general funds/50% federal funds) in fiscal 2027 through 2029 
to comply with the bill. Federal fund revenues increase correspondingly. Expenditures may 
be offset by savings from reduced delays in treatment and reduced medical costs such as 
provider visits and hospitalizations. 
 
MDH additionally advises that the federal Substance Use Disorder Prevention that 
Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment for Patients and Communities (SUPPORT) Act 
requires states to implement claims review processes for individuals prescribed opioids  
and antipsychotics. MDH’s current prior authorization policies comply with the 
SUPPORT Act. MDH notes that the bill may impact the State’s compliance, putting federal 
matching dollars at risk. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 111 and HB 382 of 2025, and SB 990 and HB 1423 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 490 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3