START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 899 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 899 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Home Detention Monitoring Agencies - Promotion and Solicitation of Business - 
Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits, on the grounds of a courthouse or correctional facility, an agent of a 
private home detention monitoring agency (PHDMA), an employee of a courthouse, or an 
employee of a correctional facility from (1) approaching, enticing, or inviting a person to 
use the services of a specific PHDMA; (2) distributing, displaying, or wearing an item that 
advertises the services of a PHDMA; or (3) otherwise soliciting business for a PHDMA. 
The bill also establishes related penalties for noncompliance.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) can 
implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. The bill’s penalty provisions are 
not anticipated to have a meaningful effect on general fund revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s penalty provisions are not anticipated to have a meaningful effect 
on local revenues. Local government expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A person who violates the bill’s prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and on conviction is subject to (1) a fine not exceeding $2,500 and, if licensed, a 30-day 
license suspension for the first offence, and (2) a fine not exceeding $5,000 and, if licensed, 
a 90-day license suspension for a subsequent offence. A licensed person that is convicted 
of a violation of the bill’s prohibition must be referred to DPSCS for appropriate action. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 899/ Page 2 
Current Law:  A “private home detention monitoring agency” is a person who conducts 
a business that provides monitoring services for a fee to individuals who are under a court 
order that requires monitoring by a private home detention monitoring agency. 
 
Generally, in accordance with eligibility criteria, conditions, and procedures required under 
the Maryland Rules, the court may require, as a condition of a defendant’s pretrial release, 
that the defendant be monitored by a PHDMA licensed by DPSCS. PHDMA’s must  
(1) monitor individuals in accordance with any applicable orders of the court; (2) monitor 
24 hours a day and 7 days a week individuals who are under a court order that requires 
monitoring by a PHDMA; and (3) use electronic equipment or other monitoring methods 
that meet or exceed standards established in regulations by the Secretary of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services. The Judiciary advises that currently there are five PHDMAs 
licensed by DPSCS. 
 
The fee for a PHDMA license is $500, and PHDMA’s must keep general liability insurance 
of at least $100,000 and a surety bond of at least $2,500. A person may not operate a 
PHDMA in the State unless the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services has 
issued a license to the person. A person who willfully and knowingly violates the licensing 
requirements is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding 
$5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 540 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2