START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 833 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 833 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Commission to Advance Lithium-Ion Battery Safety in Maryland - 
Reestablishment 
 
 
This bill reestablishes the Commission to Advance Lithium-Ion Battery Safety in 
Maryland. The Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) must provide staff for the 
commission. Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses. By December 1, 2026, the commission must submit an 
interim report on the progress and status of the commission to the Legislative Policy 
Committee. By December 1, 2027, the commission must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $70,700 in 
FY 2027 and by $30,100 in FY 2028. Any expense reimbursements for members of the 
commission are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
70,700 
30,100 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($70,700) 
($30,100) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 833/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 949 and 950 of 2024 established the 
Commission to Advance Lithium-Ion Battery Safety in Maryland, which terminated  
December 31, 2025. The commission was required to study and make legislative, 
regulatory, programmatic, or other recommendations regarding:   
 
 
best practices, standards, and guidelines (1) to prevent, detect, and suppress 
lithium‑ion battery fires in consumer and transportation applications and in utility 
applications, with review and consideration of the National Fire Prevention 
855 Standards for Grid Scale Storage and Safety; (2) to prevent, detect, and suppress 
lithium-ion fires at recycling facilities; and (3) for reusing, recycling, and 
decommissioning lithium-ion batteries; 
 
the viability of extended producer responsibility for lithium-ion batteries; 
 
training, education, and other information to better inform the public and 
first responders regarding lithium-ion battery safety; and 
 
any other global issues the commission may consider useful for enhancing the safety 
and reuse of batteries in the State. 
 
The commission submitted its interim report on December 1, 2024, and submitted its 
final report on November 25, 2025. The commission’s final report included, among other 
things, recommendations to extend the commission’s mandate for an additional two years 
so it can study (1) battery risks at the Port of Baltimore, roads, rail and tunnels throughout 
Maryland; (2) impacts of battery risks on insurance providers and insurance coverage 
availability; (3) Maryland’s current waste classifications for lithium-ion batteries and how 
they affect collection, storage, and recycling as well as how this could be better addressed 
in the permitting and regulation of solid waste facilities; and (4) the integration of pending 
federal regulations and emerging third-party standards.  
 
The bill generally requires the commission to study those aforementioned issues and adds 
additional commission members.  
 
State Expenditures:  The Department of State Police advises that OSFM hired a 
temporary contractual employee to staff the original commission and must again hire 
another temporary contractual employee for the reestablished commission. Therefore, 
general fund expenditures increase by $70,656 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a  
30‑day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring one contractual management associate to staff the commission, study the new 
lithium‑ion batteries and the new requirements established under the bill, and complete the 
required reports. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one‑time start‑up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 833/ Page 3 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$60,821 
Operating Expenses 
    9,835 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$70,656 
 
Fiscal 2028 expenditures, which total $30,100, reflect ongoing costs and the termination 
of the contractual position midway through fiscal 2028, following the completion of the 
commission’s final report and concurrent with the bill’s termination date. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Legislative Services advises that the 
National Fire Prevention Association 855 (Standard for the Installation of Stationary 
Energy Storage Systems) provides, among other things, guidance for the installation and 
maintenance of energy storage systems, which can include lithium-ion batteries. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 553 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; National Fire Protection Association; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3