START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 804 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 804 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Health 
 
 
Department of Aging - Aging Resilience Fund - Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Aging Resilience Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund to support 
implementation of the Maryland Department of Aging’s (MDOA) mission. The Secretary 
of Aging must administer the fund, which consists of (1) investment earnings; (2) any fees 
collected by MDOA; and (3) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. The fund may be used for administrative expenses that align with the 
department’s mission, including personnel; partnership development; and programs 
services, or activities within MDOA. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in 
accordance with the State budget. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOA can administer the fund with existing budgeted resources. 
Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
FY 2027, as discussed below.      
  
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for local area agencies on aging (AAAs) may 
increase to the extent that funds become available.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDOA functions as the State Unit on Aging as federally designated 
through the Older Americans Act of 1965 and receives federal and State funding to serve 
older adults and their families and caregivers. MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the 
delivery of services for, and advocates on behalf of, older adults at all levels of government.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 804/ Page 2 
MDOA distributes funding and provides fiscal and programmatic oversight to the aging 
services network across the State, including to 19 local AAAs. Services funded through 
MDOA and administered by the aging services network include information and referral 
services, nutrition services, community-based supportive services, and assisted living 
subsidies. 
 
The Secretary of Aging must:  
 
 
evaluate the service needs of seniors in the State;  
 
determine the extent to which existing public and private programs meet the needs 
of seniors;  
 
establish priorities for meeting the needs of seniors;  
 
coordinate, assess and evaluate, and educate the public and professionals about all 
State and local programs and services, both public and private, that relate and are 
important to the well-being of seniors in the State, including in the areas of income 
maintenance, public health, mental health, housing and urban development, 
employment, education, recreation, and rehabilitation of seniors with physical or 
mental disabilities;  
 
develop a statewide plan incorporating local plans for a comprehensive and 
coordinated system of health, social, and community services for seniors, including 
housing, and institutional and noninstitutional care;  
 
represent the interests of seniors by serving as an advocate at all levels of 
government;  
 
consult with and advise the secretaries of the principal departments of State 
government about the programs and services for seniors that are the primary 
responsibility of those departments;  
 
consult with the Commission on Aging on all matters pertaining to programs for 
seniors;  
 
provide consultation and technical assistance to communities and civic groups 
developing local services for seniors;  
 
maintain a clearinghouse of information related to the interests of seniors; and 
 
review and recommend policies to the Governor on publicly funded plans and 
programs that affect seniors. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDOA special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in fiscal 2027, reflecting any fees collected by MDOA, investment earnings of 
the fund, or any other money accepted for the benefit of the fund. Special fund expenditures 
likely increase accordingly, in accordance with the authorized uses of the fund. MDOA 
advises that the extent of the increase in special fund revenues and expenditures cannot be 
reliably estimated. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 804/ Page 3 
MDOA notes that the department has limited authority to accept and spend philanthropic 
or private funds, and that the department is working with philanthropies to generate new 
investments to align with MDOA grantmaking, initiatives, services, or other efforts for the 
benefit of older Marylanders, caregivers and their families. MDOA projects initial 
investments to the fund will be modest. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 860 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3