START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 878 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 878 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Workers' Compensation - Heart Disease and Hypertension Presumption and 
Permanent Partial Disability - Carroll County Correctional Deputies 
 
 
This bill extends to all Carroll County correctional deputies an occupational disease 
presumption for heart disease or hypertension that (1) is more severe than their condition 
existing prior to that employment and (2) results in partial or total disability or death. 
Accordingly, as a condition of employment, Carroll County correctional deputies must 
submit to a medical examination to determine any heart disease or hypertension condition 
existing prior to their employment. The bill also alters the definition of “public safety 
employee” to include Carroll County correctional deputies, making these individuals 
eligible for enhanced workers’ compensation benefits. Provisions related to the designation 
as a “public safety employee” must be construed to apply only prospectively and may not 
be applied or interpreted to have any effect on, or application to, any claims arising before 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State government operations or finances. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County expenditures increase beginning in FY 2027 for additional 
workers’ compensation costs, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 878/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A Carroll County correctional deputy who is employed on or before 
September 30, 2026, (1) as a condition of continued employment must provide to the 
Carroll County Sheriff’s Office, by December 31, 2026, a copy of a medical report 
disclosing and describing any existing heart disease or hypertension from which the 
correctional deputy may be suffering and (2) is entitled to the presumption established by 
the bill only to the extent that the individual suffers from heart disease or hypertension that 
is more severe than the condition existing as of the date of the medical report provided. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Occupational Disease Presumptions 
 
Workers’ compensation law establishes a presumption of compensable occupational 
disease for certain public safety employees who are exposed to unusual hazards in the 
course of their employment. It is assumed that these injuries or diseases are due to the 
employees’ work and, therefore, require no additional evidence in the filing of a claim for 
workers’ compensation. As shown below, generally, presumptions are based on particular 
occupations and their associated health risks. 
 
Type of Personnel/Occupation 
Type of Disease 
 
Volunteer and career firefighters, fire fighting 
instructors, rescue squad members, and 
advanced life support unit members; fire 
marshals employed by an airport authority, a 
county, a fire control district, a municipality, 
or the State  
 
Heart disease, hypertension, or lung disease 
that results in partial or total disability or death 
 
Leukemia or prostate, rectal, throat, multiple 
myeloma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, brain, 
bladder, kidney or renal cell, testicular, breast, 
thyroid, colon, or ovarian cancer under 
specified conditions 
 
 
Police officers; deputy sheriffs, correctional 
officers, and detention officers of specified 
counties 
 
 
Heart disease or hypertension that results in 
partial or total disability or death 
 
Department of Natural Resources paid law 
enforcement employees, park police officers of 
the Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission, forest rangers, park 
rangers, and wildlife rangers  
 
 
Lyme disease under specified conditions 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 878/ Page 3 
A covered employee who receives a presumption is entitled to workers’ compensation 
benefits in addition to any benefits that the individual is entitled to receive under the 
retirement system in which the individual participated at the time of the claim. However, 
the weekly total of workers’ compensation and retirement benefits may not exceed the 
weekly salary that was paid to the individual; any necessary adjustment is made against the 
workers’ compensation benefits.  
 
Although statute is silent on the issue, occupational disease presumptions have long been 
considered rebuttable presumptions. Two court decisions address the use of “is presumed” 
in reference to occupational diseases in current law, specifying that the term “without 
contrary qualification, should be read to be a presumption, although rebuttable, of fact.” 
(See Board of County Commissioners v. Colgan, 274 Md. 193, 334 A.2d 89 (1975); and 
Montgomery County Fire Board v. Fisher, 53 Md. App. 435, 454 A.2d 394, aff’d, 
298 Md. 245, 468 A.2d 625 (1983).) However, the Court of Special Appeals (now the 
Appellate Court of Maryland) has stated that, “after the last injurious exposure to a hazard 
and the conclusion of employment the nexus between an occupational disease and an 
occupation becomes increasingly remote.” (See Montgomery County, Maryland v. Pirrone, 
109 Md. App. 201, 674 A.2d 98 (1996).) 
 
Enhanced Benefits for Public Safety Employees 
 
Normally, an employee who is awarded compensation for a permanent partial disability 
for a period less than 75 weeks is eligible to receive weekly benefits of one-third of his or 
her average weekly wage, but that amount may not exceed 16.7% of the State average 
weekly wage. However, a public safety employee is eligible for enhanced workers’ 
compensation benefits if awarded compensation for less than 75 weeks. In such a case, the 
employer or its insurer must pay the public safety employee at a compensation rate set for 
an award period equal to or greater than 75 weeks but less than 250 weeks. Thus, a public 
safety employee is eligible to receive approximately double the weekly benefits – 
two-thirds of their average weekly wage, but that amount may not exceed one-third of the 
State average weekly wage. The State average weekly wage for 2026 is $1,537. 
 
Deputy sheriffs from the following jurisdictions are considered public safety employees 
for this purpose:  Baltimore City and Allegany, Anne Arundel, Baltimore (under specified 
circumstances only), Harford, Howard, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties. 
 
State correctional officers and correctional officers or detention officers from the following 
jurisdictions are considered public safety employees for this purpose:  Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Harford, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 878/ Page 4 
Local Expenditures: 
 
Enhanced Workers’ Compensation Benefits 
 
Carroll County correctional deputies are entitled to enhanced workers’ compensation 
benefits under the bill due to their designation as public safety employees; this benefit is 
for any claim. While the number of claims made subject to enhancement in any given year 
cannot be reliably estimated, any expenditures due to this designation could be significant. 
 
Permanent partial disability awards for less than 75 weeks (awards that receive the 
enhanced benefits) are among the most common types of compensation awards. A public 
safety employee who receives such an award in calendar 2026 would be entitled to a 
maximum weekly benefit of $513 (for a maximum of 74 weeks, for a total of $37,962); 
whereas any other employee would be entitled to a maximum weekly benefit of $257 (for 
a maximum of 74 weeks, for a total of $19,018) under the same circumstances. Thus, for 
each correctional deputy who sustains this type of injury, Carroll County may pay up to 
$18,944 more in wage replacement benefits under this provision of the bill. 
 
Occupational Disease Presumption 
 
Any increase in expenditures due to the occupational disease presumption established by 
the bill depends on how many affected employees qualify in any given year and whether 
any of those employees would have received workers’ compensation for hypertension 
absent the bill. The number of Carroll County correctional deputies who may benefit from 
the compensable occupational disease presumption established by the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time; however, considering the prevalence of heart disease and 
hypertension in society at large and the stressful nature of the occupation, it is likely that 
the county becomes responsible for numerous claims annually, and payment of such claims 
may continue for several years. 
 
Additional Comments:  The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates 
that nearly half (48.1%) of all Americans have hypertension, only 22.5% of those adults 
with hypertension have it under control, and 45% of those with uncontrolled high blood 
pressure (roughly 37 million adults) have a blood pressure of 140/90 millimeters of 
mercury or higher. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 878/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 449 (Carroll County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; 
Subsequent Injury Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
js/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5