START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 864 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 864 
(Delegate Wells, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Works Contracts - Apprenticeship Requirements (Maryland Workforce 
Apprenticeship Utilization Act) 
 
 
This bill requires that contractors and subcontractors that employ four or more individuals 
on covered public work projects use apprentices and journeyworkers for a specified 
percentage of the work. It also (1) repeals the option for contractors and some 
subcontractors on covered public work projects to make contributions to a registered 
apprenticeship program instead of participating in the apprenticeship program; (2) alters 
the definition of “covered project” from a contract with a value of $500,000 or more to a 
project that is subject to the prevailing wage law; and (3) applies these requirements to 
public four-year universities and Baltimore City Community College (BCCC). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase starting in FY 2027 as more contractors likely 
pay into the State Apprenticeship and Training Fund (SATF) as an alternative to using an 
apprenticeship program, but a reliable estimate is not feasible. State agencies can likely 
implement the bill with existing resources. The bill may reduce the number of bidders and 
offerors on State public work contracts, which may cause the cost of those projects to 
increase, but a reliable estimate of any such effect is not feasible. Conversely, increased 
use of apprentices and journeyworkers may mitigate the cost of State public work projects. 
General fund revenues may increase minimally from increased penalties. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may reduce the number of bidders and offerors on local public work 
projects, which may cause the cost of those projects to increase, but a reliable estimate of 
any such effect is not feasible. Conversely, increased use of apprentices and 
journeyworkers may mitigate the cost of local public work projects. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 864/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Use of Apprentices on Covered Projects 
 
For a covered public works project for which a public body advertises for bids or proposals 
on or after January 1, 2027, 20% of the total number of work hours on a project, including 
construction, alteration, or repair work, must be performed by an apprentice or a 
journeyworker. Total work hours do not include any work performed by specified 
supervisory personnel. On or before December 31, 2027, and annually thereafter, the 
Secretary of Labor must set the applicable percentage for the following calendar year. The 
Secretary may alter the applicable percentage for a covered project to meet any ratio 
requirements necessary for apprentice or journeyworker supervision in the covered craft. 
 
A contractor or subcontractor awarded a contract for a covered project must verify in 
writing that the contractor or subcontractor either (1) is employing the number of qualified 
apprentices or journeyworkers for a covered project necessary to meet the applicable 
percentage or (2) will make payments to SATF. 
 
The Secretary may waive these requirements if a contractor or subcontractor submits a 
written waiver application, with supporting documentation, demonstrating that the 
contractor or subcontractor:   
 
 
requested qualified apprentices from all applicable apprenticeship training programs 
in a specified geographic area; and 
 
for each request, the request was denied or the apprenticeship training program 
failed to respond within 10 business days. 
 
The bill specifies procedures for contractors and subcontractors to follow in submitting 
requests for apprentices to apprenticeship training programs. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
While construction activity on a covered project is ongoing, each contractor and 
subcontractor must submit monthly reports with specified information, including work 
hours for each apprentice and journeyworker, to the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor). Within 60 days of completing work on a covered project, each contractor and 
subcontractor must submit (1) a statement to MD Labor with the total number of  
labor hours performed by an apprentice or journeyworker and (2) if applicable, a written 
declaration justifying a waiver received. MD Labor must maintain on its website 
aggregated data from the reports it receives and descriptions of the circumstances of any 
waiver granted. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 864/ Page 3 
Enforcement 
 
A contractor or subcontractor that fails to comply with the bill’s requirements is liable for 
an amount equal to (1) twice the amount of unpaid training contributions and  
(2) $100 multiplied by the total work hours required to be performed by an apprentice or 
journeyworker. Penalties are recoverable under the Maryland False Claims Act (MFCA). 
 
The Secretary of Labor must adopt regulations to implement the bill. Nothing in the bill 
may preempt a local law or policy providing for additional skilled and trained workforce 
requirements on public work projects. 
 
Current Law:  A “public work” is a structure or work, including a bridge, ditch, road, 
alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that is constructed for public use or benefit or 
is paid for wholly or partly by public money. It does not include specified utility projects 
or capital construction projects that receive State funds in the annual State capital budget, 
as specified. 
 
Public works projects that must pay prevailing wages are: 
 
 
those carried out by the State; 
 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is 
State money; 
 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages; and 
 
construction projects by investor-owned gas and/or electric companies involving 
any underground gas or electric infrastructure. 
 
In general, only contracts for public works valued at $250,000 or more are required to pay 
prevailing wages. However, the prevailing wage law was amended in 2022 to include 
mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. Mechanical service contracts are 
defined as contracts for (1) heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, including duct work; 
(2) refrigeration systems; (3) plumbing systems, as specified; (4) electrical systems, as 
specified; and (5) elevator systems, as specified. 
 
Chapter 687 of 2009 created SATF and required contractors on covered public work 
contracts (those valued at $500,000 or more) and subcontractors with contracts worth at 
least $100,000 to either participate in an apprenticeship training program, make payments 
to a registered apprenticeship program or to an organization that operates registered 
programs, or contribute to SATF. Chapter 782 of 2017 extended virtually identical 
requirements to contracts with a value of at least $500,000 for capital construction projects 
that receive at least $1.0 million from the State’s capital budget (which, as noted above, 
are not considered public work projects). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 864/ Page 4 
The purpose of SATF is to promote preapprenticeship programs and other workforce 
development programs in the State’s public secondary schools and community colleges 
and to cover the cost of implementing the bill’s provisions. The programs should prepare 
students to enter apprenticeship training programs. The fund’s revenues consist of 
payments made by contractors and penalties collected due to violations. 
 
Contractors and subcontractors that elect to contribute to SATF must pay, on a monthly 
basis, an amount determined by the Secretary of Labor, not to exceed 25 cents per hour  
per employee in a covered craft. Payments to the fund satisfy required apprenticeship 
program contributions under the prevailing wage determination and may be deducted from 
the prevailing wage rate required to be paid to each employee. 
 
MD Labor is responsible for enforcing these requirements. Organizations that operate 
registered apprenticeship programs must certify to the Secretary of Labor that all funds 
received are used solely for those designated purposes. 
 
Contractors and subcontractors that do not comply must pay into SATF twice the amount 
of unpaid apprenticeship training contributions required. Willful misrepresentation of 
prevailing wage records is subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each employee and 
falsified record. The Secretary of Labor may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction 
to enforce these requirements; contractors or subcontractors must pay reasonable legal fees 
and court costs associated with a civil action filed by the Secretary. 
 
Enacted under Chapter 165 of 2015, MFCA prohibits a person from knowingly making a 
false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval by a governmental entity (defined as the 
State, a county, or a municipal corporation) and authorizes a private citizen to file a civil 
action on behalf of a governmental entity (often referred to as a “qui tam” action) against 
a person who has made a false claim. 
 
For an overview of registered apprenticeship programs in the State, please see the 
Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
State Apprenticeship Training Fund 
 
The bill keeps current law allowing contractors to pay into the SATF in lieu of participating 
in the apprenticeship program but repeals the option for contractors to make payments 
directly to registered apprenticeship programs. Contractors that had previously used the 
option to pay directly to a registered apprenticeship program will have to either use 
apprentices, pay directly into the fund, or decline to bid on procurements. As a result, 
revenues for the fund are expected to increase beginning in fiscal 2027 as more contractors 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 864/ Page 5 
choose to pay into it instead of contributing to an apprenticeship program, but a reliable 
estimate requires knowing what choices potential contractors will make and therefore is 
not feasible.  
 
Administrative Costs 
 
As MD Labor is responsible for enforcing the bill’s requirements, State agencies that 
manage public work projects (including the Department of General Services, the Maryland 
Department of Transportation, public four-year universities, and BCCC) have limited 
responsibilities under the bill. They can likely incorporate any monitoring of contractor use 
of apprentices and journeyworkers on covered projects into their normal project 
management duties. 
 
MD Labor currently enforces compliance with existing requirements for contractors and 
subcontractors on covered public work projects to use registered apprentices or make 
related contributions. Those responsibilities include monitoring the use of apprentices on 
public work projects, ensuring that registered apprenticeship programs that receive 
contributions use the funds for designated purposes, and administering SATF. MD Labor 
can likely continue to use existing resources to enforce the bill’s responsibilities without 
incurring additional costs. 
 
MD Labor also enforces prevailing wage requirements, including verifying (through 
regular payroll submissions) the employment and wages of contractors working on public 
work projects. It can incorporate any necessary review of monthly reports (in many cases 
the reporting requirements are overlapping as they involve many of the same projects) into 
existing practices. 
 
Project Costs 
 
The bill’s requirements, and the administrative burdens associated with applying for 
waivers and/or submitting monthly reports to MD Labor, may have the effect of dissuading 
some contractors and subcontractors from participating in State public work projects. 
Meeting the bill’s 20% requirement for apprentices, particularly in more specialized crafts, 
may be difficult for some contractors to achieve and also requires substantially more 
supervision by skilled workers (as State law generally requires a one-to-one ratio of 
apprentice to skilled tradesperson). These challenges may reduce the number of bidders 
and offerors on State projects and, hence, the level of competition for those contracts, 
which has been shown to increase project costs. 
 
Conversely, to the extent that increased use of apprentices and journeyworkers displaces 
higher-wage skilled tradespeople working on public work projects, project costs may be 
less. Any such savings has no effect on total capital spending, which is determined annually 
by the Governor and the General Assembly through the capital budget process, but it may 
increase the number of projects that receive funding each year. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 864/ Page 6 
Local Expenditures:  Local governments that manage public work projects can likely 
incorporate monitoring of contractors and subcontractors into their normal project 
management activities. As with the State, the bill may reduce competition for local public 
work projects, potentially increasing their costs, but increased use of apprentices and 
journeyworkers may mitigate project costs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small construction companies with at least four employees that 
participate in covered public work projects must meet the bill’s targets for participation by 
apprentices and journeyworkers or make payments to the SATF. Otherwise, they must 
apply for waivers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 688 and HB 1017 of 2025 and SB 1138 and HB 1276 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 964 (Senator McCray) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 864/ Page 7 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a  
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship 
programs. More specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as 
changes to current programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. 
The approval process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program 
in a proposed industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current 
staffing level of the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate 
supervision can be provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations 
of the entity. The Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory 
role for legislation and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
Additionally, Chapter 2 of 2025 (discussed further below) established the Maryland Office 
of Registered Apprenticeship Development (MORAD) within DWDAL’s Maryland 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 864/ Page 8 
Apprenticeship and Training Program (MATP) for the purpose of scaling registered 
apprenticeships across industries and occupations to meet the needs of the State’s economy. 
 
According to MD Labor and as of September 2025, the total number of registered 
apprenticeships in Maryland is over 13,000, with over 1,400 apprentices graduating from 
their programs during 2025. 
 
In addition to registered apprenticeship, MD Labor, in collaboration with the Maryland 
State Department of Education, also operates a parallel youth apprenticeship program 
aimed at connecting students to paid employment and training opportunities called the 
Apprenticeship Maryland Program. As of May 2024, there were 1,045 active youth 
apprenticeships participating in the program. 
 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission 
 
Chapter 168 of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. The purpose of the 
commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill shortages in  
high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways for young 
people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and 
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023, ten times in 2024, and once 
in 2025 and published interim and final reports January 2024 and March 2025, respectively. 
Additionally, the University of Baltimore Schafer Center, as part of its contract to provide 
support staff to the commission, undertook a Survey of Employers and Labor Unions and 
published findings on the prevalence of, barriers to, and benefits of apprenticeships in 
February 2025. 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy (RAISE) Act 
 
Chapter 2, the RAISE Act, operationalized multiple recommendations from the 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission’s interim and final reports. Specifically, Chapter 2 
establishes (1) MORAD within MATP to scale registered apprenticeships across industries 
to meet the needs of the State’s economy; (2) the Registered Apprenticeship Qualified 
Intermediary Program within MATP to increase apprenticeship awareness, connect 
employers and labor organizations with partners, and provide technical assistance to launch 
and expand apprenticeships; (3) the Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory 
Board to advise MORAD on the strategy to achieve its mission of expanding registered 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 864/ Page 9 
apprenticeship opportunities in the State; and (4) the Maryland Pay Per Apprentice 
Program and associated special fund to provide grants to employers and sponsors to 
develop a well-trained, productive workforce that meets the needs of the State’s economy 
and help offset apprenticeship costs. 
 
Recent Reports and Publications 
 
In response to Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024, MD Labor released a report on analyzing the 
apprenticeship mentoring ratio for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the 
State. The report indicates that, for fiscal 2024, there were approximately 694 apprentices 
employed by 119 employers in nontraditional apprenticeships (those outside the traditional 
building trades). 
 
The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) outlined concerns with workforce shortages 
among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation sectors. The 
report directed MD Labor to convene workgroups to study and report on the short-term 
and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. Pursuant to the 2022 JCR, 
MD Labor released reports from a Healthcare Apprenticeship Workgroup, Transportation 
Apprenticeship Workgroup, and Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup. 
 
The 2024 and 2025 JCR directed multiple agencies to collect data relevant to 
apprenticeship in the State in accordance with the interim and final recommendations of 
the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. This included reports from: 
 
 
the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Department of Juvenile Services on 
Public Safety Apprenticeship; 
 
the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission on Apprenticeships in 
Maryland Hospitals; 
 
the Maryland Insurance Administration on Efforts to Support Insurance Industry 
Apprenticeships; 
 
the Maryland Department of Health on a Registered Nurse Degree Apprenticeship 
Program Study; 
 
the Public Service Commission of Maryland on Apprenticeships Within Public 
Service Companies; and 
 
the Maryland Department of Budget and Management on Public Service Registered 
Apprenticeships within State Government. 
 

END OF PAGE 9