START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 813 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 813 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Coverage for the Treatment of Obesity - 
Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes Medicaid, beginning January 1, 2027, to provide “comprehensive 
coverage for the treatment of obesity,” including coverage for intensive behavioral therapy, 
bariatric surgery, and any medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) with an indication for chronic weight management in patients with obesity. 
Medicaid may undertake utilization management to determine medical necessity and 
appropriateness if the determinations are made in the same manner as for the treatment of 
any other illness, condition, or disorder. By January 1, 2027, the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) must apply to the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) for a state plan amendment (SPA) that authorizes the State to provide 
comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity. By November 1, 2027, MDH must 
report to specified committees of the General Assembly on whether Medicaid has begun 
to provide comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity. If coverage is provided, 
MDH must provide notice to Medicaid recipients. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the bill is intended to authorize MDH to provide comprehensive 
coverage for the treatment of obesity, the bill’s requirement to apply for a SPA effectively 
obligates MDH to provide such services, as discussed below. Thus, Medicaid expenditures 
increase by a significant amount (estimated at $449.4 million annually under one set of 
assumptions), likely beginning in FY 2028, to cover anti-obesity medications, as well as 
for personnel and other administrative costs. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
This bill increases the cost of an entitlement program beginning in FY 2028. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 813/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Medicaid Coverage for the Treatment of Obesity 
 
Maryland Medicaid currently covers bariatric surgery and intensive behavioral therapy for 
participants who meet certain clinical criteria. Coverage of anti-obesity medication is 
limited to individuals with an obesity diagnosis and certain comorbidities (sleep apnea, 
cardiovascular disease, or non-cirrhotic metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis). 
Medicaid covers Byetta, Ozempic, Trulicity, Victoza, Bydureon, Mounjaro, Rybelsus, 
Wegovy, and Zepbound for FDA-approved indications other than obesity. All these 
medications (except for Wegovy and Zepbound) are used for type 2 diabetes. Medicaid 
covers Wegovy for participants who are overweight or obese and have cardiovascular 
disease, and for adults with non-cirrhotic metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis. 
Medicaid covers Zepbound for obese adults with obstructive sleep apnea. 
 
Chapters 777 and 778 of 2024 required MDH to study the impact of requiring Medicaid to 
provide comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity and report to specified 
committees of the General Assembly by December 31, 2024. According to the report, 
coverage of anti-obesity medication would cost Medicaid between $225.0 million 
(assuming 15% uptake) and $437.7 million (assuming 25% uptake) for prescription drugs 
only in fiscal 2026 (58.9% federal funds, 41.1% general funds), in addition to personnel 
and contracting costs.  
 
Medicaid State Plan  
 
A Medicaid state plan is an agreement between a state and CMS that describes how a state 
administers its Medicaid program. A state plan gives an assurance that a state will abide by 
federal rules and may claim federal matching funds. A Medicaid state plan sets out groups 
of individuals to be covered, services to be provided, methodologies for providers to be 
reimbursed, and the administrative activities that are underway in the state. Services 
included in the state plan must be made available to all eligible beneficiaries when 
medically necessary. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although intended to authorize Medicaid to provide coverage for the 
treatment of obesity, the bill requires MDH, by January 1, 2027, to apply to CMS for a 
SPA that authorizes the State to provide comprehensive coverage for the treatment of 
obesity. As a result, should CMS approve the SPA, comprehensive coverage for the 
treatment of obesity would become part of Maryland’s state plan, and MDH would be 
obligated to cover those services. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 813/ Page 3 
Thus, Medicaid expenditures increase by an indeterminate but significant amount likely 
beginning in fiscal 2028 (to allow time for submission, approval, and implementation of 
the SPA). MDH advises that a 25% uptake rate of anti-obesity medications is likely. Thus, 
based on projections in the report and accounting for 2.7% inflation in costs, Medicaid 
expenditures would increase by at least $449.4 million annually (58.9% federal funds, 
41.1% general funds) for prescription drugs only, as well as an additional amount for 
personnel and related administrative expenditures. Federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. 
 
Additional Comments:  In December 2025, CMS announced the Better Approaches to 
Lifestyle and Nutrition for Comprehensive hEalth (BALANCE) Model. The model is 
intended to enable Medicare Part D plans and state Medicaid agencies to cover 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) medications used for weight management and metabolic 
health improvement. CMS will negotiate with GLP-1 manufacturers for lower net prices 
and standardized coverage terms. MDH is currently assessing the model and potential 
participation; however, as of March 2026, pricing, key terms, and access criteria 
requirements have not been made available to states. The BALANCE Model may 
ultimately lower the cost of these medications. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 876 and HB 1489 of 2025, and SB 594 and HB 986 of 2024 (as 
introduced) (all of which mandated coverage for the treatment of obesity). 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 496 (Senator Hershey) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3