START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 843 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 843 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Washington County - Notice of Tax Sale - Alterations 
 
 
This bill establishes that, in Washington County, a notice of tax sale must be published 
two times, once per week in alternate weeks, and posted on the county’s website four weeks 
prior to the sale, instead of being published four times, once a week for four successive 
weeks. The required newspaper notice must provide instructions for accessing the notice 
on the county’s website and the notice on the website must be updated each Friday. The 
bill also requires, in Washington County, that an additional copy of the notice sent to an 
owner of property sold at a tax sale be sent within 15 days after the initial notice. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Washington County finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Advertisement of Tax Sale 
 
Under current law, at least 30 days before any property (that will be sold at a tax sale) is 
advertised for sale, the tax collector must mail to the person who last appears as owner of 
the property on the collector’s tax roll a statement of the taxes due and notice that the 
collector will proceed to sell the property if the taxes due are not paid within 30 days of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 843/ Page 2 
notice. At any time after 30 days from the mailing of the statement and notice of sale, the 
local tax collector must publish a notice four times, once a week for four successive weeks, 
in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the county in which the property is 
located. The notice must state that the property will be sold at public auction on the date 
and at the place named in the notice. In Dorchester, Frederick, Garrett, Kent, and 
Queen Anne’s counties the notice must be published three times, once a week for 
three successive weeks. In Baltimore City, the notice must be (1) published two times, 
once per week in alternate weeks and (2) posted on the city’s website four weeks prior to 
the sale. The newspaper notice must include a statement that the notice is posted on the 
city’s website along with instructions on how to access the website. 
 
Under the bill, in Washington County, the notice must be (1) published two times, 
once per week in alternate weeks and (2) posted on the county’s website four weeks prior 
to the sale. The newspaper notice must include a statement that the notice is posted on the 
county’s website along with instructions on how to access the website. The notice on the 
county’s website must be updated by the close of business on each Friday until the sale. 
 
Notice Sent to Owner After a Tax Sale 
 
Under existing law, within 60 days of a property being sold at a tax sale, the tax collector 
must send to the person who last appears as owner of the property on the collector’s tax 
roll a notice of the sale, including, among other information, details such as the sale date, 
highest bid, lien amount, and redemption rights. The notice must inform the owner of the 
purchaser’s right to foreclose the right of redemption as early as six months from the date 
of the sale and the amount that must be paid to redeem the property. 
 
Under the bill, in Washington County, one additional copy of this notice must be sent 
within 15 days after the initial notice. 
 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation’s website, along with the office’s most recent annual report, 
which contains data on tax sales in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1372 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 499 (Washington County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 843/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3