START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 872 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 872 
(Delegate Coley, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Law Enforcement Officers' Pension System - Seat Pleasant Police Department 
 
   
This bill makes local law enforcement officers of the Seat Pleasant Police Department 
members of the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS) as a condition of 
employment, subject to Seat Pleasant beginning participation in LEOPS as a participating 
governmental unit (PGU). Participating members receive eligibility and creditable service 
in LEOPS for past employment with Seat Pleasant. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only the city of Seat Pleasant. 
  
Local Effect:  Assuming Seat Pleasant elects to participate in CORS and based on an 
actuarial analysis as of June 30, 2025, its pension liabilities increase by $2,104,315. Due 
to a new entrant liability credit, net contributions increase by $541,380 beginning as early 
as FY 2028. No discernible effect on pension liabilities or employer contribution rates for 
other PGUs in LEOPS. No effect on local revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Counties and municipal corporations are eligible to participate in LEOPS 
as PGUs. The legislative body of an eligible governmental unit may approve participation 
by its law enforcement officers, firefighters, or emergency medical technicians in LEOPS 
if the legislative body adopts a resolution in the form prescribed by the Board of Trustees 
of the State Retirement and Pension System. If the eligible governmental unit participates 
in a State system or operates a local plan, at least 60% of the specified participants of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 872/ Page 2 
plan must petition to become members of LEOPS and the legislative body must approve 
participation in lieu of participation in the State system or local plan. Furthermore, the State 
system or local plan of the eligible governmental unit must require (1) member 
contributions of the same rate as the member contribution rate that would be applicable to 
members of LEOPS or (2) if the eligible governmental unit does not offer an employer 
pickup program for member contributions, it must certify that it will not use one following 
participation in LEOPS. According to the Internal Revenue Service, a pickup program 
refers to a retirement plan established by a governmental unit where the contributions of 
employing units are designated employee contributions, but the employer “picks up” the 
contributions so that they may be treated as employer contributions for tax purposes.  
 
If the eligible governmental unit approves participation in LEOPS, the operation of any 
local plan or State system for law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical 
technicians, or paramedics terminates on the effective date, which is July 1 of the year 
following the fiscal year in which the governmental unit elects to participate in LEOPS. If 
a law enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency medical technician, or paramedic joins 
LEOPS on the effective date, the member is entitled to credit for employment with the 
governmental unit before the effective date. 
 
The assets to the credit of the local plan or State plan with respect to the specified members 
must be transferred to LEOPS and the trustee or administrative head of the local plan or 
State system must certify the proportion of the funds of the local plan or State system that 
represents the accumulated contributions of the members as of that date. The accumulated 
contributions must be credited to the respective annuity savings accounts of the members 
in LEOPS. The balance of the funds transferred to LEOPS may be offset against any special 
accrued liability to be funded by the governmental unit. 
 
If an eligible governmental unit does not satisfy the requirements to participate in LEOPS, 
it may still submit a request to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees must consider 
this request and determine whether any legislation is necessary to allow the governmental 
unit to participate in LEOPS. The Board of Trustees must subsequently make 
recommendations to the Joint Committee on Pension regarding any legislation that it 
determines is necessary to allow the eligible governmental unit to participate in LEOPS.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Typically, when a PGU is considering joining a State plan, it 
requests that the State Retirement Agency conduct an actuarial valuation to determine the 
costs or benefits of doing so. For this bill, Seat Pleasant requested an actuarial valuation of 
the cost for its law enforcement officers to join LEOPS. The analysis was conducted in 
November 2025. 
 
Under LEOPS, Seat Pleasant liabilities for the 25 law enforcement officers that would be 
added to the system increase by $2,104,315, and the annual cost for those members is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 872/ Page 3 
initially estimated to increase by $680,330 starting in fiscal 2028 due to the employer 
contributions Seat Pleasant must make on behalf of its officers (39.56%). However, 
because the 25 Seat Pleasant law enforcement officers are generally younger, have less 
service credit, and have lower average compensation than the current municipal LEOPS 
membership pool, Seat Pleasant receives a new entrant liability credit of $138,950 per year 
for 25 years, resulting in a net estimated contribution increase of $541,380 beginning in 
fiscal 2028 ($680,330 - $138,950). 
 
Additional Comments:  Seat Pleasant is not currently a PGU in any State pension system. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Internal Revenue Service; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3