START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 828 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 828 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Board of Education - Membership - Educational Support Member 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Maryland State Board of Education by requiring that 
one member be an educational support professional. The board member must be appointed 
by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. However, the Governor must 
select an individual that received the highest number of votes after an election by 
educational support professionals in the State. The election must be conducted under 
regulations adopted by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). The 
educational support member may attend and participate in an executive session of the State 
board but may not vote on any matter that relates to appeals concerning the suspension or 
dismissal of teachers, principals, and other professional personnel. MSDE must provide 
notices of vacancies for the educational support member to specified public school 
employees and organizations representing them for the purpose of collective bargaining. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures increase by approximately $35,000 in FY 2027 for MSDE 
to conduct an election to determine the candidate for appointment to the State board. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, one of the existing 13 members of the State Board of 
Education must be an educational support professional who is actively working in a public 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 828/ Page 2 
school as a noncertificated, nonsupervisory public school employee. The Governor, with 
the advice and consent of the Senate, must appoint the educational support member who 
received the highest number of votes after an election by educational support professionals 
in the State. The election must be conducted under regulations adopted by MSDE. 
 
MSDE must provide notice of an educational support member vacancy on the State board 
to all educational support professionals who are actively working in a public school as a 
noncertificated, nonsupervisory public school employee. This notice must also be provided 
to all educational support professionals’ organizations representing education support 
professionals in the State for purposes of collective bargaining. 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Education consists of 13 regular members and 1 student 
member appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. In making 
appointments to the State board, the Governor must consider representation from all parts 
of the State and areas of the State with concentrations of population or unique needs. 
Members of the board must be appointed from the general public. Except for the teacher 
and student members, any individual who is subject to the authority of the State board may 
not be appointed to the State board. In addition, the Governor and the State Superintendent 
of Schools may not be appointed to the State board. 
 
Each regular member serves for a staggered four-year term and until a successor is 
appointed and qualifies. The Governor must appoint a new member to fill any vacancy on 
the State board for the remainder of that term and until a successor is appointed and 
qualifies. A member is eligible for reappointment but may not serve for more than two full 
four-year terms. The student member serves for a term of one-year. A student member is 
eligible for reappointment but may not serve more than two full one-year terms. 
 
Among the regular members, the Governor must appoint one teacher and one parent 
member with the advice and consent of the Senate. The teacher member who received the 
highest number of votes after an election by teachers in the State must be appointed by the 
Governor. For the parent member, the Governor must appoint the parent member from a 
list of three qualified individuals submitted by the Maryland Parent Teacher Association 
(PTA). MSDE must provide notice of a teacher member vacancy to (1) all certified teachers 
who are actively teaching in the State and (2) all teachers’ organizations representing 
teachers in the State for purposes of collective bargaining. The elections must be conducted 
under regulations adopted by MSDE. MSDE may consult with the State Retirement 
Agency of the Maryland State Retirement and Pension System to conduct the election. 
MSDE must provide notice of a parent member vacancy to the Maryland PTA. 
 
A teacher or parent member may attend and participate in an executive session of the 
State board; however, a teacher member may not vote on any matter that relates to appeals 
to the State board related to the suspension or dismissal of teachers, principals, and other 
professional personnel. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 828/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  MSDE already conducts an election for the teacher member of the 
State Board of Education every four years and a similar election process would be required 
for the educational support member added by the bill. The last teacher election in 2025 cost 
approximately $35,000 to conduct, which covered the cost of online and telephone voting 
for approximately 80,000 electors. An election for the educational support member would 
similarly necessitate additional spending to administer. 
 
Furthermore, because MSDE does not collect the contact information of educational 
support professionals, a system will need to be developed to collect this information from 
local school systems. This collection will require the school systems to indicate if the 
education support professional is actively working in a public school as a noncertified, 
nonsupervisory public school employee, as well as the email and telephone contract 
information for each educational support professional. 
 
Accordingly, State expenditures increase by approximately $35,000 to hold an election for 
the educational support member in fiscal 2027, or whichever fiscal year the election is held, 
and once every four years thereafter. While the bill does not specify when the start date of 
the educational support member is, additional costs may be necessary to the extent that 
MSDE requires immediate services to conduct the election. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 712 and HB 923 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3