START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 860 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 860 
(Delegate Alston) 
Health and Judiciary 
 
 
Petitions for Emergency Evaluation (Arnaud and Magruder Memorial Act) 
 
 
This bill clarifies that an endorsed petition for emergency evaluation is effective for 5 days 
after endorsement and authorizes a court (on a motion by the original petitioner and for 
good cause shown) to extend the effect of an endorsed petition by 5 days at a time for up 
to 30 days based on the presenting behavior of the individual. Each extension must be based 
on a separate motion. An endorsed or extended petition must be served expeditiously, and 
the court must include on the petition the date the petition expires. A peace officer must 
act in accordance with the Maryland use of force statute when executing a petition. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $5,000 in FY 2027 
only for the Judiciary to implement programming changes. To the extent the bill increases 
the number of emergency petition reviews required of the Office of the Public Defender 
(OPD), OPD expenditures may increase, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances, including the work of local law enforcement. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the Health-General Article, specified health professionals, a 
health officer (or designee), a peace officer, or any other interested party may petition for 
an emergency evaluation of an individual if the petitioner has reason to believe that the 
individual (1) has a mental disorder and (2) presents a danger to the life or safety of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 860/ Page 2 
individual or of others. A peace officer may petition for an emergency evaluation only if 
the peace officer has personally observed the individual or the individual’s behavior, 
whereas specified health professionals and health officers (or designees) who petition for 
an emergency evaluation must have examined the individual.  
 
When the petitioner is a specified health professional or health officer (or designee), the 
petition must be given to a peace officer.  
 
When the petitioner is someone other than a specified health professional, health officer, 
or peace officer, the petitioner must present the petition to the court for review. If, after 
review, the court finds probable cause to believe that the emergency evaluee has shown the 
symptoms of a mental disorder and that the individual presents a danger to the life or safety 
of the individual or others, the court must endorse the petition. However, if the court does 
not find such probable cause, the court must indicate that fact on the petition and no further 
action may be taken under the petition.  
 
On receipt of a petition for an emergency evaluation that has been endorsed by a court 
within the last five days or is received from specified individuals (i.e., a specified health 
professional, a health officer, a health officer’s designee, or a peace officer), a peace officer 
must take the individual to the nearest emergency facility and must notify the facility in 
advance, to the extent practicable. The peace officer must stay for the duration of the 
evaluation at the request of emergency facility staff, as specified, if the emergency evaluee 
exhibits violent behavior. If the peace officer is requested to stay as specified, a physician 
must examine the emergency evaluee as promptly as possible.  
 
Chapter 60 of 2021, among other things, established the Maryland Use of Force Statute, 
which specifies requirements regarding a police officer’s use of force. A police officer may 
not use force against a person unless, under the totality of the circumstances, the force is 
necessary and proportional to prevent an imminent threat of physical injury to a person or 
effectuate a legitimate law enforcement objective. A police officer must cease the use of 
force as soon as (1) the person on whom the force is used is under the police officer’s 
control or no longer poses an imminent threat of physical injury or death to the police 
officer or to another person, or (2) the police officer determines that force will no longer 
accomplish a legitimate law enforcement objective.  
 
State Expenditures:  The Judiciary advises that programming changes are necessary for 
the Judicial Information System to implement the bill’s authorization to extend a petition 
for emergency evaluation for up to five days at a time. Thus, general fund expenditures 
increase by $4,935 in fiscal 2027 only. 
 
OPD advises that it must process and review all emergency petitions and review the 
transcripts of the ex parte emergency petition hearings to ensure that they are legal and do 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 860/ Page 3 
not violate clients’ rights. As a result, to the extent the bill increases the number of 
emergency petitions OPD must review, the bill may increase costs for the office. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 468 of 2025 and HB 1019 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland Department of Health; Department of State Police; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3