START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 895 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 895 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Food Retailers - Dynamic Pricing, Surveillance Data, and Collective Bargaining 
Agreements (Protection From Predatory Pricing Act) 
 
 
This emergency Administration bill prohibits a “food retailer” from engaging in the 
practice of “dynamic pricing” or using consumer “surveillance data” to set a price for 
consumer goods or services for a single consumer or a group of consumers. A food retailer 
may not use protected class data to offer, advertise, or sell a consumer good or service to a 
consumer for whom the protected class data pertains if the use of such data has the effect 
of withholding or denying from the consumer an accommodation, an advantage, or a 
privilege provided to others. Violation of these provisions is an unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to 
MCPA’s civil penalty provisions. The bill also prohibits a food retailer from diminishing 
or impairing any right or benefit guaranteed to employees of the food retailer under an 
existing collective bargaining agreement or memorandum of understanding, unless a 
change has been negotiated and mutually agreed on with the exclusive representative of 
the employees. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase, at least minimally beginning as early as 
FY 2026, for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), as discussed below. The bill’s 
imposition of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to have a material impact on 
State revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 895/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Dynamic pricing” means the practice of varying the prices of consumer goods or services 
within a business day based on demand or other factors, including through the use of 
artificial intelligence (AI) or models that retrain or recalibrate based on received 
information in near real-time. It does not include promotional pricing offers, loyalty 
program benefits, or other temporary discounts or changes to pricing related to retention of 
existing customers. 
 
“Food retailer” means a merchant that operates a business establishment that (1) has a 
minimum of 15,000 square feet and (2) sells food that is exempt from the sales and use tax 
in accordance with the Tax-General Article. 
 
“Surveillance data” means consumer information collected and tracked by technological 
methods, systems, or tools, such as sensors, cameras, device tracking, biometric 
monitoring, or other forms of observation or data collection, that are capable of gathering 
personally identifiable information about a consumer’s behavior, characteristics, location, 
or other personal attributes (whether in a physical or digital environment). 
 
Diminishment or Impairment of Rights of Food Retailer Employees 
 
A food retailer may not implement an administrative, operational, or organizational change 
that diminishes or impairs any right or benefit guaranteed to employees of the food retailer 
under an existing collective bargaining agreement or memorandum of understanding, 
unless the change is negotiated and mutually agreed on with the exclusive representative 
of the employees. A person may bring an action to recover for injury or loss sustained as a 
result of a violation of this requirement. A person who brings such an action and who is 
awarded damages may also seek and be awarded reasonable attorney’s fees. If it appears 
to the satisfaction of the court, at any time, that an action is brought in bad faith or is of a 
frivolous nature, the court may order the offending party to pay to the other party 
reasonable attorney’s fees. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 895/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Artificial Intelligence 
 
“AI” means a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of human-defined 
objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual 
environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual 
environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an automated 
manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or action. 
 
For additional information on the status of AI in the State and nation, please see the 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence. 
 
Price Regulation 
 
State law generally does not regulate price setting in the manner specified by the bill. 
However, various provisions of State law address the practice of adjusting or advertising 
prices for consumer goods and services. For example, Chapters 630 and 631 of 2023 
prohibit a person from selling a good or service designated as essential (including a repair 
or reconstruction service) for a price that exceeds a specified threshold during and, in some 
cases, after a state of emergency. Additionally, a seller is prohibited from increasing the 
layaway price of a consumer good that is sold under a layaway agreement. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 895/ Page 4 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
Sales and Use Tax – Exemption for Food 
 
Generally, the sales and use tax does not apply to a sale of food for consumption off the 
premises by a food vendor who operates a substantial grocery or market business at the 
same location where the food is sold. However, this exemption does not apply to (1) food 
that the vendor serves for consumption on the premises of the buyer or of a third party or 
(2) food for immediate consumption. 
 
Collective Bargaining Agreements 
 
Maryland statute does not regulate collective bargaining for private employees. Private 
labor union agreements are generally enforced by the federal National Labor Relations 
Board. 
 
Background:  According a study by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), details such as 
a person’s location or browser history can frequently be used to target individual consumers 
with different prices for the same goods or services. More specifically, third-party 
intermediaries (i.e., entities hired by retailers that can algorithmically tweak and target their 
prices) may set individualized prices for products and services based on a variety of 
factors – including demographics, browsing patterns, and shopping history. FTC staff 
found that consumer behaviors ranging from mouse movements on a webpage to the type 
of products that consumers leave unpurchased in an online shopping cart can be tracked 
and used by retailers to set unique pricing levels for individual consumers. Moreover, the 
FTC found that grocery stores were among the many types of consumer-facing businesses 
that utilized data from intermediaries. 
 
State Expenditures:  OAG advises that it requires additional staff to investigate and 
enforce the bill’s prohibition against dynamic pricing and the use of consumer surveillance 
data by food retailers. Specifically, OAG anticipates the need for one assistant 
Attorney General and one technologist, with estimated personnel expenditures of 
approximately $325,000 on an annual basis. 
 
DLS acknowledges that enforcement of the bill is likely to require specialized knowledge 
of the relevant industries. This analysis assumes, therefore, that OAG incurs at least 
minimal contractual costs to facilitate training and the development of technical expertise. 
Due to the bill’s emergency status, these expenditures may be incurred as early as 
fiscal 2026. However, DLS advises that without experience under the bill, it is unclear to 
what extent food retailers will be noncompliant and whether there will be a significant 
enough volume of related complaints to necessitate additional staff. To the extent OAG 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 895/ Page 5 
receives a significant number of complaints from consumers under the bill that it is unable 
to handle with existing staff, OAG may request additional resources through the annual 
budget process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 387 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Federal Trade Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 895/ Page 6 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 
Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise 
provide additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some 
students use AI to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 
Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems 
that host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased 
energy costs; 
 
Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 
Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to 
make “deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to 
differentiate from actual events; 
 
AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data 
privacy. 
 
Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 
Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 895/ Page 7 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human‑defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State 
government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 895/ Page 8 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 895/ Page 9 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 895/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Food Retailers - Dynamic Pricing, Surveillance Data, and Collective 
Bargaining Agreements (Protection From Predatory Pricing Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 895 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
    X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
           WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 10