START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 837 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 837 
(Delegate Ebersole, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education – Student Athletic Activities – Physical Examinations and 
Cardiovascular Prescreening 
 
 
This bill requires a physical examination used to determine a student’s physical fitness to 
participate in interscholastic sports at public or certified nonpublic noncollegiate 
educational institutions to include a cardiovascular prescreening. Beginning in the  
2026-2027 school year, a qualified health care provider who performs specified physical 
examinations must include a cardiovascular screening. The Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE), in consultation with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), must 
develop guidelines to increase health care provider knowledge and awareness of 
cardiovascular prescreening for children participating in youth sports. Local boards of 
education and local health departments (LHDs) must report data on cardiovascular 
prescreening to MDH, which must report local data and analyze outcomes annually by 
January 31. MSDE, in consultation with MDH, must adopt regulations to implement 
cardiovascular prescreening requirements. Certified nonpublic, noncollegiate educational 
institutions must develop policies and programs relating to sudden cardiac arrest as 
established in current law for public schools. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $100,500 in FY 2027 for 
staffing at MSDE and MDH. Future years reflect elimination of one-time costs, ongoing 
costs, and a reduction in staffing in FY 2028. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,500 
88,100 
92,300 
96,600 
100,900 
Net Effect 
($100,500) 
($88,100) 
($92,300) 
($96,600) 
($100,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 837/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local school systems and/or LHDs can likely report information with 
existing budgeted resources. Local school systems can alter form collection procedures to 
ensure compliance with the 90-day cardiovascular screening with existing budgeted 
resources. Any costs associated with providing such screenings are assumed to be borne 
by parents or guardians of students, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Cardiovascular Prescreening Provisions 
 
Under the bill, cardiovascular prescreening means a set of tests and examinations designed 
to assess an individual’s heart health, identify risk factors for heart disease, and detect any 
underlying cardiovascular abnormalities before symptoms appear, including a targeted 
personal and family history and a physical examination based on nationally recognized, 
evidence-based guidelines recommended by organizations focused on cardiovascular care 
in pediatric populations. A cardiovascular prescreening may not be conducted earlier than 
the 90-day period before the first day of the school year in which the student intends to 
participate in interscholastic sports. If a health care provider determines that a student’s 
cardiovascular prescreening has a positive finding, the provider should determine whether 
a referral to a cardiologist for further evaluation and testing is necessary. 
 
The bill requires that a physical examination of a student used to determine the student’s 
physical fitness to participate in interscholastic sports, including a try-out, practice, or 
contest of a school team must include a cardiovascular prescreening. Beginning in the 
2026-2027 school year, a qualified health care provider who performs physical 
examinations for students participating in interscholastic sports or for a nonpublic student 
must include a cardiovascular screening as part of the examination. The bill’s 
cardiovascular prescreening requirements apply to public schools and certified nonpublic, 
noncollegiate educational institutions that require students to receive a physical 
examination determining physical fitness to participate in interscholastic sports. 
 
MSDE guidelines must include policies, programs, training, and continuing education on 
(1) how to complete a cardiovascular prescreening, including collecting a family history 
and personal reports of symptoms; (2) identifying early signs of cardiac arrest through 
physical examination; and (3) referral procedures for positive findings.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 837/ Page 3 
Beginning in the 2026-2027 school year, each public school must report to the local board 
of education or LHD the total number of students who (1) had a physical examination to 
participate in interscholastic sports, (2) had a physical examination that included a 
cardiovascular prescreening to participate in interscholastic sports, and (3) were given a 
referral to a cardiologist for further evaluation and testing resulting from a cardiovascular 
prescreening. Each local board or LHD must report the information obtained from each 
public school to MDH by a date established by MDH.  
 
Annually by January 31, MDH must publish a report on its website listing the total number 
of students in each category of information collected from local boards and LHDs and 
analyzing the outcomes of the cardiovascular prescreening requirements, including 
utilization and uptake by clinicians, the proportion of positive screenings, and 
recommendations for any additional diagnostic studies. 
 
Sudden Cardiac Arrest Awareness Provisions 
 
The bill also requires certified nonpublic, noncollegiate educational institutions to develop 
policies and programs relating to sudden cardiac arrest as established in current law for 
public schools. The bill accordingly updates the statutory definition of “youth athlete” to 
include instances where the youth sports program is conducted at a facility of a certified 
nonpublic, noncollegiate educational institution.  
 
Current Law:  Under § 7-402 of the Education Article, MSDE, in consultation with MDH, 
must adopt regulations requiring a physical examination for children entering the Maryland 
public school system for the first time. The regulations must require each child to have a 
physical examination completed within the nine-month period before entering the public 
school system or the six-month period after entering the public school system. The physical 
examination must be completed by a licensed physician, licensed physician assistant, or 
certified nurse practitioner. 
 
For each school year, each public school must report to the local board of education or 
LHD the number of children entering the public school system for the first time who have 
not had a physical examination due to lack of access to health care, insufficient financial 
resources, or any other reason, including a religious reason, as the public school deems 
appropriate. The local board of education or LHD must report the information to MDH.  
 
Noncollegiate Educational Institutions  
 
Under § 2-206 of the Education Article, the State board must issue a certificate of approval 
to a noncollegiate educational institution (i.e., a school or other institution that offers an 
educational program but is not an institution of postsecondary education) if certain 
requirements are satisfied. With the advice of the State Superintendent, the State Board 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 837/ Page 4 
must adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations for the approval and accreditation of all public 
schools. The board must also establish minimum requirements for issuing certificates and 
diplomas by public and private noncollegiate educational institutions in the State. A 
noncollegiate educational institution may not operate in this State without a certificate of 
approval from the board.  
 
Cardiac Arrest Awareness – Generally 
 
MSDE, in collaboration with MDH, each local board of education, and other experts and 
stakeholders, must develop and implement a program to provide sudden cardiac arrest 
awareness to coaches, school personnel, student athletes, and parents. 
 
The sudden cardiac arrest program developed by MSDE must include the nature and 
warning signs of sudden cardiac arrest and the risks associated with continuing to play or 
practice after experiencing a symptom of sudden cardiac arrest. The program must include 
a process to verify that a coach has received information relating to the program.  
 
Before a student enrolled in a public school may participate in an authorized athletic 
activity, the local board of education must provide a sudden cardiac arrest symptoms and 
warning signs information sheet to the student and the student’s parent or guardian; both 
must acknowledge the receipt of this sheet by signing a statement. MSDE must create the 
information sheet and the acknowledgement statement. 
 
MSDE may use materials available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Parent Heart Watch, Sudden Arrhythmia Death Syndromes Foundation, or any other 
appropriate entity. A public school may hold an informational meeting before the start of 
each athletic season regarding the symptoms and warning signs of sudden cardiac arrest. 
 
Cardiac Arrest Awareness – Information for Participants and Parents or Guardians 
 
Before an individual participates in an authorized athletic activity on school property, the 
local board of education must provide, or require that a third party provide (1) information 
on sudden cardiac arrest to the individual and, if applicable, a parent or guardian of the 
individual and (2) notice that acknowledgement of the receipt of the information. 
 
The information must be in the form of a separate information sheet, or a notice of the 
registration form for a youth sports program stating that information on sudden cardiac 
arrest is available, including directions on how to receive the information electronically. 
The individual and, if applicable, the parent or guardian of the individual must 
acknowledge the receipt of the information in a specified manner. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 837/ Page 5 
Cardiac Arrest Awareness – Youth Athletes and Sports Programs 
 
A “youth athlete” means an individual who participates in an athletic activity in association 
with a youth sports program conducted at a public school facility or by a recreational 
athletic organization. 
 
A “youth sports program” is defined as a program organized for recreational athletic 
competition or instruction for participants who are younger than 19 years old. 
 
A youth sports program that uses a public school facility must provide annually to the local 
board of education (or the board’s agent) a statement of intent to comply for all its athletic 
activities with the requirement to provide participants and parents and guardians with 
information on sudden cardiac arrest and notice that acknowledgement of the receipt of the 
information is required. A youth sports program that does not use a public school facility 
is encouraged to follow the guidelines.  
 
A youth sports program must make available information on sudden cardiac arrest 
developed by MSDE to coaches, youth athletes, and the parents and guardians of youth 
athletes. A coach of a youth sports program must review the information. 
 
Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association Guidance 
 
In May 2024, the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association (MPSSAA), in 
consultation with its medical advisory committee, adopted an updated preparticipation 
physical evaluation form that incorporates the most current medical guidance related to 
cardiovascular prescreening, including individual medical history, family medical history, 
and cardiovascular risk factors. The form includes a section with language directing 
evaluating medical professionals to “[c]onsider ECG, echocardiogram, and referral to 
cardiology if abnormal cardiac history/exam or family history to address Sudden Cardiac 
Arrest and Sudden Cardiac Death risk.”  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $100,485 in  
fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective 
date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring (1) one half-time program manager at MSDE 
to oversee development and implementation of the required guidance and training on 
cardiovascular prescreening and (2) one half-time contractual epidemiologist at MDH to 
manage data collection, analysis, and reporting. It includes salaries, fringe benefits,  
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Full-time Equivalent Positions 
1 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$84,287 
Operating Expenses 
16,198 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$100,485 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 837/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This analysis assumes that the 
half-time epidemiologist position at MDH steps down to a quarter-time position beginning 
in fiscal 2028 once initial reporting is established. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
To the extent that MDH requires additional resources to provide consultation to MSDE on 
cardiovascular prescreening guidelines, MDH general fund expenditures increase by an 
additional amount beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
MDH also estimates that the agency requires one half-time health policy analyst to assist 
with collection of data and generation of annual reports. However, this analysis assumes 
that the part-time epidemiologist can complete the required analysis with support from 
existing staff at MDH. 
 
MSDE advises that the agency requires significant contractual support to implement 
training on cardiovascular screenings in all 24 local school systems. This analysis, 
however, assumes that MSDE must only develop guidelines relating to cardiovascular 
prescreening, including training and continuing education. The bill does not require the 
agency to deliver such training to local school systems. 
 
MPSSAA advises that its medical advisory committee members may require additional 
stipends to collaborate on policy, guidance and training materials that are not reflected in 
the above estimate as such costs are assumed to be absorbable with existing resources.  
 
Additional Comments:  Nonpublic schools affected by the bill can likely provide student 
athletes and their parents or guardians with the required information about sudden cardiac 
arrest using existing resources. 
 
MSDE, MPSSAA, Baltimore City Public Schools, Montgomery County Public Schools, 
Prince George’s County Public Schools, St. Mary’s County Public Schools, and  
Wicomico County Public Schools all advise that the bill’s cardiovascular prescreening 
requirements may impose an additional burden on parents and guardians of students to 
provide a screening within 90 days of the start of the academic year. MSDE specifically 
notes that insurance plans typically cover one physical exam per year and to the extent an 
additional cardiovascular exam within 90 days of the start of the school year is required 
outside of normal yearly physicals, families may face additional out-of-pocket costs for 
such exams. This may place an additional barrier to student participation in athletics.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 837/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 593 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery 
County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public 
Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7