START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 898 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 898 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Ways and Means and Economic Matters 
 
 
Economic Development - Delivering Economic Competitiveness and Advancing 
Development Efforts (DECADE) Act 
 
 
This Administration bill alters, enhances, and transfers various economic development 
programs and tax credits. The bill generally takes effect June 1, 2026. Most provisions 
modifying programs and tax credits take effect July 1, 2026. Provisions affecting 
specified income tax credits apply to tax year 2026 and beyond. Provisions affecting 
specified property tax credits apply to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026 and no quantified net effect on State revenues or 
expenditures in FY 2027; however, general fund revenues may decrease by a significant 
amount in FY 2027 due to enhancements to the film production activity tax credit, as 
discussed below. Special fund revenues and expenditures are also affected. Quantified 
general fund revenue reductions from tax credit program extensions total $13.0 million in 
FY 2028, escalating to $14.6 million in FY 2030. Related quantified special fund revenue 
and expenditure reductions total $3.0 million and $0.3 million, respectively, in FY 2028 
and escalate to $3.4 million and $0.4 million in FY 2030. Net general fund expenditures 
increase by an estimated $7.0 million annually in FY 2028 through 2030 due to the 
extension of the Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
($13.0) 
($13.0) 
($14.6) 
($14.6) 
SF Revenue 
(-) 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.4) 
($3.4) 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$7.0 
$7.0 
$7.0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
(-) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.4) 
($0.4) 
Net Effect 
(-) 
($22.7) 
($22.7) 
($24.6) 
($17.6) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments are affected, as discussed below. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 898/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with 
this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  A discussion of each provision in the bill is provided in 
Appendix A. 
 
Background:  The Administration advises that the bill seeks to increase private investment 
in the State by enhancing, extending, and increasing the flexibility of various existing 
Department of Commerce-administered programs. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The impact on State finances and operations is included in the 
discussion of each provision in Appendix A. There may be other relatively minor or 
incidental implementation costs for various State agencies not captured in the individual 
discussions below. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Several provisions in the bill affect local government finances. The 
impact on local jurisdictions is included in the discussion of each provision in Appendix A. 
Generally, effects are due to receiving different levels of funding through various State 
economic development programs, changes to local highway user revenue distributions 
from changes to tax credits claimed against the corporate income tax, and changes to 
property tax revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar provisions have been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 427 and HB 498 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 388 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Economic Development Corporation; Maryland 
Technology Development Corporation; Department of Social and Economic Mobility; 
Department of Commerce; Maryland Municipal League; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
State Treasurer's Office; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Board of Public Works; Public Service 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 898/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History: 
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 898/ Page 4 
Appendix A – Individual Provisions 
 
Alter, Transfer, and Rename Economic Development Opportunities Program Account ... 5 
 
Alter Provisions Relating to Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority 
and Fund .............................................................................................................................. 6 
 
Establish Maryland Small Business Development Financing Fund and Alter Related 
Programs .............................................................................................................................. 8 
 
Extend Job Creation Tax Credit ........................................................................................ 10 
 
Alter and Transfer Commerce Programs to the Maryland Economic Development 
Corporation ........................................................................................................................ 12 
 
Waive Annual Filing Fee for Targeted Industry Businesses in Regional Institution Strategic 
Enterprise Zones ................................................................................................................ 15 
 
Reallocate Video Lottery Terminal Distributions between Maryland Small, Minority, and 
Women‑Owned Businesses Account and Maryland Small Business Development 
Financing Fund .................................................................................................................. 16 
 
Extend Research and Development Tax Credit................................................................. 17 
 
Alter Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit ..................................................... 18 
 
Alter Film Production Activity Tax Credit ....................................................................... 20 
 
Extend Employer Security Clearance Costs Tax Credit ................................................... 22 
 
Alter Property Tax Credits for Enterprise Zone and Regional Institution Strategic 
Enterprise Zone Property ................................................................................................... 23 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 898/ Page 5 
Alter, Transfer, and Rename Economic Development Opportunities Program 
Account 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Rename the Economic Development Opportunities Program 
Account to be the Strategic Closing Fund, relocate the fund to the Department of 
Commerce, require the fund’s investment earnings to be credited to the general fund, and 
make various conforming changes. Eliminate required Legislative Policy Committee 
(LPC) approval before funds are expended and instead require only notice. Reduce, from 
60 to 21, the number of days LPC must have to review and comment on Commerce’s 
annual program report. Modify the definition of “extraordinary economic development 
opportunity” as it applies to the program to (1) include the attraction, retention, or 
expansion of private-sector enterprises whose capital investment is less than five times the 
value of the incentive offered and (2) eliminate emphasis on the creation or retention of 
substantial employment in areas of high unemployment. 
 
Agency:  Commerce 
 
State Effect:  No net effect on State expenditures. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced 
includes $16.0 million in general funds for the Economic Development Opportunities Program 
Account; thus, general fund expenditures for the State Reserve Fund decrease by $16.0 million 
in fiscal 2027 and by indeterminate amounts thereafter due to the transfer of this renamed 
account to Commerce. General fund expenditures for Commerce increase by a corresponding 
amount. General fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2027 due to the redirection of 
investment earnings from the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day Fund); Rainy Day 
Fund revenues decrease by a corresponding amount. 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
Program Description:  The Economic Development Opportunities Program Account (better 
known as the Sunny Day Fund) is an account in the State Reserve Fund that is used to provide 
conditional loans, grants, and investments to maximize extraordinary economic development 
opportunities. “Extraordinary economic development opportunity” is in part defined as 
opportunities that create or retain substantial employment, particularly in areas of high 
unemployment. It includes the attraction, retention, or expansion of a private-sector enterprise 
in the State that invests in capital at a level equal to five times the value of the incentive offered 
and meets other eligibility requirements. Subject to LPC approval, funds may be transferred 
from the account to the appropriate executive agency to provide authorized grants, loans, and 
investments. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1; Section 3, Economic Development Article, 
§§ 2.5-109, 5-108, and 10-470, and State Finance and Procurement Article, § 7-309 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 898/ Page 6 
Alter Provisions Relating to Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority 
and Fund 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Make various alterations relating to the Maryland Economic 
Development Assistance Authority and Fund (collectively, MEDAAF). Specifically:  
(1) double, from $2.5 million to $5.0 million, the maximum amount of financial assistance 
that may be approved by the Secretary of Commerce for a project (other than a Tier I county 
project) without approval by the authority; (2) authorize specified assistance to be approved 
by letters from the governing body of a local jurisdiction and/or the board of directors of 
the Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) (as applicable), as opposed 
to by formal resolutions; (3) repeal the requirement for a local government to provide a 
guarantee, matching funds, or both for a local economic development opportunity; 
(4) increase the maximum amount of assistance that may be provided from the fund for a 
local economic development opportunity from $5.0 million to $7.5 million for a loan or 
investment and from $2.0 million to $5.0 million for a grant; (5) increase, from $3.0 million 
to $5.0 million, the maximum amount of direct financial assistance that may be provided 
to a local government or MEDCO to finance a project; and (6) repeal certain provisions 
relating to the interest on and term of a loan from the fund and specify that the Department 
of Commerce or the authority must determine whether a loan from the fund must bear 
interest and, if so, the interest rate. 
 
Agency:  Commerce; MEDCO 
 
State Effect:  The provisions do not alter overall funding for MEDAAF and have minimal 
or no effect on State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments may benefit from the repeal of certain matching 
requirements and/or receive increased direct financial assistance. 
 
Program Description:  The purposes of MEDAAF are to (1) expand employment 
opportunities in the State by providing financial assistance to businesses engaged in 
eligible business sectors, including financial assistance for aquaculture projects, arts and 
entertainment enterprises and projects, and creation and expansion of child care facilities; 
(2) provide financial assistance for the redevelopment of qualified brownfield sites; 
(3) provide financial assistance to local governments and MEDCO for economic 
development projects; and (4) provide grants to local economic development funds. 
Commerce or the authority may provide loans from the fund of up to $10.0 million for 
significant strategic economic development opportunities and, for local economic 
development opportunities, loans or investments of up to $5.0 million or grants of up to 
$2.0 million. The fund may also be used to provide direct financial assistance of up to 
$3.0 million to a local government or MEDCO to finance a project; such assistance may 
be in the form of a grant, loan, or investment. Projects generally must be located within a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 898/ Page 7 
priority funding area, and financial assistance from the fund generally may not exceed 70% 
of total project costs. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 3, Economic Development Article, §§ 5-319, 
5-324, and 5-325 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 898/ Page 8 
Establish Maryland Small Business Development Financing Fund and Alter Related 
Programs 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Establish the Maryland Small Business Development Financing 
Fund in the Department of Commerce as the successor to multiple funds (Small Business 
Development Contract Financing Fund, Small Business Development Guaranty Fund, 
Equity Participation Investment Incentive Program Fund, and Small Business Surety Bond 
Fund), each of which are repealed but are continued as programs of the fund, and make 
various conforming changes. Streamline various requirements for financial assistance 
under the aforementioned programs and make certain substantive changes – specifically, 
among them: 
 
 
increase the maximum amount of a guaranty or loan provided under the Small 
Business Development Contract Financing Program and a guaranty under the Small 
Business Development Guaranty Program from $2.0 million to $3.0 million; 
 
increase the maximum amount of a guaranty provided under the Small Business 
Surety Bond Program from $2.25 million to $3.0 million and double the maximum 
amount of bid, performance, and payment bonds that the Maryland Small Business 
Development Financing Authority (MSBDFA) may directly issue under the 
program from $2.5 million to $5.0 million; 
 
repeal certain requirements for financial and bonding assistance that generally limit 
eligibility to government and utility contracts; and 
 
increase criminal penalties for knowingly making false statements or reports to 
MSBDFA with respect to the Small Business Surety Bond Program to conform to 
those under the Small Business Development Contract Financing and Small 
Business Development Guaranty programs. 
 
Agency:  Commerce 
 
State Effect:  The provisions do not alter overall funding for MSBDFA and otherwise have 
minimal or no effect on State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The provisions do not materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Program Description:  MSBDFA provides financing options for small businesses that are 
owned by economically and socially disadvantaged entrepreneurs and small businesses that 
are unable to meet the established credit criteria of financial institutions. Subject to 
specified conditions, Commerce may (and does) contract for and engage the services of 
some or all of the MSBDFA staff to administer the authority’s programs. MSBDFA has 
four special funds in statute, listed above, that in practice already operate as programs. 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 898/ Page 9 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 3 Economic Development Article, §§ 5-501, 
5-502, 5-511, 5-515, and 5-517 through 5-559 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 898/ Page 10 
Extend Job Creation Tax Credit 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Extends the Job Creation Tax Credit Program by five years, to 
January 1, 2032. 
 
Agency:  Department of Commerce; Comptroller 
 
State Effect:  No effect in fiscal 2027. In fiscal 2028, general fund revenues may decrease 
by an estimated $3.2 million, Higher Education Investment Fund and Transportation Trust 
Fund (TTF) revenues may decrease by an estimated $0.2 million and $0.6 million, 
respectively, and TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants may decrease by 
an estimated $0.1 million. General fund revenues and special fund revenues and 
expenditures may decrease by similar amounts annually through fiscal 2032. To the extent 
credits are claimed against the corporate income tax by a corporation that operates a 
qualified data center, Strategic Energy Investment Fund revenues are also affected. This 
estimate assumes that 90% of credits are claimed against the corporate income tax and the 
remaining 10% are claimed against the personal income tax or insurance premiums tax. 
Actual revenues and expenditures under the provision may differ from this estimate due to 
the amount and timing of tax credit claims and carryforwards. 
 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues may decrease by an estimated $0.1 million in 
fiscal 2028 and by similar amounts annually through fiscal 2032 under the assumptions 
discussed above. Actual local highway user revenues under the provision may differ from 
this estimate due to the amount and timing of corporate income tax credit claims and 
carryforwards. 
 
Program Description:  The Job Creation Tax Credit Program offers nonrefundable tax 
credits against the income tax or the insurance premiums tax to a business that establishes 
or expands a facility in the State that (1) is primarily engaged in an eligible industry and 
(2) within a 24-month period, creates: 
 
 
at least 60 qualifying positions (as defined); 
 
at least 25 qualifying positions in a State priority funding area; or 
 
at least 10 qualifying positions in a county with an annual average employment that 
is less than 75,000 or a median household income that is less than two-thirds of the 
statewide median household income. 
 
The value of the credit is generally equal to $3,000 per qualified employee employed 
during the credit year (for a facility located in a revitalization area, $5,000 per qualified 
employee employed during the credit year), subject to a maximum of $1.0 million per 
qualified business entity per credit year. The credit may be carried forward up to 
five tax years and may not be carried back to a preceding tax year. 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 898/ Page 11 
Chapter 191 of 2021 established an enhanced job creation tax credit for the hiring of 
qualified veteran employees and extended program eligibility to small businesses that hire 
at least one qualified veteran employee for a full-time position in the State. 
 
Commerce may certify up to $4.0 million in job creation tax credits annually. The program 
is scheduled to terminate January 1, 2027, after which a business entity may be considered 
for eligibility for the tax credit based on positions filled before this termination date, and 
tax credits earned may be carried forward. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 3, Economic Development Article, § 6-309 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 898/ Page 12 
Alter and Transfer Commerce Programs to the Maryland Economic Development 
Corporation 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Transfer the Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise (RISE) Zone 
Program and Build Our Future Grant (BOFG) Pilot Program from the Department of 
Commerce to the Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) and make 
various conforming changes. Extend the termination date of the BOFG Pilot Program from 
June 30, 2027, to June 30, 2030; remove “pilot” from the name of the program; and require 
MEDCO to prioritize applicants located in a RISE zone. Make various alterations to the 
RISE Zone Program – specifically:  (1) authorize a RISE zone to be renewed for an 
additional 10 years (increased from 5 years); (2) authorize MEDCO to approve 
one extraordinary RISE zone in a single county or municipality for an area that promotes 
quantum computing; (3) repeal a prohibition on designating a RISE zone in a specified 
development district or special taxing district; (4) increase the maximum duration for rental 
assistance from 3 to 5 years; (5) repeal requirements that a business entity have nexus with 
a qualified institution located in a RISE zone and have been in active business no longer 
than 7 years in order to be eligible for rental assistance; and (6) allow a qualified institution, 
a county, a municipality, or an economic development entity that establishes a rental 
assistance program to receive funding without providing matching funds. 
 
Agency:  Commerce; MEDCO 
 
State Effect:  The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $7.0 million in general funds 
for the BOFG Pilot Program and no funds for the RISE Zone Program. Thus, general fund 
expenditures for Commerce decrease by $7.0 million in fiscal 2027 due to the transfer of 
the BOFG Program to MEDCO and by indeterminate amounts thereafter due to the transfer 
of the RISE Zone Program. General fund expenditures for MEDCO increase by a 
corresponding amount. General fund expenditures for MEDCO increase by an additional 
$7.0 million annually in fiscal 2028 through 2030 due to the extension of the  
BOFG Program, assuming that the program continues to be funded at the proposed  
fiscal 2027 funding level. 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments benefit from the extension of the BOFG Program 
through fiscal 2030 and may also be affected by the prioritization of applicants located in 
a RISE zone. Other changes are not anticipated to materially affect local government 
finances or operations. 
 
Program Description: 
 
Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Zone Program 
 
The purposes of the RISE Zone Program are to (1) access institutional assets that have a 
strong and demonstrated history of commitment to economic development and 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 898/ Page 13 
revitalization in the communities in which they are located and (2) incentivize the location 
of innovative start-up businesses based on technology developed, licensed, or poised for 
commercialization at or in collaboration with qualified Maryland institutions. Qualified 
institutions include institutions of higher education (public and private four‑year 
institutions and community colleges), nonprofit organizations affiliated with federal 
agencies, and regional higher education centers. Businesses that are located within a zone 
and meet program requirements qualify for program benefits and priority consideration for 
specified State financial assistance programs. 
 
The Secretary of Commerce designates RISE zones, subject to specified requirements, for 
a period of five years with an optional five‑year renewal. Zones may not exceed 500 acres. 
Except for Baltimore City, which can have four RISE zones, no more than three  
RISE zones may be designated in a single county or municipality. 
 
Chapters 206 and 207 of 2021 made significant modifications to the RISE Zone Program, 
most notably to the incentives offered. More specifically, a rental assistance grant program 
and enhanced investment incentive tax credits were established, while property tax credits 
were limited to businesses that located in a RISE zone before January 1, 2023, and income 
tax credits were ended after tax year 2022. 
 
Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program 
 
Chapters 430 and 431 of 2023 established the BOFG Pilot Program and Fund in Commerce 
to provide grant funding for infrastructure projects intended to support innovation in 
eligible technology sectors. Under the program, grants of up to $2.0 million may be 
awarded to private companies, nonprofits, local governments, or colleges and universities 
in the State and may be used to defray specified costs associated with an eligible innovation 
infrastructure project. A grant recipient must provide matching funds of either 200% or 
400%, depending on the size of the grant. Additional requirements are placed on grants to 
be used by colleges and universities. A single entity is limited to $2.0 million in grants in 
a fiscal year. The program terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation 
 
MEDCO is a nonbudgeted entity created in 1984 by the General Assembly to assist 
business and governmental entities through ownership, financing, and development of real 
and personal property projects. MEDCO purchases or develops property that is leased to 
others and makes loans to companies throughout the State to maintain or develop facilities. 
MEDCO has broad powers to finance projects and most often is a conduit issuer of 
tax‑exempt revenue bonds to an eligible tax‑exempt borrower. MEDCO has also issued its 
bonds to finance its own projects, which it owns and operates. MEDCO‑owned projects 
consist mostly of student housing projects. Generally, MEDCO debt is not debt of the State, 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 898/ Page 14 
and there is no implied State guaranty or State obligation to protect bondholders from 
losses. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2; Section 3, Economic Development Article, 
§§ 5-102, 10-137, 10-139 through 10-156, and 12-201; Section 4, Tax –⁠ General Article, 
§§ 10-702 and 10-725; Section 5, Tax –⁠ Property Article, § 9-103.1; and Section 6 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 898/ Page 15 
Waive Annual Filing Fee for Targeted Industry Businesses in Regional Institution 
Strategic Enterprise Zones 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, requires the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to waive the filing fee for a business entity for 
each year that the entity provides evidence to the department that it (1) has located within 
a Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise (RISE) zone within three years of the date by 
which the filing fee is due and (2) is in an eligible technology sector (as specified). 
 
Agency:  SDAT 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an unknown but likely modest amount 
beginning in fiscal 2027 from reduced filing fees. The amount depends on the number of 
eligible businesses located in RISE zones and the proportion of those businesses that 
provide evidence to SDAT of their eligibility. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  Business entities in the State are required to file an annual report 
along with a reporting fee with SDAT by April 15, regardless of whether the business owns 
property, generates income, or has conducted business activity in the State during the 
preceding year. Failure to file the annual report may result in the business entity losing the 
right to conduct business in Maryland. The fee is generally $300. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 3, Corporations and Associations Article, 
§ 1-203 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 898/ Page 16 
Reallocate Video Lottery Terminal Distributions between Maryland Small, Minority, 
and Women-Owned Businesses Account and Maryland Small Business Development 
Financing Fund 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Reallocates 0.75% of video lottery terminal (VLT) revenues from 
the Maryland Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account (SMWOBA) to 
the Maryland Small Business Development Financing Fund established under the bill. 
 
Agency:  Department of Commerce 
 
State Effect:  Overall special fund revenues and expenditures for Commerce are 
unaffected, as funding is reallocated between two Commerce programs. 
 
Local Effect:  Local economic development corporations may receive less funding from 
eligible fund managers under SMWOBA beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Program Description:  SMWOBA is used to provide loans and grants to small, minority, 
and women-owned businesses in the State. A small percentage of gross VLT proceeds is 
distributed to SMWOBA each fiscal year. Commerce then provides grants from 
SMWOBA to eligible fund managers – in practice, mostly a mixture of county 
development corporations and private firms. The fund managers then provide loans and 
grants to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the State. Generally, grants are 
limited to $10,000 per recipient and, except in the case of certain disasters or emergencies, 
must be issued in conjunction with a loan. 
 
The Maryland Small Business Development Financing Authority (MSBDFA) provides 
financing options for small businesses that are owned by economically and socially 
disadvantaged entrepreneurs and small businesses that are unable to meet the  
established credit criteria of financial institutions. As discussed above, MSBDFA has 
four special funds which in practice operate as programs and which the bill consolidates 
under a newly established Maryland Small Business Development Financing Fund. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 3, State Government Article, § 9-1A-27 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 898/ Page 17 
Extend Research and Development Tax Credit 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Extend the Research and Development (R&D) Tax Credit Program 
for tax years 2026 through 2030. 
 
Agency:  Department of Commerce; Comptroller 
 
State Effect:  No effect in fiscal 2027. In fiscal 2028, general fund revenues decrease by 
an estimated $9.8 million, Higher Education Investment Fund and Transportation Trust 
Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by an estimated $0.6 million and $1.6 million, respectively, 
and TTF expenditures for local highway user revenues decrease by an estimated 
$0.3 million. General fund revenues and special fund revenues and expenditures decrease 
by similar amounts annually through fiscal 2032. This estimate assumes that 80% of credits 
are claimed against the corporate income tax and the remaining 20% are claimed against 
the personal income tax. Actual revenues and expenditures under the provisions may differ 
from this estimate due to the timing of tax credit claims and carryforwards. 
 
Local Effect:  No effect in fiscal 2027. Local highway user revenues decrease by an 
estimated $0.3 million in fiscal 2028 and by similar amounts annually through fiscal 2032. 
Actual local highway user revenues under the provisions may differ from this estimate due 
to the timing of tax credit claims and carryforwards. 
 
Program Description: The Maryland R&D tax credit is equal to 10% of the amount of 
Maryland qualified R&D expenses paid or incurred during the tax year that exceed the 
Maryland base amount (as defined), subject to an annual $250,000 per-taxpayer cap and 
certain annual aggregate limits. The tax credit is generally nonrefundable and may be 
carried forward for up to seven years after the tax year in which the expense was incurred. 
The tax credit is fully refundable for a small business, which is defined as a for‑profit 
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or sole proprietorship with net book 
value assets totaling less than $5.0 million at the beginning or end of the taxable year for 
which Maryland qualified R&D expenses are incurred. 
 
Commerce administers the tax credit application, approval, and certification process and 
may approve up to $12.0 million in tax credits annually, of which $3.5 million is set aside 
for small businesses. If the total amount of credits applied for by small businesses exceeds 
$3.5 million, the amount approved for each small business applicant is reduced by a 
proportional amount of the excess. Similarly, if the total amount of credits applied for by 
non-small businesses exceeds $8.5 million (plus any unused amount of the small business 
set-aside), the amount approved for each non-small business applicant is reduced by a 
proportional amount of the excess. The tax credit program terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 4, Tax –⁠ General Article, § 10-721; Section 6 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 898/ Page 18 
Alter Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Make various alterations to the Biotechnology Investment 
Incentive Tax Credit (BIITC) Program – specifically:  (1) clarify certain eligibility 
requirements for qualified investors that are companies; (2) increase the value of the 
enhanced credit for an investment in a qualified Maryland biotechnology company located 
in a Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise (RISE) zone or in specified counties 
(Allegany, Dorchester, Garrett, or Somerset) from 50% to 75% of the investment, up to 
$750,000 (increased from $500,000) and repeal certain related eligibility criteria; (3) for 
tax year 2027 and beyond, allow pass-through entities that elect to be taxed at the entity 
level for Maryland income tax purposes to claim and allocate the credits among their 
members in any manner; and (4) for tax year 2026 and beyond, require the Comptroller to 
provide a means for a qualified investor to file the investor’s return electronically. 
 
Agency:  Department of Commerce; Comptroller 
 
State Effect:  As discussed below, BIITC awards are subject to annual appropriations to 
the BIITC Reserve Fund. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a $12.0 million 
appropriation to the reserve fund, including $4.7 million in general funds and $7.3 million 
in special funds (reflecting the anticipated unused fund balance to be carried over from 
fiscal 2026). To the extent the provisions increase utilization of the BIITC Reserve Fund, 
general fund expenditures may increase in fiscal 2028 in order to maintain (or increase) the 
existing funding level for the BIITC program. Any such effect cannot be reliably predicted. 
General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office may increase in fiscal 2027 for 
one‑time costs to implement electronic filing for qualified investors. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The BIITC program offers a refundable State income tax credit to 
qualified investors that invest at least $25,000 in a qualified Maryland biotechnology 
company. The tax credit is generally equal to 33% of the qualified investment, up to 
$250,000. Investments in qualified Maryland biotechnology companies located in 
Allegany, Dorchester, Garrett, or Somerset counties or in a RISE zone (subject to certain 
requirements) are eligible for an enhanced credit equal to 50% of the qualified investment, 
up to $500,000. Qualified opportunity funds that invest in qualified companies located in 
an opportunity zone are also eligible for certain enhanced credits for tax years 2019 through 
2026. 
 
Commerce administers the tax credit application, approval, and certification process. Tax 
credit awards are subject to annual appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund; Commerce 
may not certify eligibility for tax credits for investments in a single qualified company that 
exceed 10% of the total appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund for the fiscal year. The 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 898/ Page 19 
Comptroller must transfer the amount of certified credits from the reserve fund to the 
general fund on a quarterly basis. The BIITC program statute specifies that the Governor 
must include an annual appropriation to the reserve fund but does not specify a required 
funding level. Commerce may not issue any tax credit certificates under the BIITC program 
after fiscal 2028. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 4, Tax –⁠ General Article, § 10-725 
 
 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 898/ Page 20 
Alter Film Production Activity Tax Credit 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Repeal the $10.0 million limit on the total amount of tax credits 
the Department of Commerce may award for a single film production activity. Authorize 
a qualified film production entity to amend its initial application if an independent auditor 
selected and paid for by the qualified film production entity has verified that the projected 
total budget has increased or decreased by at least 50%. Require the Secretary of 
Commerce to (1) evaluate an amended application; (2) determine if the film production 
entity continues to qualify for the credit; and (3) subject to funding availability, if the 
Secretary approves the amended application, provide specified notice to the Comptroller. 
 
Agency:  Commerce; Comptroller 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by a potentially significant amount annually 
to the extent the provisions result in increased utilization of the film production activity 
tax credit. In the near term, the effect may be in the magnitude of tens of millions of dollars, 
as a significant amount of unissued credit from previous years has rolled over and remains 
available for certification. For context, approximately $46.5 million in film production 
tax credits is available for fiscal 2026, including $34.5 million rolled over from prior years. 
Higher Education Investment Fund revenues and Transportation Trust Fund revenues and 
expenditures also decrease as credits are claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent the provisions result in an increase in credits claimed 
against the corporate income tax. 
 
Program Description:  A qualified film production entity may apply for and claim a 
refundable credit against the State income tax for film production activities in the State in 
an amount equal to 28% of qualified total direct costs (30% for a television series) as stated 
on a final tax credit certificate approved by the Secretary of Commerce. Commerce may 
not approve credits totaling more than $10.0 million in aggregate for a single film 
production activity. 
 
Chapter 434 of 2023 temporarily increased the maximum amount of credits Commerce 
may award annually from $12.0 million to $15.0 million for fiscal 2024, $17.5 million for 
fiscal 2025, and $20.0 million for fiscal 2026. The Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act of 2025 (Chapter 604) reduced, from $20.0 million to $12.0 million, the aggregate 
amount of film production activity tax credit certificates that may be awarded in 
fiscal 2026, thereby accelerating by one year the phaseout of temporary enhancements to 
annual program funding. Any unused amount may be issued in a subsequent year. 
Commerce must reserve 10% of the total authorized amount each year for Maryland small 
or independent film entities. 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 898/ Page 21 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) most recently evaluated the film production 
activity tax credit during the 2025 interim. In its December 2025 report, DLS recommended 
that the General Assembly consider terminating the film production activity tax credit and 
instead focus economic development efforts on incentives that generate lasting economic 
development. DLS also recommended that the General Assembly, should it choose to 
continue the program, reevaluate the $10.0 million per‑project cap for non‑small 
productions and consider limiting the amount of unused funding that may be carried 
forward. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 4, Tax –⁠ General Article, § 10-730 
 
 

END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
    
HB 898/ Page 22 
Extend Employer Security Clearance Costs Tax Credit 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Extends the employer security clearance costs tax credit by 
five years, through tax year 2032. 
 
Agency:  Department of Commerce; Comptroller 
 
State Effect:  No effect in fiscal 2027 through 2029. In fiscal 2030, general fund revenues 
decrease by an estimated $1.6 million, Higher Education Investment Fund and 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by an estimated $0.1 million and 
$0.3 million, respectively, and TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants 
decrease by less than $0.1 million. General fund revenues and special fund revenues and 
expenditures decrease by similar amounts annually through fiscal 2034. This estimate 
assumes that 80% of credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, and the 
remaining 20% are claimed against the personal income tax. Actual revenues and 
expenditures may differ from this estimate depending on the timing of tax credit claims 
and carryforwards. 
 
Local Effect:  No effect in fiscal 2027 through 2029. Local highway user revenues 
decrease by less than $0.1 million annually in fiscal 2030 through 2034. Actual local 
highway user revenues under the provisions may differ from this estimate depending on 
the timing of tax credit claims and carryforwards. 
 
Program Description:  Chapter 438 of 2023 reauthorized the employer security clearance 
costs tax credit for tax years 2023 through 2027. An individual or corporation that employs 
up to 500 employees may claim nonrefundable credits against the State income tax for 
(1) up to $200,000 of security clearance administrative expenses; (2) small businesses that 
perform security‑based contracting, up to $200,000 of first‑year rental payments for spaces 
leased in the State; and (3) up to $200,000 of construction and equipment costs incurred to 
construct or renovate a single sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF) (up to 
$500,000 in total for eligible costs to construct or renovate multiple SCIFs). Any excess 
credit may be carried forward until fully used. 
 
Commerce administers the tax credit application, approval, and certification process and 
may approve up to $2.0 million in credits annually. If the total amount of credits applied 
for exceeds this annual cap, the amount approved for each applicant is reduced by a 
proportional amount of the excess. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 4, Tax –⁠ General Article, § 10-732 
 
 

END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
    
HB 898/ Page 23 
Alter Property Tax Credits for Enterprise Zone and Regional Institution Strategic 
Enterprise Zone Property 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Expand eligibility for the enhanced enterprise zone property tax 
credit for newly constructed qualified property that provides both office and retail space to 
include such property that became eligible for the property tax credit on or after 
July 1, 2018, and before January 1, 2019. Specify that certain business entities may 
concurrently claim the Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise (RISE) zone and enterprise 
zone property tax credits, provided that the total property tax credits in any taxable year 
may not exceed 100% of the property tax that would otherwise be due. Allow, subject to 
the approval of the local governing body and the Department of Commerce, the RISE zone 
property tax credit for the taxable year in which the real property initially becomes a 
qualified property (a similar authorization is available under the enterprise zone property 
tax credit under current law). Require, for qualified property located in a designated 
enterprise zone, focus area, or renewed RISE zone, the RISE zone property tax credit to be 
calculated based on the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment after 
application of any enterprise zone property tax credits. Apply the provisions to taxable 
years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
Agency:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Commerce; Maryland Economic 
Development Corporation 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for local property tax reimbursements increase 
by an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2028 to the extent additional properties 
become eligible for and claim enhanced enterprise zone property tax credits. State revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The provisions’ overall net effect on local property tax revenues cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. However, the potential local revenue effects of each 
provision are discussed below. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Expanded Eligibility for Enhanced Enterprise Zone Property Tax Credit:  Local property 
tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent 
additional properties become eligible for and claim enhanced enterprise zone property tax 
credits. Beginning in fiscal 2028, revenue losses are partially offset by State 
reimbursements. 
 
Concurrent Utilization of RISE and Enterprise Zone Property Tax Credits:  It is assumed, 
for purposes of this analysis, that the provision expressly authorizing concurrent utilization 
of the RISE zone and enterprise zone property tax credits simply clarifies legislative intent 
and does not directly affect local property tax revenues. The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) has historically assumed that a business entity may claim both the  

END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
    
HB 898/ Page 24 
RISE zone and enterprise zone property tax credits if the eligible real property is located 
in both a RISE zone and an enterprise zone. However, as noted in DLS’s 2019 Evaluation 
of the Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise Tax Credit, the RISE zone property tax 
credit’s interaction with the enterprise zone property tax credit is unclear. 
 
The provisions further specify that the RISE zone property tax credit is to be calculated 
based on the amount of the property tax imposed after the application of any enterprise 
zone property tax credits. Under current law, the credit is calculated based on the amount 
of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment without reduction for any other 
statewide mandatory property tax credits. Thus, it is assumed that the provisions limit the 
value of the RISE zone property tax credit for qualified properties with respect to which 
the enterprise zone property tax credit is concurrently claimed – and consequently mitigate 
local property tax revenue losses associated with the RISE zone property tax credit program 
in such instances. 
 
Accelerated Application of RISE Zone Property Tax Credit:  Local property tax revenues 
are affected – potentially significantly in a given year – by the allowance of the RISE zone 
property tax credit in the taxable year in which the real property initially becomes a 
qualified property, to the extent the authorization accelerates credits claimed against the 
local property tax. 
 
Program Description:  Qualified properties located in designated enterprise zones and 
RISE zones are eligible for certain local property tax benefits as detailed below. 
 
Enterprise Zone Property Tax Credit:  “Qualified property,” as it applies to the enterprise 
zone property tax credit, is defined as real property that is not used for residential purposes; 
is used in a trade or business by a business entity that meets specified program 
requirements; and is located in an enterprise zone. The State must reimburse local 
governments for 50% of the property tax credit as provided in the State budget. 
 
A local governing body must grant the credit against the property tax imposed on the 
eligible assessment (as defined) of the qualified property. In general, the credit is equal to 
the following percentage of the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment:  
80% in each of the first five taxable years following the calendar year in which the property 
initially becomes a qualified property; 70% in the sixth taxable year; 60% in the 
seventh taxable year; 50% in the eighth taxable year; 40% in the ninth taxable year; and 
30% in the tenth taxable year. 
 
Chapters 449 and 450 of 2022 authorized enhanced enterprise zone property tax credits for 
newly constructed qualified property that provides both office and retail space and became 
eligible for the property tax credit on or after January 1, 2019, but before January 1, 2022. 
The enhanced credit is equal to the following percentage of the amount of property tax 

END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
    
HB 898/ Page 25 
imposed on the eligible assessment:  80% in each of the first eight taxable years following 
the calendar year in which the property initially becomes a qualified property; 70% in the 
ninth taxable year; 60% in the tenth taxable year; 50% in the eleventh taxable year; 40% 
in the twelfth taxable year; and 30% in the thirteenth taxable year. 
 
RISE Zone Property Tax Credit:  “Qualified property,” as it applies to the RISE zone 
property tax credit, is defined as real property that is located in a RISE zone, is not used 
for residential purposes, and is used in a trade or business by a business entity that locates 
in the RISE zone before January 1, 2023. 
 
A local governing body must grant the credit against the property tax imposed on the 
eligible assessment (as defined) of the qualified property. The credit is calculated based on 
the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment without reduction for any 
other statewide mandatory property tax credits. In general, the credit is equal to at least 
50% of the property tax imposed on the eligible assessment for the first taxable year 
following the calendar year in which the property initially becomes a qualified property 
and at least 10% of the property tax imposed on the eligible assessment in each of the 
following four taxable years. If a RISE zone is renewed, the credit is equal to at least 10% 
of the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment for the sixth through 
tenth taxable years. 
 
Certain enhanced credits are available for qualified property located in an enterprise zone 
or focus area. For qualified property located in an enterprise zone, the credit is equal to 
80% of the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment for each of the 
five taxable years following the calendar year in which the property initially becomes a 
qualified property. For qualified property located in a focus area, the credit is equal to 
100% of the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible assessment for each of the 
five taxable years following the calendar year in which the property initially becomes a 
qualified property. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 5, Tax –⁠ Property Article, §§ 9-103 and 
9-103.1; Section 9 
 
 

END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
    
HB 898/ Page 26 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Economic Development - Delivering Economic Competitiveness and 
Advancing Development Efforts (DECADE) Act 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 898 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
           WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
    X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The DECADE Act makes alterations to business development programs, particularly those 
that meet the standards to be considered small businesses based on the number of workers 
they employ. The alterations to each program seek to increase their utility, usefulness, and 
accessibility to businesses in order to make Maryland’s economy more resilient. The 
programs in the bill will collectively direct funding to qualified businesses to help expand 
their access to capital and to leverage state resources for business attraction, expansion, 
and retention efforts. Several programs impacted through the DECADE Act are directly 
targeted toward small businesses or have a set aside for small businesses, and continuation 
of those programs as well as improvements, will positively benefit those businesses. Small 
businesses will be directly impacted through improved access to these programs and 
indirectly impacted through the supply chain. 
 

END OF PAGE 26