START OF PAGE 1
HB0837/923529/1

BY: Ways and Means Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 837
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 2, strike “Physical Examinations and”; strike beginning with
“requiring” in line 4 down through “guidelines;” in line 10; in line 13, after “programs;”
insert “requiring a certain physical examination for student participation in an
interscholastic sport to include a cardiovascular prescreening under certain
circumstances; requiring an individual performing a cardiovascular prescreening to
make certain notices under certain circumstances;”; strike beginning with “student” in
line 13 down through “and” in line 14; in line 14, after “prescreening” insert “for
interscholastic sports”; strike in their entirety lines 15 through 19, inclusive; and after
line 24, insert:

“BY adding to
Article - Education
Section 7-436.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On pages 2 through 4, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 10 on
page 2 through line 20 on page 4, inclusive.

On page 6, after line 28, insert:

“7–436.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING” MEANS A SET
OF QUESTIONS DESIGNED TO ASSESS AN INDIVIDUAL’S HEART HEALTH, IDENTIFY
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0837/923529/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 837
Page 2 of 3

RISK FACTORS FOR HEART DISEASE, AND DETECT ANY UNDERLYING
CARDIOVASCULAR ABNORMALITIES BEFORE SYMPTOMS APPEAR, INCLUDING:

(1) A TARGETED PERSONAL AND FAMILY HISTORY; AND

(2) A PHYSICAL EXAMINATION BASED ON NATIONALLY
RECOGNIZED, EVIDENCE–BASED GUIDELINES RECOMMENDED BY
ORGANIZATIONS FOCUSED ON CARDIOVASCULAR CARE IN PEDIATRIC
POPULATIONS.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND NONPUBLIC
SCHOOLS THAT HOLD A CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL ISSUED BY THE STATE
BOARD UNDER § 2–206 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF A STUDENT USED TO DETERMINE THE STUDENT’S
PHYSICAL FITNESS TO PARTICIPATE IN AN INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORT, INCLUDING
A TRY–OUT, PRACTICE, OR CONTEST OF A SCHOOL TEAM, SHALL INCLUDE A FREE
CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION BEFORE
THE STUDENT PARTICIPATES IN THE INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORT.

(2) THE CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING SHALL BE OFFERED AS

PART OF THE PROCESS THE SCHOOL REQUIRES FOR A PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
BEFORE A STUDENT PARTICIPATES IN INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORTS.

(3) A CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING IS NOT REQUIRED UNDER
THIS SECTION IF:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0837/923529/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 837
Page 3 of 3

(I) THE SCHOOL OR LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM DOES NOT

REQUIRE A PHYSICAL EXAMINATION BEFORE A STUDENT PARTICIPATES IN
INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORTS; OR

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING IS NOT AVAILABLE FOR FREE.

(4) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A

HEALTH INSURER OR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER TO PROVIDE A PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION OR CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING TO A STUDENT AT NO COST.

(D) (1) A CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING MAY NOT BE CONDUCTED
EARLIER THAN 1 YEAR BEFORE THE FIRST DAY OF THE SCHOOL YEAR IN WHICH
THE STUDENT INTENDS TO PARTICIPATE IN AN INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORT.

(2) IF A CARDIOVASCULAR PRESCREENING HAS A POSITIVE
FINDING, THE INDIVIDUAL ADMINISTERING THE PRESCREENING SHALL NOTIFY
THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS ABOUT THE POTENTIAL RISKS OF PARTICIPATING
IN AN INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORT:

(I) THE STUDENT’S PARENT OR GUARDIAN; AND

(II) IF THE STUDENT IS AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD, THE
STUDENT.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THIS
SECTION.”.
END OF PAGE 3