START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 832 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 832 
(Delegate Boafo, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - State Law Enforcement Agencies - Hiring Restriction (ICE 
Breaker Act) 
 
   
This bill prohibits a “State law enforcement agency” from hiring for employment an 
individual who was hired as a sworn officer of the U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) on or after January 20, 2025. The bill only applies prospectively and 
may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on (or application to) any individual 
hired by a State law enforcement agency before the bill’s effective date. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “State law enforcement agency” means a governmental police force, 
security force, or law enforcement organization of the State that by statute, ordinance, or 
common law is authorized to enforce the general criminal laws of the State. “State law 
enforcement agency” includes: 
 
 
the Department of State Police; 
 
the Maryland Transportation Authority Police; 
 
the police forces of the Department of Natural Resources; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 832/ Page 2 
 
the police force of the Maryland Capitol Police of the Department of General 
Services; 
 
the office of State Fire Marshal; 
 
the police force of the Maryland Department of Health; 
 
the Field Enforcement Division of the Comptroller’s Office; and 
 
the Field Enforcement Division of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Discrimination in Employment – Generally  
 
Under § 20-602 of the State Government Article, it is State policy to assure that all persons 
have equal opportunity in employment and in all labor management-union relations. As 
such, State law generally prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race, 
color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, military status, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, genetic information, or disability (unrelated in nature and 
extent so as to reasonably preclude the performance of the employment).  
 
Subject to limited exceptions, on any of these bases or because of an individual’s refusal 
to submit to or make available the results of a genetic test, an employer may not (1) fail or 
refuse to hire, discharge, or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to 
the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions or privileges or (2) limit, segregate, or 
classify its employees or applicants for employment in any way that deprives or tends to 
deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the 
individual’s status as an employee. An employer is also prohibited from failing or refusing 
to make a reasonable accommodation for the known disability of an otherwise qualified 
employee or an applicant for employment; however, State law does not require an 
employer to reasonably accommodate a disability if the accommodation would cause 
undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s business. Furthermore, an employer may 
not (1) engage in the harassment (including sexual harassment) of an employee or 
(2) discriminate or retaliate against an employee or applicant because the 
employee/applicant has opposed any practice prohibited by State law relevant to 
employment discrimination or made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in an 
investigation, proceeding, or hearing related to such laws. Additional prohibitions – 
including those specific to interns, employment agencies, and labor organizations – are also 
specified in statute.  
 
In general, the above prohibitions are applicable to employers that have 15 or more 
employees (based on the number of employees working in each of 20 or more calendar 
weeks in the current or preceding calendar year). Provisions relating to harassment 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 832/ Page 3 
allegations apply to employers with 1 or more employees. Statute also specifically prohibits 
units, officers, or employees of the State, a county, or a municipal corporation from 
engaging in these discriminatory acts. 
 
Immigration Enforcement 
 
ICE is a federal law enforcement agency within the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) created in 2002. Its primary purpose is to protect national security, public safety, 
and integrity by enforcing immigration laws, investigating transnational crime, and 
detaining or removing individuals who violate these laws. 
 
While immigration is controlled by federal law, ICE and DHS have initiated numerous 
programs that involve state and local law enforcement agencies as allies and additional 
resources. For example, the Criminal Alien Program (CAP) supports ICE Enforcement and 
Removal Operations in executing its mission through the arrest and removal of 
undocumented immigrants who threaten the safety of the nation’s communities and the 
integrity of U.S. immigration laws. CAP focuses on the identification, arrest, and removal 
of incarcerated undocumented immigrants at federal, state, and local levels, as well as 
at‑large criminal undocumented immigrants. 
 
Federal law does not mandate that state and local law enforcement agencies become 
involved in immigration efforts. However, federal law does prohibit a state or local 
government from prohibiting or in any way restricting any government entity or official 
from sending to or receiving from ICE information regarding the citizenship or 
immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual. It also prohibits restrictions on 
any of the following with respect to information regarding the immigration status, lawful 
or unlawful, of any individual:  (1) sending such information to, or requesting or receiving 
such information from, ICE; (2) maintaining such information; or (3) exchanging such 
information with any other federal, state, or local government authority.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s 
Office; Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 832/ Page 4 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4