START OF PAGE 1
 
  
  HB 842 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 842 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Tax Exemption - Property Acquired by Surviving Spouse of Service 
Member - Repeal of Time Limitation 
 
   
This bill alters the eligibility criteria for a property tax exemption for disabled veterans and 
surviving spouses by repealing a requirement that a dwelling house of a surviving spouse 
of a service member who died in the line of duty be acquired within two years of the service 
member’s death to qualify for a real property tax exemption. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues decrease beginning in FY 2027 
depending on the number of surviving spouses that meet the updated eligibility 
requirements. Any ABF revenue decrease may require either (1) an increase in the State 
property tax rate or (2) a general fund appropriation to cover debt service on the State’s 
general obligation (GO) bonds. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease beginning in FY 2027 depending on 
the number of surviving spouses that meet the updated eligibility requirements. Local 
expenditures are not directly affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The real property owned by disabled veterans, as their legal residence, is 
exempt from taxation if specified requirements are met. A disabled veteran is an individual 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 842/ Page 2 
who is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active 
service in any branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. To qualify for the tax exemption, the 
disabled veteran must have a 100% service-connected disability rating. Real property 
owned by the surviving spouse of a disabled veteran and the surviving spouse of an 
individual who died in the line of duty while in active military, naval, or air service of the 
United States is exempt from taxation. In addition, a home owned by the surviving spouse 
of a veteran of the U.S. Armed Forces who receives Dependency and Indemnity 
Compensation from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is eligible for a property 
tax exemption under specified circumstances. 
 
A disabled veteran or a surviving spouse of a disabled veteran must apply for a property 
tax exemption by providing to the Supervisor of Assessments (1) a copy of the disabled 
veteran’s discharge certificate from active military, naval, or air service and (2) on the form 
provided by the department, a certification of the disabled veteran’s disability from the VA 
or a rating decision of the disabled veteran’s disability from the VA that includes the 
effective date of the rating decision. The disabled veteran’s certificate of disability may not 
be inspected by individuals other than (1) the disabled veteran or (2) appropriate employees 
of the State, a county, or a municipality. 
 
Chapters 195 and 196 of 2022 authorize an individual to submit an application to the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) for a specified property tax exemption 
for disabled veterans and surviving spouses for a specific dwelling house the individual 
intends to purchase before purchasing the dwelling house. Following receipt of the 
application, SDAT must process the application and send the applicant a letter stating 
(1) that the application is preliminarily approved or preliminarily denied and (2) if the 
application is preliminarily approved, the amount of the tax exemption for the dwelling the 
individual intends to purchase. An individual who is issued a letter preliminarily approving 
the exemption must receive the exemption for the dwelling referenced in the letter after 
becoming the owner of the dwelling without having to file another application. 
 
The dwelling house of a surviving spouse is exempt from property tax if:  (1) the dwelling 
house was owned by the service member at the time of the service member’s death; (2) the 
dwelling house was acquired by the surviving spouse within two years of the service 
member’s death, if the service member or the surviving spouse was domiciled in the State 
as of the date of the service member’s death; or (3) the dwelling house was acquired after 
the surviving spouse qualified for exemption for a former dwelling house.  
 
Fiscal Impact of Current Exemption 
 
For fiscal 2026, 32,299 property owners are receiving a property tax exemption for being 
a disabled veteran (30,697), a surviving spouse (1,556), or a disabled active-duty service 
member (46), and the assessment for these properties is approximately $15.3 billion. The 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 842/ Page 3 
average exemption is $400,315, and the associated State revenue loss from these 
exemptions totaled approximately $17.2 million, based on a $0.112 State property tax rate. 
All State property tax revenues are credited to a special fund, the ABF, dedicated 
exclusively to paying the debt service on State GO bonds. Local governments generally 
have the authority to set their own property tax rates. Based on the average combined 
county-municipal property tax rate, the projected local revenue loss from the current 
exemption could total approximately $190 million. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues will decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 as a result of 
the expanded eligibility for the property tax exemption for surviving spouses. The amount 
of the revenue decrease depends on the number of eligible surviving spouses who meet the 
updated eligibility requirements and the assessed value of each residential property. 
 
Impact on Debt Service Payments 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s GO bonds are paid from the ABF. Revenue sources 
for the fund include State property taxes, premium from bond sales, and repayments from 
certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General funds may be 
appropriated directly to the ABF to make up any differences between the debt service 
payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. The fiscal 2027 
budget assumes $1.3 billion in State property tax revenues to the ABF. In addition, 
$177.7 million in general funds and $0.8 million in federal funds are budgeted to the ABF, 
since the State property tax rate is not set high enough to cover the full cost of the debt 
service payments on the State’s GO bonds. 
 
To offset the reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could 
increase in an amount equal to the decrease in the ABF revenues, or the State property tax 
rate would have to be increased to meet debt service payments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2027. The 
impact on local revenues may vary depending on the actual number of surviving spouses 
who qualify for the property tax exemption, where each recipient resides, and the assessed 
value of each property. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 842/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4