START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 805 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 805 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Building Homes Act 
 
 
This bill authorizes county and municipal governments to grant a property tax credit for a 
dwelling if the dwelling is subject to:  (1) a mortgage or deed of trust provided by a 
nonprofit entity; and (2) a covenant or legally binding agreement with a duration of at least 
20 years that enforces income and equity or appreciation restrictions and ensures affordable 
pricing of the dwelling, including on resale. The amount of the property tax credit is equal 
to an amount up to the difference between the tax imposed on:  (1) the full assessed value 
of the dwelling; and (2) the portion of the value of the dwelling that the homeowner is 
responsible for paying on the homeowner’s first mortgage or deed of trust. Local 
governments may provide for:  (1) the duration of the tax credit; (2) additional eligibility 
criteria for the tax credit; (3) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform 
processing of requests for the tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out 
the tax credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning 
after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent the property tax credit is granted. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Tax credits that may be authorized by local governments, against local 
property taxes only, are specified by law for various types of property. Currently, there are 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 805/ Page 2 
73 optional property tax credits authorized by the General Assembly that are made 
available on a statewide basis. These credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the 
Tax – Property Article and are listed in Appendix 1 of the Guide to Local Government 
Taxing Authority. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 
to the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue decrease depends 
on the number of dwellings that are purchased and financed in each county in the manner 
prescribed by the bill and the selling price of these dwellings, neither of which can be 
reliably estimated. 
 
The bill will enable local governments to provide a one-time property tax credit to 
nonprofit mortgage lien holders reflecting the value of the price of a recently sold property 
charged to the homeowner through an income, equity, and appreciation restricted 
agreement, rather than the price recorded on the deed with the local government. As a 
result, the tax credit would allow organizations such as Habitat for Humanity to recoup a 
portion of their up-front costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2