START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 865 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 865 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Remittance Advice - Interest on Late-Paid Claims 
 
 
This bill requires an insurer, a nonprofit health service plan, or a health maintenance 
organization that owes interest on an unpaid clean claim to provide remittance advice to 
the person that filed the claim that separately identifies and itemizes the interest. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland regulations (COMAR 31.10.11.02) define “clean claim” to mean 
a claim for reimbursement submitted to a third-party payor by a health care practitioner, 
pharmacy or pharmacist, hospital, or person entitled to reimbursement that contains 
specified information, such as essential data elements and any related attachments, which 
may vary by provider type. 
 
A carrier that does not pay clean claims must pay interest on the amount of the claim that 
remains unpaid 30 days after the claim is received. Interest must be paid at a monthly rate 
of (1) 1.5% from the thirty-first through sixtieth day; (2) 2.0% from the sixty-first through 
one hundred-twentieth day; and (3) 2.5% after the one hundred-twentieth day.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 865/ Page 2 
A carrier in violation of these requirements is subject to a fine of up to $500 per violation 
and additional penalties for frequent violations that indicate a general business practice. 
Interest must be included in any late reimbursement to the provider. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2