START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 889 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 889 
(Wicomico County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Wicomico County - Property Tax Credit - Salisbury Neighborhood Housing 
Services, Inc. 
 
   
This bill authorizes Wicomico County and municipalities in the county to grant, by law, a 
property tax credit for real property that is:  (1) owned by Salisbury Neighborhood Housing  
Services, Inc., with the intention of relinquishing ownership in the near future; (2) used for 
the purposes of development, rehabilitation, and transfer to a private owner; and (3) not 
occupied by administrative or warehouse buildings owned by Salisbury Neighborhood 
Housing Services, Inc. The county and municipal governments may provide, by law,  
for:  (1) the amount, terms, scope, and duration of the tax credit; and (2) any other provision 
necessary to carry out the tax credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.     
  
Local Effect:  Wicomico County and municipal property tax revenues decrease by a 
minimal amount beginning in FY 2027 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. 
Expenditures are not directly affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If Wicomico County or a municipality grants a property tax credit, 
Salisbury Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc. must submit an annual written report to 
the county or municipality with the following information:  (1) all real property holdings 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 889/ Page 2 
of Salisbury Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc., in the jurisdiction granting the tax 
credit; and (2) all transactions involving real property holdings of Salisbury Neighborhood 
Housing Services, Inc., in the jurisdiction granting the tax credit. 
 
Current Law:  Tax credit programs mandated by law may be applicable only to specific 
counties or municipalities. These credits can be found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the  
Tax – Property Article. In addition to statewide optional tax credits, some optional credits 
are applicable only to a specified county or municipality within a specified county. These 
county specific optional credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Tax – Property Article. 
Exhibit 1 shows the optional property tax credits in Wicomico County, currently there are 
no mandatory property tax credits for county or municipal purposes.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Wicomico County Property Tax Credits 
 
9-324 
Optional Tax Credits 
(a) 
East Side Men's Club 
(b) 
Agricultural land/easements in an agricultural 
preservation district 
(c)  
Salisbury Area Chamber of Commerce 
 
 
Salisbury Neighborhood Housing Services 
 
Salisbury Neighborhood Housing Services is a private non-profit organization dedicated 
to expanding affordable homeownership and strengthening neighborhoods in Salisbury and 
Wicomico County. The organization offers a variety of services including homebuyer 
education, credit and budget counseling, foreclosure counseling, rental counseling, loan 
products, property development, and grant funding. In a typical year, the organization is 
able to purchase one to three single family homes for rehabilitation and resale. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Wicomico County and municipal property tax revenues decrease by 
a minimal amount beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. 
The amount of the revenue decrease will vary from year to year depending on the number 
of properties owned by Salisbury Neighborhood Housing Services and the amount of the 
property tax credit granted. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 889/ Page 3 
As a point of reference, Salisbury Neighborhood Housing Services currently owns 
14 parcels in Salisbury, including nine row houses on one block of Fitzwater Street. The 
total amount of taxes paid for all 14 parcels was $3,611 for fiscal 2026. 
 
Property Tax Collections in Wicomico County 
 
The City of Salisbury is projected to collect $27.4 million in real property taxes in 
fiscal 2026. Wicomico County Government is projected to collect $79.1 million in property 
tax revenues in fiscal 2026, as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of 
the report is available on the Department of Legislative Services website.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 847 (Senators Carozza and Mautz) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Wicomico County; City of Salisbury; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
me/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3