START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 844 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 844 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicle Registration - Fee Exemption - Unemployable Disabled Veterans 
 
 
This bill establishes that a vehicle owned by (or leased to) and personally used by a veteran 
who is unemployable due to a service-connected disability is exempt from vehicle 
registration fees. Only one vehicle can be exempted from registration fees using this 
authorization.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) and special fund revenues decrease 
beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Expenditures are likely not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Unless the number of exemptions increases significantly, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The contribution of the U.S. Armed Forces is recognized through several 
provisions within the Maryland Vehicle Law. Specifically, Maryland has exemptions from 
registration fees for veterans with certain disabilities and vehicles owned by national 
veterans’ organizations as well as special registration plates for honorably discharged 
veterans; recipients of individually earned, combat-related U.S. Armed Forces medals; and 
recipients of a U.S. Department of Defense Gold Star indicating status as a surviving 
spouse, parent, or next of kin of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who lost his or her 
life in combat. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 844/ Page 2 
Most classes of vehicle may register for one or two years. Registration fees vary based on 
a vehicle’s characteristics (e.g., class and weight, whether the vehicle is an electric drive 
vehicle, etc.). Registration fees also include a yearly $40.00 surcharge, primarily for the 
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF), as much as $24.50. 
A portion of that surcharge ($6.50) is reserved for the Maryland Trauma Physician Services 
Fund (MTPSF), and at least $9.00 from each surcharge must be allocated to the  
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Motor Vehicle Administration estimates approximately  
4,000 veterans in the State meet the criteria of unemployable due to a service-related 
disability. The number who may seek the fee exemption authorized by the bill is unknown, 
as some may already qualify for a fee exemption under other provisions of State law.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, if 2,000 vehicles become exempt from registration fees 
under the bill, TTF revenues decrease by approximately $195,000 annually ($146,250 in 
fiscal 2027), based on an annual registration fee of $97.50 (i.e., the average annual 
registration fee in fiscal 2026 for Class A and Class M vehicles). In this scenario, other 
special fund revenues (MEMSOF, MTPSF, and Shock Trauma) decrease by a combined 
$80,000 annually ($60,000 in fiscal 2027). In addition, as a portion of registration fee 
revenues is shared with local governments as highway user revenue capital grants, 
TTF expenditures for that purpose decrease minimally.  
 
Local Revenues:  As a portion of registration fee revenues is shared with local 
governments as highway user revenue capital grants, they are also affected. However, this 
analysis assumes the impact is likely minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 179 and HB 248 of 2025 and HB 716 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans 
and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2