START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 849 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 849 
(Delegate Mireku-North, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
 
 
Child Care Scholarship Program - Freeze in Enrollment - Exceptions 
 
 
This bill prohibits a freeze in enrollment in the Child Care Scholarship (CCS) Program 
from applying to (1) a family or an individual who is enrolled in the Temporary Cash 
Assistance (TCA) Program; (2) a family or an individual who is enrolled in the federal 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program; (3) a child who is enrolled in the 
federal Social Security Income (SSI) Program (or a sibling); (4) an individual who has 
become unemployed within the past 30 days and would have qualified for the program 
beforehand; (5) an individual who is employed by the federal, State, or local governments 
in the State who is involuntarily furloughed from work without pay because of a 
government shutdown, as specified, and would have qualified for the program beforehand; 
or (6) an individual who is employed by a child care center, a family child care home, or a 
large family child care home. These individuals must otherwise meet the criteria for 
enrollment in the CCS Program (described below). The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Significant increase in general fund expenditures (likely by tens of millions 
of dollars annually) for the CCS Program beginning in FY 2027 due to the bill’s enrollment 
freeze exceptions, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 849/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The CCS Program provides financial assistance with child care costs to 
low-income families that meet applicable State or federal requirements. The program is 
funded through a combination of State funds and the federal Child Care and Development 
Block Grant. All participating parents or guardians must meet a variety of technical 
requirements and must be working or enrolled in school, a training program, or a 
work-related activity. 
 
To meet income requirements, an individual must meet income guidelines that vary based 
on family size or be a recipient of TCA or SSI. Beginning July 1, 2023, the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) implemented a process for granting presumptive 
eligibility to individuals who attest to meeting the eligibility requirements for a scholarship, 
as required by Chapters 525 and 526 of 2022. Effective May 2022, MSDE also increased 
the income eligibility threshold to 75% of the State median income using federal assistance 
distributed to states during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
For each child needing care, eligible families receive a voucher with the scholarship rate, 
which is used to purchase child care directly from the provider of their choice. Families 
also receive access to information and referral services to assist them in finding appropriate 
child care. Scholarship rates are determined by the geographic region, type of provider, 
and age of the child. A family that does not receive TCA or SSI may be required to 
contribute a copayment, and any remaining balance between the actual rate charged by the 
provider and the voucher amount. In accordance with Chapters 525 and 526, MSDE must 
award scholarships in an amount sufficient to ensure that an individual will not be required 
to pay a copay if they participate in certain programs, such as the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program or the federal Housing Choice Voucher Program. Effective May 2022, 
MSDE also reduced copays for all other participating families to a range of 
$1 to $3 per week. 
 
MSDE determines provider reimbursement rates based on market rate surveys of the 
geographic regions conducted every two years. 
 
Under current law, MSDE is generally prohibited from making certain alterations to the 
CCS program. For example, it is prohibited from making the following alterations to the 
CCS Program in effect as of January 1, 2023:  (1) reducing the reimbursement rates; 
(2) reducing the income eligibility requirements; or (3) implementing a freeze in program 
enrollment. However, MSDE may do so if (1) it submits a notification to specified 
committees of the General Assembly on the intended program alterations, including the 
reason for, and expected duration of, the proposed actions and (2) the program alterations 
identified in the notification are not implemented until the completion of the regular 
legislative session immediately following the submission of the notification. If the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 849/ Page 3 
Board of Public Works approves budget reductions for the program pursuant to its current 
statutory authority for a certain fiscal year, MSDE may reduce the reimbursement rates, 
reduce the income eligibility requirements, or implement a freeze in enrollment at any time 
during the fiscal year. MSDE is also prohibited from increasing the copayment levels of 
the program in effect as of January 1, 2024. 
 
State Expenditures:  CCS Program expenditures increase significantly beginning in 
fiscal 2027, as the bill’s provisions likely result in a significant influx of families 
participating in the program that may otherwise not be able to receive services under the 
enrollment freeze discussed below. As a result, general funds are assumed to be needed to 
cover the additional costs. 
 
Due to prior year budget shortfalls for the CCS Program, MSDE implemented an 
enrollment freeze to slow spending growth; a waitlist for program services was 
implemented beginning May 1, 2025. Under the bill, the CCS Program must serve 
additional families who, under current law, would be placed on the waitlist. Certain 
exemptions related to the enrollment freeze, however, are not expected to have a 
fiscal impact. Specifically, families receiving TCA or SSI are already exempt from the 
waitlist. Moreover, families can also already bypass the waitlist if a sibling is enrolled in 
the program. Therefore, there is no material impact from codifying these exemptions. 
 
While it is not possible to assess how many families may qualify to bypass the waitlist 
under the bill, the number is likely significant. For example, MSDE advises that, in 2022, 
there were more than 40,000 early child care and education workers in the State. In 2024, 
there were more than 500,000 public sector workers across federal, State, and local 
government, who could potentially be impacted by a lapse in government funding. 
Several thousand more individuals may be eligible under the bill’s exemption for recently 
unemployed workers. 
 
Taking into account the potentially significant number of applicants who may be able to 
bypass the waitlist, MSDE advises that general fund expenditures may increase by as much 
as $68 million on an annual basis under one scenario, which assumes an additional 
5,000 scholarships are awarded on a monthly basis. MSDE notes that this large expansion 
in the number of families with children exempt from the waitlist likely means that the 
waitlist is maintained indefinitely. In order to lower the overall number of participants to 
sustainable levels, MSDE would need to rely on attrition from existing families, who may 
unenroll for various reasons over time (e.g., due to the child aging out, moving out of state, 
or a change in family income or circumstances). MSDE advises, however, that the average 
monthly attrition rate since the freeze went into effect is less than 2.0%. 
 
In addition, MSDE expects increased costs associated with higher caseloads, staffing and 
operational needs, and system modifications. Specifically, the agency’s CCS 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 849/ Page 4 
Administrative Tracking System and the CCS provider and family portals must be 
modified to comply with the bill’s changes. These costs are expected to total approximately 
$125,000 in fiscal 2027 only. 
 
MSDE also anticipates the need for additional staff to handle a significant increase in the 
number of families participating in the CCS Program. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one program manager to assist with higher workloads under the bill. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$90,595 
Operating Costs 
    9,141 
FY 2027 State Expenditures – Staff 
$99,736 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
MSDE notes that the above position may not be sufficient should enrollment remain at a 
consistently elevated level; over the long‐term, additional positions may be needed. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Private child care providers that qualify as small businesses and 
accept child care scholarships may benefit from the bill’s waitlist exemptions, which may 
result in an overall increase in the number of children receiving a scholarship. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4