START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 821 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 821 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Judiciary Department - Judicial Removal - Disqualification From Future 
Judicial Office 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, disqualifies a justice or judge removed or retired on recommendation of 
the Commission on Judicial Disabilities from future judicial office.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Under Article IV, § 4B of the Maryland Constitution, the 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities has the power to (1) investigate complaints against 
any justice or judge of the Supreme Court of Maryland, any intermediate courts of appeal, 
the circuit courts, the District Court of Maryland, or the orphans’ court; (2) conduct 
hearings regarding complaints, administer oaths, issue process to compel witnesses and the 
production of evidence, and require persons to testify and produce evidence by granting 
them immunity from prosecution or from penalty or forfeiture; (3) issue a reprimand; and 
(4) recommend to the Supreme Court of Maryland the removal, censure, or other 
appropriate disciplining of a justice or judge, or retirement. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 821/ Page 2 
Upon any recommendation of the Commission on Judicial Disabilities, the Supreme Court 
of Maryland, after a hearing, may:  
 
 
upon a finding of misconduct while in office, or of persistent failure to perform the 
duties of the office, or of conduct prejudicial to the property administration of 
justice, remove the justice or judge from office or censure or otherwise discipline 
the justice or judge; or 
 
upon a finding of disability which is or is likely to become permanent and which 
seriously interferes with the performance of the justice’s or judge’s duties, retire 
the justice or judge from office. 
 
A justice or judge who is removed, and the justice’s or judge’s surviving spouse, must have 
the rights and privileges accruing from the justice’s or judge’s judicial service only to the 
extent prescribed by the order of removal. A justice or judge who is retired must have the 
rights and privileges prescribed by law for other retired justice or judges. 
 
These provisions are an alternative to, and cumulative with, the methods of retirement and 
removal specified in §§ 3 and 4 of Article IV, and § 26 of Article III, of the 
Maryland Constitution. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the bill removes any ambiguity regarding the eligibility for 
future judicial office if a justice or judge is removed or retired under Article IV, § 4B. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 541 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2