START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 896 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 896 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Military Department - National Guard State Active Duty Mobilization Fund 
 
   
This departmental bill establishes the National Guard State Active Duty Mobilization Fund 
as a special, nonlapsing fund administered by the Office of the Adjutant General within the 
Military Department. The purpose of the fund is to pay for personnel and equipment for 
State active-duty mobilization of the National Guard, as ordered by the Governor. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures that would occur anyway are accelerated to 
capitalize the fund, likely with at least $1.0 million in FY 2027; special fund revenues 
increase correspondingly. Special fund expenditures increase beginning in FY 2027 
depending on the occurrence of State active duty mobilization of the National Guard. 
Similarly, general fund expenditures are accelerated as needed for ongoing fund 
replenishments, with special fund revenues and expenditures increasing correspondingly.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Military Department has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund 
and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Any 
investment earnings of the fund must be credited to the general fund.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 896/ Page 2 
The fund may be used only for the expenses of and to support the operations of the 
National Guard in State active-duty status. Money expended from the fund for State  
active-duty mobilization of the National Guard is supplemental to and is not intended to 
take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for State active-duty 
mobilization of the National Guard. Money expended from the fund must be replenished 
in a timely manner to maintain the operational effectiveness of future State active-duty 
mobilization of the National Guard. 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Active Duty 
 
The Public Safety Article defines “State active duty” to mean military duty performed in 
service of the State by a unit or member of the militia under orders issued by the Governor 
under the Maryland Constitution or as specified under the Public Safety Article.  
 
The Governor may order the militia (specifically, the Maryland Defense Force and the 
National Guard) into State active duty (1) in times or on reasonable apprehension of 
imminent public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, insurrection, invasion, tumult, or 
breach of peace; (2) when martial law is declared; (3) to enforce the laws; or (4) to carry 
on any function of the militia of the State. 
 
To enforce the laws, a member of the militia in State active duty has all the authority of a 
peace or law enforcement officer. The authority of the member extends throughout the 
State during the State active duty. Whenever the militia is in State active duty, the ranking 
officer of the militia ordered into State active duty or that officer’s subordinates on State 
active duty must (1) cooperate with local law enforcement authorities or (2) if the 
exigencies of the case require, and subject only to order from the Governor, direct and 
control local law enforcement authorities and the Department of State Police and assume 
all the powers vested in these subordinated law enforcement authorities.  
 
The Military Department and Adjutant General 
 
The Military Department provides overall direction and maintenance of the Maryland 
National Guard, which is comprised of the Maryland Army National Guard and the 
Maryland Air National Guard. The Maryland National Guard may be called up by the 
Governor during State emergencies or may be activated by the U.S. Department of 
Defense. 
 
The Adjutant General is the head of the Military Department. Among other things, the 
Adjutant General must be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the 
Senate and is subordinate only to the Governor in matters relating to the Military 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 896/ Page 3 
Department. The Adjutant General must have a commissioned grade not above that of 
Lieutenant General and must be a full-time employee of the Military Department in 
State active-duty status.  
 
Background/State Fiscal Effect:  The Military Department advises that its current 
operating budget was never designed to absorb significant, unplanned expenditures, which 
creates dangerous funding gaps compromising its operational effectiveness. Mobilization 
of the National Guard for State active duty often depletes available funding and necessitates 
additional funding facilitated through reimbursements via deficiency appropriations or 
budget amendments. For example, the Maryland National Guard deployed for eight days 
in January 2026 to respond to snowstorm-related local emergencies, with an estimated cost 
of approximately $443,000. The availability of a special fund will allow the department to 
access funding more quickly and process budget amendments more readily. According to 
the Military Department, an initial fund capitalization of $1.0 million will allow the 
department to ensure that the Maryland National Guard can respond rapidly, equitably, and 
effectively to emergencies. 
 
While the bill specifies that money expended from the fund is supplemental to and not 
intended to replace funding that would otherwise be appropriated for State active duty 
mobilization, based on information provided by the Military Department and current 
challenges faced by the department, this estimate assumes that the intended purpose of the 
new special fund is to establish an accelerated and more efficient funding mechanism for 
expenditures the department would incur absent the bill for State active duty mobilization 
of the National Guard.  
 
The Military Department can administer the fund with existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Military Department; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
me/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 896/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Military Department - National Guard State Active Duty 
Mobilization Fund  
BILL NUMBER: HB 896 
PREPARED BY: Dr. Tony Campbell 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The proposed bill will have NO economic impact on Maryland Small Businesses 
 

END OF PAGE 4