START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 882 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 882 
(Delegates Kaufman and Taveras) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Consumer Health Information - Termination Date and Mandatory Funding for 
the State's Consumer Health Information Hub - Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the June 30, 2026 termination date for the State’s Consumer Health 
Information Hub and the $350,000 mandated appropriation to the hub. Instead, the hub 
must operate to the extent funding is available. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 679 of 2022 designated the University of Maryland  
Herschel S. Horowitz Center for Health Literacy as the State’s Consumer Health 
Information Hub. The purpose of the hub is to promote and ensure public access to 
accurate, consistent, evidence-based, plain-language information in preferred languages to 
inform decisions about health, safety, and social services benefits. For fiscal 2024  
through 2026, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of 
$350,000 to the hub. Chapter 679 terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
The hub must (1) protect and promote public health by engaging with State and local 
government agencies and specified entities; (2) establish and promote health literacy 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 882/ Page 2 
criteria, certifications, and best practices; (3) identify health literacy challenges and provide 
recommendations on how to address the challenges; (4) monitor and report on the use of 
health literacy and plain-language initiatives and support public reporting of vital public 
health information; and (5) support the identification and ongoing training of health literacy 
officers in State and local agencies. 
 
The hub must also (1) facilitate consistent State and local government use of health literacy 
and plain-language criteria; (2) support workforce development; (3) assist programs and 
organizations to promote community health literacy; and (4) develop and publish criteria 
for evaluating whether media or a media campaign follows best practices for the promotion 
of health literacy. The hub may collaborate with entities that directly educate the public, 
including education institutions, libraries, and consumer referral services.  
 
MDH and the hub must encourage persons that promote public health, health education, or 
health awareness to submit media for evaluation by the hub. If a person submits its media 
or media campaign to the hub for review, the hub must use specified criteria to evaluate 
whether the media or media campaign follows best practices for the promotion of health 
literacy.  
 
The hub submitted a 2024 report and a 2025 report to the General Assembly on the status 
of statewide health literacy efforts. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill removes the termination date for the hub and the hub’s 
$350,000 mandated appropriation. As the hub is scheduled to terminate at the end of 
fiscal 2026, the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced does not include funding for the hub. The 
bill specifies that the hub must continue its functions to the extent funding is available. 
 
As required by Chapter 679, the fiscal 2024 through 2026 budget bills included $350,000 
for the Herschel S. Horowitz Center for Health Literacy to operate the hub. The University 
System of Maryland (USM) advises that funding for the hub supported free training for 
public health and health care professionals, reviews of public-facing materials, networking 
and information-sharing events, and creation of policies and procedures to better serve the 
public with plain language and translated information. USM further advises that the 
Herschel S. Horowitz Center for Health Literacy will continue to support hub operations, 
but further progress and growth will be difficult absent the mandated appropriation. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that, although the bill requires the hub to 
continue to operate to the extent funding is available, there is no material fiscal impact 
associated with the bill.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Herschel S. Horowitz Center for Health Literacy (part of the 
University of Maryland School of Public Health) advances research in health 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 882/ Page 3 
communication and health literacy and translates that research into education and 
community action that improves health for all.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; University 
System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3