START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 850 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 850 
(Delegates Bhandari and A. Johnson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Home Builders - Open House - Sales Representative Disclosure Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a home builder holding a property open to the public to display, in a 
conspicuous manner, a notice to prospective buyers that states:  “The sales representative 
works for the home builder, which means that he or she may assist the buyer in purchasing 
the property, buy his or her duty of loyalty is only to the home builder. As a buyer of a new 
home, you have the right to obtain your own independent representation to navigate the 
new home purchasing process.” The required disclosure must (1) use a clear, simple font; 
(2) have letters a minimum of one-half inch in height; and (3) be unobstructed from view.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly impact State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly impact local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Home builder” means a person that undertakes to erect or otherwise 
construct a new home. A person may not act as a home builder in the State unless the 
person is registered as a home builder with the Home Builder Registration Unit in the 
Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the Attorney General. The Home Builder 
Registration Unit is required to register and issue registration numbers to an applicant who 
meets the requirements and pays a nonrefundable two-year registration fee of $800. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 850/ Page 2 
Each registrant must display its home builder registration number conspicuously on all 
properties where the registrant is performing work that requires registration. If a registrant 
is building multiple homes in one project area or subdivision, the registrant may post its 
home builder registration number in one central conspicuous location within that area. 
 
A home builder must provide each prospective home buyer with a disclosure that states:  
“The sales representative works for the home builder, which means that he or she may 
assist the buyer in purchasing the property, but his or her duty of loyalty is only to the home 
builder.” This disclosure must be in at least 12-point bold type and included with (1) any 
written materials made available to consumers at the property and (2) the first agreement 
signed by the consumer.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2