START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 845 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 845 
(Wicomico County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Community College Promise Scholarship Eligibility - Delmar 
High School Graduates 
 
 
This bill extends eligibility for the Maryland Community College Promise (MCCP) 
Scholarship to residents of Delmar, Maryland who graduate from Delmar High School in 
Delaware. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility does not require additional spending; however, without 
additional spending, more individuals may be added to the waiting list. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community colleges can alter eligibility criteria on applications as 
needed using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 554 of 2018 created a scholarship program in Maryland to provide 
tuition assistance to students who attend a community college in the State and who meet 
specified eligibility criteria, including an income limitation. The MCCP Scholarship is a 
last-dollar award that is applied after State or federal non-loan aid to eligible recipients has 
been applied; an award cannot exceed $5,000 annually or actual tuition, whichever is less. 
Chapter 464 of 2019 specified that, if a local community college offers a Promise 
Scholarship, an award from the statewide program must be applied before the award of the 
local scholarship. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 845/ Page 2 
To be eligible for the program, a student must: 
 
 
be eligible for in-state tuition, have graduated high school or completed a GED in 
the State, and enroll at a community college, in an eligible program; 
 
with certain exemptions, have earned at least a 2.3 high school GPA at the end of 
the first semester or the end of the senior year unless the applicant graduated from 
high school five or more years before the date of application, for an initial award, 
or have earned at least a 2.5 GPA while enrolled at a community college in the State; 
and 
 
have a gross adjusted income of $100,000 or less if the applicant is single or resides 
in a single-parent household or of $150,000 or less if married or resides in a 
two-parent household. 
 
An applicant also has to attend the applicant’s local community college, except under 
specified circumstances. In addition, an applicant must either enroll as a candidate for a 
vocational certificate, a certificate, or an associate degree or participate in a registered 
apprenticeship at a community college in the State. Further, an applicant must enroll in at 
least six credits per semester or a sequence of credit or noncredit courses that leads to 
licensure or certificate. 
 
Under Chapters 377 and 378 of 2025, each recipient of a MCCP Scholarship may hold the 
award until the earlier of (1) three years after first enrolling as a candidate for a noncredit 
vocational certificate, in a sequence of credit or noncredit courses leading to licensure or 
certification, in credit or noncredit courses that are required for participation in a registered 
apprenticeship program, as a candidate for a certificate, or as a full-time candidate for an 
associate’s degree at a community college in the State; (2) six years after fist enrolling as 
a part-time candidate for an associate’s degree at a community college in the State; or 
(3) the date that the individual is awarded an associate’s degree. 
 
The Governor must appropriate at least $13.5 million annually for the program. Under 
Chapter 634 of 2023, each community college in the State, rather than the Maryland Higher 
Education Commission (MHEC) Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA), is 
responsible for the selection and distribution of awards. Nevertheless, annually, OSFA 
must allocate MCCP Scholarship funding to each community college in the State based on 
the proportion of Pell Grant-eligible students at each community college. If a community 
college does not award all funding allocated, the community college must distribute the 
remaining funding to other community colleges to make MCCP Scholarship awards in the 
award year. 
 
Initial awards are made based on greatest demonstrated need. Eligible applicants who do 
not receive an award are placed on a waiting list. For non-initial awards, priority must be 
given to prior-year recipients who remain eligible for the program as well as all eligible 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 845/ Page 3 
students who are enrolled in either at least 12 credits per semester or a sequence of credit 
or noncredit courses that lead to licensure or certification. Then, if any funds remain to be 
allocated, students enrolled in at least 6 credits per semester may be awarded scholarships. 
A recipient can receive the award for a total of three years (or up to six years for a part-time 
student). To maintain the award, the recipient must complete 6 credits per semester or make 
satisfactory progress toward a vocational certificate and earn a cumulative GPA of at least 
2.5. The recipient must meet the designated income requirements for the program, remain 
eligible for in-state tuition, apply annually, and continue to make satisfactory academic 
progress as determined by the community college. 
 
MHEC must contact each school counselor at each public high school in the State with 
information on the MCCP Scholarship, including eligibility, availability, and deadlines for 
the scholarship. In addition, MHEC and each community college must post this 
information in a readily accessible location on their respective websites. Finally, 
MHEC must annually report to the General Assembly on specified aspects of its 
implementation of the MCCP Scholarship, including its outreach activities. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHEC advises that Maryland residents who graduate from Delmar 
High School are ineligible for a MCCP scholarship under current law. Although these 
students are eligible for in-State tuition, they did not graduate a high school in the State 
because Delmar High School is located in Delmar, Delaware. Students who live in 
Delmar, Maryland have historically been permitted to attend Delmar High School. 
 
Expanding eligibility for the MCCP scholarship does not alter the overall level of 
State funding for the program, which is set in the State operating budget subject to the 
requirement that the Governor must appropriate at least $13.5 million annually. Prior to 
fiscal 2026, the program was mandated to receive $15 million annually, however the 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 (Chapter 604) reduced the 
amount that the Governor must annually provide from $15.0 million to $13.5 million 
beginning in fiscal 2026. The fiscal 2026 budget included $13.5 million for the program. 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a $2.0 million reduction to the fiscal 2026 
amount to align the appropriation with actual spending levels for the scholarship. 
 
The BRFA of 2026 includes language that would again reduce the mandated appropriation 
by $1.0 million to $12.5 million. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a 
$13.5 million appropriation to the program and a $1.0 million reduction to the fiscal 2027 
amount contingent on the passage of legislation reducing the mandate (the BRFA of 2026). 
 
In fiscal 2025, the MCCP awarded $9.3 million in scholarships to 3,494 recipients for an 
average award amount of $2,648. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 845/ Page 4 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not alter the funding amount or distribution processes 
for MCCP scholarships. Each community college (including State-funded Baltimore City 
Community College) continues to receive a portion of the MCCP allocation in the 
State budget based on a calculation of each college’s Pell Grant-eligible population. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 728 (Senators Carozza and Mautz) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Worcester County; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4