START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 811 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 811 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Health 
 
 
Aging-in-Place Programs - Grants - Multigenerational Third Places (The Village 
Multigenerational Third Places Act) 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) to make grants to 
nonprofit organizations and area agencies on aging (AAAs) to support social connection 
for individuals in aging-in-place programs through events or gathers at “multigenerational 
third places.” The bill codifies the authorization for any nonprofit organization or AAA to 
apply to MDOA for a State grant to be applied toward operational costs, including 
administrative costs or short-term or long-term leases or rental costs, for a senior village to 
provide access to multigenerational third places. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing funds may be used. 
To the extent it requires administrative changes, MDOA can handle them with existing 
resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments that operate AAAs as a unit of government may receive 
grants for the purposes identified under the bill. Local government expenditures increase 
correspondingly. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Multigenerational third place” means a community space other than a 
personal home or workplace that supports social connection, events, or gathering among 
individuals of different ages. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 811/ Page 2 
Current Law:  MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the delivery of services for, and 
advocates on behalf of, older adults at all levels of government. The department also 
administers programs and activities under the provisions of the federal Older Americans 
Act. Most of the direct services funded by MDOA are delivered through AAAs. In 
Maryland, each of the 23 counties and Baltimore City designate an AAA. The agency may 
be a unit of local government or a private, nonprofit corporation. AAAs provide a variety 
of adult services, incorporating assisted living, protective services, and temporary 
disability programs. 
 
“Senior village” means a local, member-driven, nonprofit organization that (1) supports 
community members who choose to age in place by fostering social connections through 
activities and events and coordinating volunteer help at a senior’s home using a  
neighbor-helping-neighbor model and (2) is exempt from taxation.  
 
MDOA may make grants to nonprofit organizations and AAAs to expand and establish 
aging-in-place programs for seniors. Any nonprofit organization or AAA may apply for a 
State grant to be applied toward the cost of expanding or establishing an aging-in-place 
program that provides to seniors:   
 
 
assistance with the cost of in-home personal care services for activities of daily 
living, including bathing, personal hygiene and grooming, dressing, toileting, 
functional mobility, food preparation, laundry, and house cleaning;  
 
psychological, economic, or functional assistance to enable successful health 
management, 
access 
to 
medical 
care, 
or 
compliance 
with 
treatment 
recommendations;  
 
awareness of and access to resources, services, and benefits;  
 
support services and care coordination;  
 
affordable transportation; 
 
assistance making in-home modifications or repairs to improve safety, mobility, and 
accessibility; or 
 
the opportunity to live in a senior village. 
 
A nonprofit organization or AAA must demonstrate an equal match for the funds requested. 
Funding for the grants is as provided by the Governor in the annual State budget.  
 
Additional Comments:  MDOA advises that the bill clarifies the existing authorization 
for senior village grantees to use grant funds to cover the administrative cost of specified 
rental costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 811/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 530 (Senator Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3