START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 972 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 972 
(Delegate Miller, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Fair and Agricultural Education Promise Fund - Establishment 
(Maryland Fair and Agricultural Education Promise Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Fair and Agricultural Education Promise Fund to 
advance agricultural fairs and education in the State. The bill requires that $1.45 million of 
proceeds from the State Lottery Fund be distributed to the new special fund beginning in 
fiscal 2027. The bill repeals requirements that specified amounts from the State horse 
racing special fund be used to promote State agricultural fairs and education. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund revenues decrease by $1.45 million, and 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase by the same amount annually beginning 
in FY 2027. This bill establishes a mandated distribution beginning in FY 2027. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
SF Revenue 
$1.45 
$1.45 
$1.45 
$1.45 
$1.45 
SF Expenditure 
$1.45 
$1.45 
$1.45 
$1.45 
$1.45 
Net Effect 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
($1.45) 
($1.45)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent that horse racing special fund revenues remain available for 
other purposes as a result of the bill, revenues could increase minimally for local 
jurisdictions that are eligible for impact aid. Expenditures are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 972/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes the Maryland Fair and Agricultural Education Promise 
Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund, administered by the Comptroller, to advance 
agricultural fairs and education in the State. The fund consists of (1) $1.45 million in  
State Lottery Fund proceeds, beginning in fiscal 2027; (2) money appropriated in the 
State budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and (4) any other money from any other 
source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
The bill requires the Comptroller to pay annual grants from the fund of (1) $825,000 to the 
Maryland Agricultural Fair Board to promote and enhance State and county agricultural 
fairs and exhibits; (2) $75,000 to the Maryland Agricultural Education Foundation to 
promote and enhance statewide agricultural education; (3) $550,000 to the  
Maryland State Fair and Agricultural Society to promote and enhance the State agricultural 
fair and maintain and develop youth agricultural programs, with substantial funding 
provided to organizations, including 4-H clubs and the Maryland FFA Association, for the 
provision of recognition and awards; and (4) $50,000 to the Maryland FFA Association for 
agricultural education and career development.  
 
The bill also repeals similar provisions of law that mandate the following grants from the 
horse racing special fund:  (1) $825,000 to the Maryland Agricultural Fair Board to 
promote State and county agricultural fairs and exhibits; (2) $75,000 to the 
Maryland Agricultural Education Foundation to promote and enhance statewide 
agricultural education; (3) $500,000 to the Maryland State Fair and Agricultural Society to 
promote and enhance the Maryland State Fair and maintain and develop youth agricultural 
programs, with substantial funding provided to organizations, including 4-H clubs and the 
Maryland FFA Association, for the provision of recognition and awards (if the 
Maryland State Fair remains at the Timonium Fair Grounds); and (4) $50,000 to 
Baltimore County (also if the Maryland State Fair remains at the Timonium Fair Grounds). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Horse Racing Special Fund 
 
Revenues from pari-mutuel taxes and license fees, as well as other horse racing revenues, 
are credited to a special fund. The Comptroller makes the following grant distributions 
from the horse racing special fund:   
 
 
$825,000 to the Maryland Agricultural Fair Board (for promotion of fairs and 
exhibits);  
 
$500,000 for the Maryland Million and $350,000 for the Sire Stakes Program;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 972/ Page 3 
 
for as long as the Maryland State Fair remains at the Timonium Fairgrounds, 
$500,000 to the Maryland State Fair and Agricultural Society, Inc. (for promotion 
and enhancement of the fair);  
 
$50,000 to Baltimore County (to replace former revenues); 
 
$100,000 to Prince George’s County (to replace former revenues from the 
admissions and amusement tax); 
 
$40,000 to the Great Frederick Fair to support exhibition harness races; 
 
$75,000 to the Maryland Agricultural Education Foundation; 
 
$20,000 to the Great Pocomoke Fair; 
 
up to $500,000 for the Maryland International Thoroughbred Race; and 
 
local impact aid. 
 
In recent years, revenues from the horse racing special fund have been insufficient to fulfill 
the expected local impact aid allocation to each jurisdiction and the other mandated uses, 
mainly due to a reduction in racing days. In any fiscal year that revenues to the special fund 
are not sufficient to fully fund local impact aid, the Comptroller must proportionately 
reduce the amount of grants required to be paid.  
 
State Lottery Fund 
 
State Lottery Fund revenues are first used to pay the expenses of administering and 
operating the lottery and then, with specified exceptions, the holder of each winning ticket 
or share. Additional revenues are allocated as specified in § 9-120 of the State Government 
Article so that, after various other higher priority and required distributions are made, any 
remaining State Lottery Fund revenues are distributed to the general fund.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State Lottery Fund revenues that would otherwise be distributed to 
the general fund are instead distributed to the new special fund. Accordingly, general fund 
revenues decrease by $1.45 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027, and special fund 
revenues to the new fund increase by the same amount beginning in fiscal 2027. 
Special fund 
expenditures 
from 
the 
new 
fund 
to 
provide 
grants 
to 
the 
Maryland Agricultural Fair Board, the Maryland Agricultural Education Foundation, and 
the Maryland State Fair and Agricultural Society increase by $1.45 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027. The funding currently provided to these organizations through 
the horse racing special fund is instead expended for other purposes.  
 
Exhibit 1 shows the funding provided to the affected organizations in fiscal 2025. 
Assuming a similar level of funding would otherwise be available to them in fiscal 2027, 
these organizations receive an additional $410,302 due to the assurance of full funding 
through the State Lottery Fund distribution. Also, because the bill repeals similar grants to 
these organizations from the horse racing special fund, the horse racing special fund has an 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 972/ Page 4 
estimated $410,302 available to use for other purposes, all of which continues to be 
expended. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Grants for State Agricultural Organizations 
 
Grant Recipient 
FY 2025 
Actual 
The Bill 
Difference 
Maryland Agricultural Fair Board 
$592,126 
$825,000 $232,874 
Maryland Agricultural Education Foundation and 
Maryland State Fair and  
Agricultural Society (combined) 
447,572 
625,000 
177,428 
Total 
$1,039,698 $1,450,000 $410,302 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
The required annual revenue distributions to various organizations in the bill total 
$1.5 million, which exceeds the total amount required to be distributed to the special fund 
from the State Lottery Fund each year by $50,000. For purposes of this analysis, it is 
assumed that funding is, therefore, not available for the $50,000 grant to the Maryland FFA 
Association for agricultural education and career development. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 650 and SB 563 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
me/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4