START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 904 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 904 
(Delegate Moon, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Law Enforcement - Protective Body Armor - Requirements and Reporting 
 
 
This bill (1) prohibits a law enforcement agency from assigning a law enforcement officer 
to duties other than administrative duties unless the officer is issued protective body armor; 
(2) establishes requirements for the issuance and replacement of protective body armor; 
and (3) establishes provisions relating to the failure of a law enforcement agency to replace 
protective body armor as required by the bill.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
increase by $55,300 in FY 2027; otherwise, the bill’s changes are not anticipated to 
materially affect State operations or finances during the five-year period covered by this 
fiscal and policy note, as discussed below. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
55,300 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($55,300) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect local government 
operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.    
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 904/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A law enforcement agency may issue only protective body armor to a law 
enforcement officer that (1) conforms to all current National Institute of Justice Ballistic 
Resistance of Body Armor standards and (2) has not reached the expiration or suggested 
replacement date indicated by the manufacturer of the protective body armor. A law 
enforcement agency must replace protective body armor before the expiration or suggested 
replacement date indicated by the manufacturer. 
 
If a law enforcement agency has not replaced a law enforcement officer’s protective body 
armor by the 31st day after the expiration or suggested replacement date indicated by the 
manufacturer, the law enforcement agency must promptly notify the Maryland Police 
Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC). MPTSC must then notify the Governor’s 
Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) regarding the failure. After receiving 
notification from MPTSC, GOCPP must withhold grant funds available to the law 
enforcement agency until the law enforcement agency provides proof that the agency has 
issued replacement protective body armor that meets the bill’s requirements. In addition, 
GOCPP may not disburse funds to a law enforcement agency if, in the immediately 
preceding fiscal year, the law enforcement agency (1) failed to notify MPTSC as required 
by the bill or (2) notified MPTSC on three or more occasions in accordance with the bill’s 
provisions. 
  
Current Law:  “Protective body armor” means a vest or similar article that is:   
 
 
designed to be worn on the body to protect against blunt force trauma associated 
with the impact of a firearm projectile; and 
 
manufactured of bullet resistant fabric that conforms to applicable, current National 
Institute of Justice standards and V-50 ballistic testing requirements. 
 
The Protective Body Armor Fund is a special fund administered by the Executive Director 
of GOCPP. The purposes of the fund are to:   
 
 
assist local law enforcement agencies to (1) acquire protective body armor for each 
police officer of the local law enforcement agency and (2) replace protective body 
armor at least every 10 years, or sooner if testing indicates a need for replacement; 
and 
 
when the above purpose has been fulfilled, assist the Division of Parole and 
Probation (DPP) in the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services to 
acquire protective body armor for its agents, as specified.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 904/ Page 3 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund. A local law 
enforcement agency and DPP may use State money provided from the fund only to 
purchase or replace protective body armor.  
 
In accordance with the State budget, grants to local law enforcement agencies are made 
based on the comparative needs of each local law enforcement agency as determined by 
the following criteria:   
 
 
the number of violent crime incidents committed within the jurisdiction of the local 
law enforcement agency for the last two years; 
 
the current number of sworn officers; 
 
the current number of sworn officers not assigned protective body armor; 
 
the number and age of protective body armor units currently in use by the local law 
enforcement agency;  
 
the number of protective body armor units requested for officers not currently 
assigned protective body armor and for officers assigned protective body armor in 
need of replacement due to age or wear;  
 
the regulations of the local law enforcement agency that relate to the use of 
protective body armor;  
 
the local law enforcement agency’s budget request for supplies and equipment for 
the current and last two fiscal years; and 
 
any other information that the Executive Director considers necessary to make 
grants for protective body armor. 
 
A single grant may not initially exceed 10% of the total money budgeted in the fund for 
any fiscal year. After the initial allocation of money, the Executive Director may distribute 
any money remaining in the fund on an equitable basis, as determined by the same criteria. 
After the allocations are made to eligible local law enforcement agencies, the 
Executive Director may distribute any of the money remaining in the fund to DPP to assist 
the division to acquire protective body armor for its agents.  
 
A local law enforcement agency must use the money distributed from the fund as an 
addition to and not as a substitute for money appropriated from sources other than the fund 
to acquire or replace protective body armor. Each local law enforcement agency must 
spend money from its own sources to acquire or replace protective body armor in an 
amount at least equal to the amount of State money awarded from the fund. After a local 
law enforcement agency receives notice from the Executive Director of a grant, the local 
law enforcement agency must submit to the Executive Director proof of expenditures on 
protective body armor. After certifying the expenditures, the Executive Director may 
authorize the reimbursement of one-half of the local law enforcement agency’s 
expenditures on protective body armor, up to a maximum of the amount of the grant. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 904/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  A limited survey of State law enforcement agencies indicates that 
law enforcement units within the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission, the 
Department of State Police (DSP), the Comptroller’s Office, the Department of Natural 
Resources, the Maryland Department of Labor, the Maryland Department of 
Transportation, the Maryland Transportation Authority, Morgan State University, and the 
University System of Maryland can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources.  
 
However, MDH indicates that the department’s Secured Transportation and Investigation 
Unit (STIU) assigned to MDH facilities currently works in conjunction with DSP and local 
law enforcement agencies for criminal investigations and other matters; thus, law 
enforcement officers within STIU are not currently assigned protective body armor. In 
order to meet the bill’s requirements, MDH needs to purchase 45 protective body armor at 
an approximate cost of $1,229 per vest; accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by 
$55,305 in fiscal 2027. Because protective body armor typically has a service life of at 
least five years, routine replacement costs are likely not incurred until after the five-year 
period covered by this fiscal and policy note. Even so, MDH general fund expenditures 
increase in future years to replace protective body armor as necessary to meet the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the most recent Protective Body Armor Fund 
Report, in fiscal 2024, GOCPP provided $49,088 in funding to nine local law enforcement 
agencies for the combined purchase of 131 armor vests. The fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced includes $49,088 in general funds for the Protective Body Armor Fund.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 516 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert and Prince George’s counties; City of Annapolis; Town 
of Elkton; Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; 
Comptroller’s Office; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 904/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5