START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 986 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 986 
(Delegate Terrasa) 
Health 
 
 
Nurse Licensure - Educational Requirements - Enforcement 
 
 
This bill requires an applicant for licensure by endorsement from the State Board of 
Nursing (MBON) to provide adequate evidence, including official transcripts, that the 
applicant’s educational credentials meet specified requirements. The bill expands the 
disciplinary grounds on which MBON may take disciplinary action against an applicant or 
licensee to include failure to complete specified educational requirements. The bill also 
specifies that the Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC) may not be construed to limit the 
authority of MBON to (1) investigate the qualifications of an applicant or a licensee, 
including the sufficiency of the applicant’s nursing education or (2) take appropriate 
disciplinary action against an interstate licensee, including denial or revocation of 
licensure. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed and/or certified by MBON to 
practice specified nursing duties in the State. MBON is responsible for the regulation and 
oversight of nursing professionals in the State, ensuring that nurses comply with federal 
and State laws governing the profession through the regulation and oversight of education 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 986/ Page 2 
and training programs and by taking disciplinary action against licensees and certificate 
holders when warranted.  
 
Licensure by Endorsement 
 
MBON may issue a license by endorsement and waive any appropriate examination 
requirement for an applicant who has an active unencumbered registered nurse (RN) or 
licensed practical nurse (LPN) license in any other state or country if the applicant:  
 
 
submits to the board an application on the form the board requires;  
 
submits to a criminal history records check;  
 
pays the application fee set by the board; and  
 
provides adequate evidence that they (1) at the time they graduated from a nursing 
education program, the program was substantially equivalent to the education 
program approved in Maryland; (2) passed an examination at the time they were 
licensed that is similar to the Maryland examination; and (3) meet the qualifications 
otherwise required. 
 
Chapters 731 and 732 of 2025 clarified that an applicant may hold a valid, unencumbered 
multistate license under the NLC as an alternative to providing the evidence specified 
above to qualify for licensure by endorsement.  
 
Chapter 416 of 2025 specified that, if an applicant for licensure as an RN by endorsement 
cannot provide evidence that the nursing program they graduated from was substantially 
equivalent to the education program approved in Maryland, the applicant may still qualify 
for licensure by endorsement if the applicant has:  
 
 
completed satisfactorily and met all requirements for an associate or a baccalaureate 
degree in registered nursing from a college or university that, at the time of the 
applicant’s graduation, is (1) accredited by a national or regional nursing 
accreditation agency recognized by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of 
Education or the Council for Higher Education Accreditation and (2) approved by 
MBON or an applicable state regulator in the state in which the program is located; 
and  
 
completed a minimum number of direct patient care practice hours as required by 
regulations adopted by MBON.  
 
Disciplinary Actions 
 
Subject to specified hearing provisions, MBON may deny a license or grant a license, 
including a license subject to reprimand, probation, or suspension, to an applicant, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 986/ Page 3 
reprimand a licensee, place a licensee on probation, or suspend or revoke the license of a 
licensee if, among other things, the applicant or licensee violates any one of 36 disciplinary 
grounds. 
 
Nurse Licensure Compact  
 
Since 1999, Maryland has participated in NLC, which currently has 43 participating states 
and territories. Under NLC, a multistate license authorizes an individual to practice as an 
RN or an LPN in a remote state. Licenses are issued by the home state.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3