START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 981 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 981 
(Delegate A. Johnson, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Investor-Owned Public Service Companies - Base Rate Proceeding - Equity 
Market Return 
 
 
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to determine the current average 
expected 10-year U.S. equity market return by using multiple objective sources in a base 
rate proceeding to set just and reasonable rates for a public service company that is an 
investor‑owned electric, gas, or combination gas and electric company. PSC may adjust 
the rates for the public service company based on the risks to the public service company 
as compared to the determined equity market return. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can implement the bill’s changes using existing budgeted resources. 
The potential effect on gas and electric utility rates is discussed in the Additional 
Comments below. No effect on revenues.  
 
Local Effect:  The potential effect on gas and electric utility rates is discussed in the 
Additional Comments below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal, as discussed in the Additional Comments 
below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies subject to its 
jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of the public and (2) promote 
adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in the State without unjust 
discrimination.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 981/ Page 2 
Public Service Company Rates  
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that:   
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article; 
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and 
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public. 
 
U.S. Supreme Court rulings (Bluefield Water Works & Improvement Co. v. Pub. Serv. 
Comm’n of W. Va., 262 U.S. 679 (1923) and Fed. Power Comm’n v. Hope Nat. Gas Co., 
320 U.S. 591 (1944)) have clarified the requirement that a rate yield a “reasonable return”. 
As an example in a recent rate case, PSC adopted the federal standards in Order No. 88432 
when authorizing an increase in electric rates for Potomac Electric Power Company. The 
order established three primary requirements that a utility’s return must meet to be 
considered fair. The requirements are that:   
 
 
a fair return must be comparable to returns investors expect on investments of 
similar risk; 
 
the return must be sufficient to assure confidence in the financial integrity of the 
company; and 
 
the rate must be adequate to support the company’s credit and attract the capital 
necessary to discharge its public duties.  
 
Public Service Commission Rate Proceedings – Generally 
 
Currently, neither the Public Utilities Article nor COMAR limit what information PSC 
must use when determining the return on equity (ROE) in a rate case. However, PSC orders 
determining ROEs generally include the same types of information used by PSC when 
determining a rate. PSC Order No. 88432 demonstrates the process for determining the 
ROE as a technical and evidentiary inquiry. Among other things, PSC considers the 
following information in its proceedings:   
 
 
evidence from expert witnesses representing the utility, the Office of People’s 
Counsel, and PSC staff, among others, which PSC examines to make factual 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 981/ Page 3 
findings regarding comparable risks to similar investments investors can make, the 
current capital market environment, and the financial integrity of the utility;  
 
analytical data from methodologies such as, but not limited to, the discounted cash 
flow and variants of the capital asset pricing model to calculate a recommended 
ROE; and  
 
comparative financial information to ensure the resulting return is comparable to 
investments of similar risk, sufficient to maintain financial integrity, and adequate 
to attract capital. 
 
Additional Comments:  Gas and/or electric utility rates may be affected as a result of the 
bill’s changes to base rate recovery. The extent to which the bill results in a decrease or 
increase in rates cannot be reliably estimated at this time. In any event, gas and electric 
utility customers, including the State, local governments, and small businesses, are affected 
by any changes in rates that may result from the bill’s changes. 
 
In general, the U.S. equity market return refers to the money earned or lost by an investment 
in U.S. stocks over a specific period, typically expressed as a percentage of the initial 
investment often measured using major benchmarks or sectors in the economy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3