START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 952 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 952 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Companion Chatbots - Regulation 
 
 
This bill requires an operator of a “companion chatbot” to establish and maintain a protocol 
for preventing a companion chatbot from producing or presenting content concerning 
self‑harm, suicidal ideation, or suicide to a user who expresses thoughts of self-harm or 
suicidal ideation. The protocol must include a notification to such a user that refers the 
individual to a crisis service provider, including (1) the Maryland Behavioral Health Crisis 
Response System and (2) the national 9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. The bill also 
requires an operator to establish and maintain a protocol for preventing a companion 
chatbot from producing or presenting to a minor user content concerning sexually explicit 
conduct, as specified. An operator must publish these protocols on its website. Further, the 
bill (1) limits the amount and type of data an operator may collect; (2) limits the way an 
operator may use certain data; and (3) requires an operator to establish and maintain a 
complaint system. The Office of Suicide Prevention in the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) must annually collect and publish specified data from operators. A chatbot is 
considered a product for certain product liability actions. Violation of the bill is an unfair, 
abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), 
subject to MCPA’s civil penalty provisions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase, at least minimally, beginning in 
FY 2027 for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), as discussed below. MDH can 
receive and publish the required information with existing resources. The bill’s imposition 
of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to have a material impact on State revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 952/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Companion chatbot” means an artificial intelligence (AI) system with a 
natural language interface that provides adaptive, human-like responses to user inputs and 
is capable of meeting a user’s social needs, including by exhibiting anthropomorphic 
features and being able to sustain a relationship across multiple interactions.  
 
An “operator” means a person who makes a companion chatbot available to a user in the 
State.  
 
An operator must use evidence-based methods for detecting when a user is expressing 
thoughts of self-harm or suicidal ideation to a companion chatbot.  
 
An operator must display a clear and conspicuous warning to a user stating that companion 
chatbots (1) are artificially generated and not human and (2) may not be suitable for some 
minors.  
 
A developer must establish and provide to a user of the operator’s chatbot clear and 
conspicuous warnings that the chatbot is AI-generated and not human through the use of:   
 
 
a static, persistent warning that continuously appears on the screen; and  
 
a dynamic warning that pops up on the screen and requires a user to respond (1) at 
the start of the user’s interaction with the chatbot; (2) after every hour of the user’s 
continuous interaction with the chatbot; and (3) when prompted by the user in a 
manner that questions how the chatbot functions or provides responses.  
 
A controller must limit the collection of personal data to what is reasonably necessary and 
proportionate to satisfy the requirements of the bill. A controller may not use data regarding 
emotional state or mental health vulnerabilities to tailor algorithms to increase the duration 
or frequency of use of a chatbot. 
 
A controller must establish and maintain a complaint system that enables a user to report 
content produced or presented by chatbot that violates the bill. Within three calendar days 
after a complaint is filed, the controller must: 
 
 
review the content reported;  
 
take all reasonable steps to (1) remove any content that violates the bill and  
(2) prevent any further presentation or production of the content in a manner that 
violates the bill; and 
 
report the complaint and the results of the review to OAG.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 952/ Page 3 
By March 1 each year (beginning in 2027), an operator must report the following to the 
Office of Suicide Prevention within MDH:  
 
 
information on the required protocols noted above; 
 
the number of times the operator has issued a required notification referring a user 
to a crisis service provider;  
 
details about the evidence-based methods utilized to detect thoughts of self-harm or 
suicidal ideation; and 
 
all complaints filed under provisions note above, including the results of the review 
of each complaint and any follow-up actions.  
 
The report may not contain any personal identifying information about a user.  
By July 1 each year (beginning in 2027), MDH must compile data from the required reports 
for the immediately preceding calendar year and publish the data on its website.  
 
Product Liability  
 
In addition to the remedies contained under MCPA, a chatbot must be considered a product 
for which:   
 
 
an operator and developer have an affirmative duty to ensure does not injure or harm 
a user;  
 
an operator or a developer may be held strictly liable for causing injury or harm to 
a user; and  
 
an individual may bring an action for a design defect, a manufacturing defect, or a 
marketing defect.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Artificial Intelligence 
 
Under Section 15-10B-05.1 of the Insurance Article, “AI” means an engineered or 
machine-based system that varies in its level of autonomy and that can, for explicit or 
implicit objectives, infer from the input it receives how to generate outputs that can 
influence physical or virtual environments. Similarly, under the State Finance and 
Procurement Article, “AI” means a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 952/ Page 4 
For additional information on the status of AI in the State and nation, please see the 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
State Expenditures:  OAG advises that it requires additional staff to enforce the bill. 
Specifically, OAG anticipates the need for one assistant Attorney General and 
one technologist, with estimated personnel expenditures of approximately $326,000 on an 
annual basis.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) acknowledges that enforcement of the bill 
is likely to require specialized knowledge. This analysis assumes, therefore, that OAG 
incurs at least minimal contractual costs to facilitate training and the development of 
technical expertise. However, DLS advises that without experience under the bill, it is 
unclear to what extent operators will be noncompliant and whether there will be a 
significant enough volume of related complaints to necessitate additional staff. To the 
extent OAG receives a significant number of complaints from consumers under the bill 
that it is unable to handle with existing staff, OAG may request additional resources 
through the annual budget process. 
 
MDH also advises that additional staff are necessary to collect and publish the  
annual report. In total, MDH estimates that 3.5 additional positions are needed  
(1 half-time program manager, 1.5 health policy analysts, one data analyst, and  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 952/ Page 5 
1 half-time web support position), at an average annual cost of approximately $382,700. 
DLS disagrees with this assessment and notes that the bill provides MDH with no 
regulatory or enforcement authority. Under the bill, the department must only receive the 
required information from operators and post it to the department’s website. Therefore, 
DLS advises the reporting requirement can be handled with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 952/ Page 6 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 
Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise 
provide additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some 
students use AI to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 
Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems 
that host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased 
energy costs; 
 
Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 
Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to 
make “deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to 
differentiate from actual events; 
 
AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data 
privacy. 
 
Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 
Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 952/ Page 7 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human‑defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State 
government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 952/ Page 8 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 952/ Page 9 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 9