START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 910 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 910 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
 
 
Child Care Scholarship Program - Priority for Child Care Providers 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to establish a 
framework to prioritize the children of individuals who provide care for children in licensed 
child care centers, registered family child care homes, and registered large family child 
care homes for scholarships under the Child Care Scholarship (CCS) Program. The bill 
applies to applications MSDE receives after the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE did not respond to a request for information on the fiscal impact 
of the bill. This analysis assumes that MSDE can develop and implement the framework 
required by the bill with existing resources, under the assumption discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected.    
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Child Care Scholarship Program  
 
The CCS program provides financial assistance with child care costs to low-income 
families that meet applicable State or federal requirements. The program is funded through 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 910/ Page 2 
a combination of State funds and the federal Child Care and Development Block Grant. 
All participating parents or guardians must meet a variety of technical requirements and 
must be working or enrolled in school, a training program, or a work-related activity. 
 
Child Care Centers  
 
Subject to limited exception, child care centers may not operate in the State unless they are 
licensed. The State Board of Education is required to adopt regulations that relate to the 
licensing and operation of child care centers. A child care center is an agency, institution, 
or establishment that, for part or all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, 
and at least twice a week, offers or provides child care to children who do not have the 
same parentage except as otherwise provided for in law or regulation. 
 
Family Child Care Homes and Large Family Child Care Homes  
 
Generally, family child care homes and large family child care homes may not operate in 
the State unless they are registered. The State Board of Education is required to adopt 
regulations that relate to the registration of family child care homes and large family child 
care homes. A family child care home is a residence in which family child care is provided 
for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in which family child 
care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although MSDE did not respond to a request for information 
regarding the fiscal impact of the bill, it noted for a bill with a similar provision that,  
in 2022, there were more than 40,000 early child care and education workers in the State. 
It is unknown how many of these workers may have children otherwise eligible for the 
CCS Program. 
 
Effective May 1, 2025, the CCS Program temporarily instituted an enrollment freeze (and 
a corresponding waitlist for services) due to significant growth in the program in recent 
years. As the bill only requires MSDE to develop a framework for prioritizing specified 
children (and does not establish an enrollment freeze exemption), this analysis assumes 
there is likely no overall increase in general fund expenditures for the CCS Program. Under 
this assumption, MSDE can comply with the bill’s requirement by developing a framework 
under which once an enrollment freeze is lifted and families on the waitlist begin receiving 
scholarships, the children of child care workers are prioritized as appropriate.  
 
If, however, the framework developed by MSDE exempts additional children from the 
enrollment freeze, general funds are likely necessary to cover the additional costs; this 
scenario, however, has not been accounted for in this analysis.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 910/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 664 (Senator Harris) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3