START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 996 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 996 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Corporations and Associations - Revisions 
 
 
This bill alters various provisions of the Corporations and Associations Article, including 
those regarding (1) the date of acceptance of a charter document for record by the  
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) when the document is rejected and 
resubmitted; (2) actions taken pursuant to a final order in a bankruptcy proceeding;  
(3) fines imposed on a foreign corporation not qualified or registered to do business in the 
State; and (4) limited partnership agreements.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SDAT can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. The bill is 
not anticipated to materially affect revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation – Acceptance of a Document for Record  
 
The bill specifies that if SDAT does not accept a charter document for record, SDAT must 
notify the person who filed the document of the rejection and the reason for the rejection. 
If a corrected charter document is refiled and accepted by SDAT for record within 30 days 
from the date of SDAT’s mailing of the notice of rejection, SDAT must accept for record 
the corrected charter document as of the date the rejected charter document was originally 
filed.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 996/ Page 2 
Under current law, generally, all charter documents are effective when accepted for 
recording or filing by SDAT. SDAT may not: 
 
 
accept for record any charter document of a Maryland corporation that does not 
conform with law; however, any document that purports to be acknowledged may 
be treated by SDAT as property acknowledged; and 
 
accept for record or filing any charter document, or other documents, as specified, 
until all required recording, filing, organization and capitalization, and other special 
fees have been paid to SDAT. 
 
Regulations specify that a resubmitted document may retain the date that the document is 
first received by SDAT as the acceptance date if, at the program manager’s discretion, the 
filer demonstrates good cause for that acceptance date. If SDAT incorrectly rejects a 
document, then the acceptance date must be the original date that the document is received 
by the department. This includes any document that is filed for recordation with SDAT by 
a foreign or domestic corporation, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited 
liability company, or other organization.  
 
Action by the Board of Directors – Consent to Act Without a Meeting  
 
Under current law, an action required or permitted to be taken at a meeting of the board of 
directors (or of a committee of the board) may be taken without a meeting if a unanimous 
consent which sets forth the action is (1) given in writing or by electronic transmission by 
each member of the board or committee entitled to vote on the matter and (2) filed in paper 
or electronic form with the minutes or proceedings of the board or committee. 
 
The bill specifies that, unless the charter requires otherwise, any action required or 
permitted to be taken at a meeting of the board of directors or of a committee of the board 
of a corporation that is registered as an open‐end investment company under the federal 
Investment Company Act of 1940 may be taken without a meeting if the consent of a 
majority of the entire board of directors or a majority of the directors serving on the 
committee (and in the manner and by the vote required under the federal Act) which sets 
forth the action is: 
 
 
given in writing or by electronic transmission by the directors who consent to the 
action; 
 
filed in paper or electronic form with the minutes or proceedings of the board or 
committee; and  
 
sent within three days after the effective date of the action to all directors or to all 
members of the committee.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 996/ Page 3 
A director who did not consent and receives notice may file a dissent to the action by 
sending a notice of dissent to the secretary of the corporation within 10 days of receipt of 
the notice, as specified. 
 
Bankruptcy Proceeding – Actions Taken Regarding a Final Order 
 
Under current law, if the final order a court makes a plan of reorganization binding on the 
stockholders of a corporation, the board of directors, trustee, or receiver, may take any 
action necessary to carry out the plan without any other corporate approval. The bill 
modifies and clarifies this provision by specifying that (1) the provisions are applicable if 
a final order for relief has been entered or is otherwise effective under federal bankruptcy 
law (instead of a plan of reorganization); (2) the permitted actions taken may include 
amending the charter, amending the bylaws, transferring assets, and dissolving the 
corporation; and (3) the actions may be taken without any action by the stockholders. 
 
The bill adds provisions specifying that (1) a trustee or a receiver may take action 
authorized by the final order without the approval of the board of directors and (2) on entry 
of a final decree in the bankruptcy proceeding closing a case and discharging the trustee or 
the receiver, the necessary actions taken to carry out the final order (specified above) no 
longer apply to the corporation, and the validity of those actions taken prior to the closing 
and discharge are not affected. 
 
Foreign Corporations – Fines for Failure to Register of Qualify 
 
Under current law, each officer (and each agent) of a foreign corporation that does 
intrastate, interstate, or foreign business in the State without qualifying or registering as 
required under the Corporations and Associations Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
subject to a maximum fine of $1,000. The bill repeals this offense. 
 
Under current law, if a foreign corporation does any intrastate, interstate, or foreign 
business in the State without qualifying or registering as required under the Corporations 
and Associations Article, SDAT must impose a penalty of $200 on the corporation, which 
may be reduced or abated under § 14‐704 of the Tax-Property Article. This provision is 
unchanged by the bill. 
 
Limited Partnership Agreements 
 
The provisions of Title 9A (“Maryland Revised Uniform Partnership Act” (MRUPA)) of 
the Corporations and Associations Article apply to limited partnerships except to the extent 
that the provisions are inconsistent with or are modified by the provisions of Title 10 
(“Maryland Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act” (MRULPA)). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 996/ Page 4 
Under MRUPA, generally, relations among the partners and between the partners and the 
partnership are governed by the partnership agreement. To the extent the partnership 
agreement does not otherwise provide, MRUPA governs the relations of the partners and 
partnership. The bill includes that the means and conditions for amending the partnership 
agreement are also governed by the partnership agreement. 
 
Under MRULPA, generally, a limited partnership agreement may (1) provide for classes 
or groups of limited partners having specified rights, powers, and duties and (2) grant to 
all or certain limited partners, or a specified class or group of limited partners, the right to 
vote on any matter, as specified, including establishing provisions related to procedures for 
voting. 
 
The bill adds provisions to MRULPA specifying that (1) a limited partnership is bound by 
and may enforce a partnership agreement whether or not the limited partnership has itself 
assented to the agreement; (2) a person that becomes a partner is deemed to assent to the 
partnership agreement; (3) two or more persons intending to become the initial partners of 
a limited partnership may make an agreement that becomes the partnership agreement on 
formation of the limited partnership; (4) unless otherwise provided, the affirmative vote or 
consent of all the partners is required to amend the partnership agreement; and (5) the 
partnership agreement may specify certain requirements to amend the partnership 
agreement. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may provide certainty for the formation of business 
entities by small businesses by requiring SDAT to accept a charter document for record on 
the date of the original filing for a rejected document that is resubmitted correctly, instead 
of relying on the program manager’s discretion. Among other potential effects, the bill’s 
provisions may facilitate the formation and amendment of limited partnership agreements. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill implements recommendations of the Maryland State Bar 
Association, whose Committee on Corporation Law regularly reviews the Corporations 
and Associations Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 631 (Senators West and Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 996/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5