START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 991 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 991 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class HC (Health Club) License - Hours 
of Sale 
 
 
This bill extends the hours of sale for a holder of a 6‑day or 7‑day Class HC (health club) 
beer and wine license in Harford County to be 1 p.m. to 11 p.m., rather than 1 p.m. to 
9 p.m. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Harford County finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Harford County Board of License Commissioners may issue a 6‑day 
or 7‑day Class HC license to a person who (1) sells health club services, as specified; 
(2) has a health club facility that offers an indoor or outdoor swimming pool or pickleball 
courts; (3) has at least 150 members who pay dues; and (4) owns or leases real property in 
the county for use as a for-profit or nonprofit health club facility. 
 
The 6‑day Class HC license authorizes the license holder to sell beer and wine from 
Monday through Saturday in a bar area at a swimming pool or an indoor lounge or both. 
 
The 7‑day Class HC license authorizes the license holder to sell beer and wine from 
Monday through Sunday in a bar area at a swimming pool or an indoor lounge or both. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 991/ Page 2 
The license holder must purchase beer and wine from an authorized licensed wholesaler. 
 
The annual fee for the 6‑day Class HC license is $1,300 and the annual fee for the  
7‑day Class HC license is $1,400. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 684 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2