START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 949 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 949 
(Talbot County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Agriculture – Noxious Weeds – Palmer Amaranth 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA), if, based on an 
inspection, it finds “Palmer amaranth” on land, to issue an order to the landowner to 
eradicate the Palmer amaranth within two weeks after the order is issued. If MDA issues 
such an order, MDA must inspect the land subject to the order every two weeks until it 
determines that the Palmer amaranth has been eradicated. A person who is in violation of 
an order issued under the bill is subject to an administrative penalty of (1) $500 for a 
first violation; (2) $1,000 for a second violation; or (3) $2,000 for a third or subsequent 
violation. Penalties collected under the bill must be distributed to a special fund to be used 
only for the control and eradication of a noxious weed. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDA increase by $721,600 in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization, inflation, and the elimination of one-time costs. 
State expenditures (multiple funds) may increase beginning in FY 2027 to eradicate 
Palmer amaranth found on State-owned land in the time frame required by the bill, as 
discussed below. Special fund revenues may increase due to the bill’s penalty provisions, 
although any such increase cannot be predicted in advance. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$721,600 
$469,500 
$490,100 
$511,000 
$532,000 
Exp. (Mult.) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase to eradicate Palmer amaranth 
found on locally owned land in the time frame required by the bill. The effect on county 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 949/ Page 2 
weed control programs is unclear, as discussed below. Local revenues are not anticipated 
to be affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Palmer amaranth” means the plant species Palmer amaranth  
(Amaranthus palmeri) that is listed as a noxious weed in regulations adopted by MDA. 
 
Current Law:  Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Agriculture Article (Weed Control) authorizes the 
Secretary of Agriculture to, among other things, (1) by regulation, designate as a noxious 
weed any plant that adversely affects or threatens agricultural production and (2) institute 
programs or carry out practices necessary for the control and eradication of a noxious weed. 
Current regulations designate eight weeds and plants, including Palmer amaranth, as 
noxious weeds in the State. 
 
The Secretary may also, among other things, enter into an agreement with a county or other 
political subdivision of the State, an adjoining state, or a federal government agency to 
implement a program for the control and eradication of a noxious weed.  
 
A person may not (1) import or transport a noxious weed in the State in any form capable 
of growth or (2) contaminate any uninfested land with a noxious weed through the 
movement of rootstocks, seed, soil, mulch, nursery stock, farm machinery, or any other 
artificial medium. Each landowner, including a landowner of public land, or person who 
possesses and manages land infested with a noxious weed must eradicate or control the 
noxious weed on that land by using practices the Secretary prescribes, including mowing, 
cultivating, or treating with an approved herbicide. 
 
Generally, a person who violates the weed control provisions is subject to the penalties and 
fines set forth in Title 12 of the Agriculture Article. Under Title 12, a person who violates 
any provision of the Agriculture Article is guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless another penalty 
is provided elsewhere, for a first offense, the person is subject to a fine of up to $500, and/or 
imprisonment for up to three months. For a second or subsequent offense, the person is 
subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. However, instead 
of pursuing the penalties and fines set forth in Title 12, the Secretary may impose on any 
person who violates the weed control provisions a penalty of (1) for a first violation, up to 
$500; (2) for a second violation, up to $1,000; or (3) for a third or subsequent violation, up 
to $2,000. Penalties collected under these provisions must be distributed to a special fund, 
to be used only for the control and eradication of a noxious weed.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 949/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:       
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture  
 
General fund expenditures increase by $721,558 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring (1) six 
agricultural inspectors (four permanent and two contractual) to issue orders to landowners, 
handle additional inspections, and potentially produce case files for possible enforcement 
actions and (2) one office secretary to handle related administrative tasks. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the purchase of vehicles), and 
ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in calculating the 
estimate are stated below: 
 
 
MDA anticipates a significant increase in inspections; 
 
MDA currently has four existing staff assigned to the Noxious Weed Program, and 
existing staff do not have the capacity to conduct additional inspections, particularly 
given the bill’s requirement that, after an order is issued, MDA must reinspect the 
land every two weeks until the weed has been eradicated;  
 
Palmer amaranth is an aggressive noxious weed that is resistant to many herbicides 
and is, therefore, difficult to control, meaning that it is likely that MDA issues a 
significant number of orders to landowners under the bill; 
 
currently, if MDA finds a noxious weed (including Palmer amaranth) on land when 
it conducts an inspection, it issues a notice to the landowner and generally gives 
landowners 30 days to eradicate the weed, at which point, MDA sends follow-up 
notices (as many as two or three, as needed) and works with landowners to come 
into compliance; 
 
inspectors will be strategically deployed in various regions of the State; 
 
inspectors spend approximately 90% of their time in the field during peak season 
(April through November); and 
 
each inspection takes two hours to a full day to complete.  
 
Permanent Positions 
5.0 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$248,319 
Vehicle Purchases 
308,814 
Operating Expenses 
  164,425 
Total FY 2027 MDA Expenditures 
$721,558 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 949/ Page 4 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
MDA advises that to the extent landowners fail to eradicate Palmer amaranth as directed 
by an order issued under the bill, MDA may incur costs to hire contractual pest control 
services in order to ensure that Palmer amaranth is eradicated on those lands. However, the 
bill does not require MDA to do so; current law specifically requires landowners and land 
managers to control or eradicate noxious weeds on their lands. Accordingly, costs for such 
contractual services have not been included in this estimate. 
 
State Agencies as Landowners 
 
State expenditures (multiple funds) may increase to the extent any State agencies, as 
landowners, must take additional steps to eradicate Palmer amaranth than they otherwise 
would, particularly given the bill’s requirement that any orders issued by MDA must 
require the Palmer amaranth to be eradicated within two weeks after the order was issued. 
While State agencies are already required to control noxious weeds, including 
Palmer amaranth, on State-owned land, they may incur additional costs to eradicate 
Palmer amaranth within two weeks of receiving an order from MDA. For example, the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) notes that, because Palmer amaranth is resistant 
to many herbicides, the bill may require DNR land managers to mow or hand pull 
Palmer amaranth plants to eradicate the weed within two weeks of receiving an order from 
MDA. DNR notes that manual removal is labor intensive and, therefore, increases costs.  
 
While the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) reports that the State Highway 
Administration (SHA) does not anticipate a significant fiscal or operational effect resulting 
from the bill, MDOT notes that if SHA is issued an order from MDA under the bill, 
additional contractual resources may be required to eradicate Palmer amaranth within 
two weeks of the issuance of the order, as required by the bill. 
 
Although it is generally assumed that State agencies comply with the bill, to the extent a 
reinspection by MDA finds Palmer amaranth on land subject to an order, an affected 
State agency may be subject to the penalties established in the bill.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the effect on State agencies, while local governments are 
already required to control noxious weeds, including Palmer amaranth, on locally owned 
land, they may incur additional costs to eradicate the weed within two weeks of receiving 
an order from MDA or face potential penalties for noncompliance.  
 
Each year, MDA enters into cooperative agreements with participating counties to provide 
technical assistance to landowners for initiating noxious weed control programs. The extent 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 949/ Page 5 
to which county weed control programs might be affected by the bill is unclear, as county 
programs are already involved with the control of Palmer amaranth. While there may be 
an operational effect on county weed control programs, because it is assumed that MDA 
conducts the additional inspections and issues orders to landowners, this analysis assumes 
that the bill does not significantly affect county weed control program expenditures.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses, such as farms, that have been found to have 
Palmer amaranth on their land may incur additional costs to eradicate the weed within 
two weeks of receiving an order from MDA or face potential penalties for noncompliance. 
Any small businesses involved in treating Palmer amaranth may benefit to the extent the 
two-week time frame for eradication results in an increase in the demand for their services. 
 
Additional Comments:  A fact sheet on Palmer amaranth can be found on MDA’s website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 613 (Talbot County Senators) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of General 
Services; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City Community College; 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Baltimore City; Harford, 
Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; City of Frostburg; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5