START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 933 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 933 
(Delegate Wilkins) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Certificates Indicating Multiple Points of Use - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters provisions of the State sales and use tax regarding multiple points of use 
(MPU) certificates. The bill specifies that a MPU certificate for the purchase and use of 
specified digital codes, digital products, and taxable data and information technology (IT) 
services must be deemed fully completed if the certificate contains specified identifying 
information about the buyer. Under the bill, a buyer is not required to obtain prior approval 
from the Comptroller in order to present an MPU certificate to a vendor. The Comptroller 
must relieve a vendor of the obligation to collect, pay, or remit the tax applicable if the 
vendor obtains a fully completed MPU certificate from the buyer within 90 days after the 
date of the sale. The Comptroller must publish a specified MPU form. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026, and applies retroactively to any retail sale or use in the State occurring 
on or after July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential decrease in State general fund revenues due to the reduction in tax 
compliance capacity at the Comptroller’s Office. General fund expenditures increase by 
$230,300 in FY 2027 for personnel and one-time computer programming changes. Future 
year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$230,300 
$181,200 
$189,700 
$198,300 
$207,000 
Net Effect 
($230,300) 
($181,200) 
($189,700) 
($198,300) 
($207,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 933/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 604 of 2025 (Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025) 
expanded the definition of taxable services under the State sales and use tax, beginning in 
fiscal 2026, to include data and IT services described under North American Industrial 
Classification System (NAICS) sectors 5132, 518, 519, and 5415. NAICS sector 5132 
includes software publishing services and NAICS sectors 518, 519, and 5415 include, 
respectively, (1) computing infrastructure providers, data processing, web hosting, and 
related services; (2) web search portals, libraries, archives, and other information services; 
and (3) computer systems design and related services. Chapter 604 specified that the sales 
and use tax on data and IT services does not apply to (1) sales of cloud computing services 
to a qualified cybersecurity business or (2) sales to or by a qualified company in an 
emerging technology development area, which encompasses quantum computing research 
and development at the University of Maryland, College Park Campus. 
 
Chapter 604 imposes a 3.0% sales and use tax on these data and IT services and distributes 
the revenue to the general fund. Chapter 604 also shifted the responsibility of collecting 
and remitting the sales and use tax from the vendor to the buyer in instances where the 
buyer presents a completed MPU certificate verified by the Comptroller to the seller of 
specified digital codes, digital products, or specified taxable data and IT services. 
 
The December 2025 general fund revenue forecast assumes $609.0 million in revenues 
from the data and IT services sales and use tax in fiscal 2027 and $769.9 million in 
fiscal 2031. 
 
Multiple Points of Use Certificate 
 
The Comptroller’s Office issued a Maryland Tax Alert addressing sales and use tax 
changes made during the 2025 legislative session including MPU certificates and the sales 
and use tax imposed on data and IT services. A copy of the alert can be found here:   
Tax Alert Sales and Use Tax Updates 2025-2026. 
 
State Revenues:  As noted, Chapter 604 shifted the responsibility of collecting the 
State sales and use tax from the vendor to the buyer in instances where the buyer presents 
a completed and verified MPU certificate to the seller of specified digital codes, digital 
products, or specified taxable data and IT services. 
 
This bill does not alter this general requirement but instead does not require prior approval 
from the Comptroller before a buyer may present a fully completed MPU certificate to a 
seller. As a result, the bill does not alter the amount of sales and use taxes that must be 
collected and paid for specified purchases and still requires the buyer, rather than the seller 
to collect and remit the sales and use tax under specified circumstances. As such, the bill 
should not have an effect on State sales and use tax revenues. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 933/ Page 3 
However, the Comptroller’s Office advises that the bill may make it harder for the 
Comptroller to verify that a filer actually has a MPU certificate. This could result in 
fraudulent MPU certificates being issued due to a lack of verification, which could result 
in a decrease in sales and use tax collections. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office reports that 751 MPU certificates have been issued through 
January 2026. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
$230,300 in fiscal 2027 and by $207,000 in fiscal 2031. This estimate is based on hiring 
two financial compliance auditors to validate the accuracy of the taxable status of 
purchases made under MPUs that are not issued by the Comptroller. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. This estimate 
includes a one-time computer programming expense totaling approximately $75,000 in 
fiscal 2027 to update the tax collection system. These costs include discovery, design, 
development, testing, and system interfaces.  
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$137,065 
Computer Programming and Modification 
75,000 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 Comptroller Expenditures 
$230,347 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 644 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3