START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 999 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 999 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - Class 9 Limited Distillery License - Alteration 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirements that a holder of a Class 9 limited distillery license must 
(1) maintain only one brand at any one time for each product of brandy, rum, whiskey, 
alcohol, and neutral spirits that is distilled, rectified, and sold and (2) not manufacture or 
rectify product of any other brand for another entity. The bill also limits the holder of a 
Class 9 limited distillery license to manufacturing or rectifying up to 31,000 gallons of 
product each calendar year for any other brand or entity. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A Class 9 Limited Distillery License may be issued by the Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission only to a holder of a Class D beer, wine, and liquor 
license or a holder of a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license, where sales for both on- and 
off-premises consumption are permitted for use on the licensed premises. The  
Class 9 license authorizes the license holder to establish and operate a plant in the State for 
distilling, rectifying, and bottling brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits if the 
holder (1) maintains only one brand at any one time for each product of brandy, rum, 
whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits that is distilled, rectified, and sold and (2) does not 
manufacture or rectify product of any other brand for another entity.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 999/ Page 2 
In addition, a Class 9 license authorizes the license holder to acquire bulk alcoholic 
beverages from the holder of a distillery or rectifying license in the State or from the holder 
of a nonresident dealer permit; sell and deliver manufactured products only to a licensed 
wholesaler in the State or person authorized to acquire distilled spirits in another state and 
not to a county dispensary; and sell manufactured products at retail in a manner consistent 
with a Class D or Class B license.  
 
A Class 9 license holder may not hold a wholesaler’s license, except a Class 8 liquor 
wholesaler’s license, but generally may distill, rectify, bottle, or sell up to 100,000 gallons 
of brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits each calendar year. The license also 
authorizes the sale of up to 31,000 gallons of manufactured products at retail on the 
premises of the Class D or Class B license for on- and off-premises consumption each 
calendar year. The annual license fee is $500. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Revenues for Class 9 limited distilleries that are small businesses 
may increase related to (1) contracts to distill of up to 31,000 gallons for smaller distilleries 
that may have limited capacity and (2) maintaining multiple brands for each product at the 
licensed premises for on- and off-premises retail sales, that would not occur, in the absence 
of the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
me/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2