START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 957 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 957 
(Delegate Wu, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Cybersecurity - Standards and Compliance - Alterations 
 
   
This bill makes various changes to the statutory framework governing cybersecurity for 
local school systems, including (1) requiring local school systems to designate points of 
contact for cybersecurity-related communications and to comply with cybersecurity 
standards adopted by the Department of Information Technology (DoIT); (2) modifying 
various requirements of the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint) to include a focus 
on cybersecurity; and (3) establishing related responsibilities for DoIT. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $932,400 in FY 2027 for staffing and 
software license costs; future years reflect annualization and ongoing operating costs. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0.9 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.1 
Net Effect 
($0.9) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.1) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase for personnel and technology 
costs necessary to comply with the bill’s requirements, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 957/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Local School Systems 
 
Each local school system must designate a point of contact for all cybersecurity-related 
communications and notify the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) of the 
designation and any subsequent update to the designation. Beginning in 2027, each local 
school system must (1) comply with the State minimum cybersecurity standards 
established by DoIT and (2) conduct a cybersecurity maturity assessment every two years. 
 
By June 30, 2027, and every two years thereafter, each local school system must certify to 
the Office of Security Management (OSM) within DoIT that it complies with the State 
minimum cybersecurity standards. 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future  
 
The bill expands authorized uses of the target per pupil foundation amount for 
implementing Blueprint to include cybersecurity. The bill also repeals the requirement for 
local school systems to prioritize the purchase of digital devices with such funding. 
 
Additionally, the bill modifies the annual report detailing technology costs and 
connectivity rates for students, teachers, and staff that must be submitted by each local 
board to MSDE by November 15 each year to instead (1) be due by August 15, 2026, and 
each August 15 thereafter, and (2) include cybersecurity expenditures related to the State 
minimum cybersecurity standards established by DoIT. 
 
Department of Information Technology 
 
The responsibilities of OSM are expanded to include annually reviewing and updating the 
State minimum cybersecurity standards. DoIT’s information security officers must support 
local school systems with (1) compliance with the State minimum cybersecurity standards; 
(2) cybersecurity maturity assessments conducted every two years; and (3) remediation 
efforts. For the 2026-2027 school year, DoIT must focus on Standard 6.2 Protect (PR) 
Controls of the State minimum cybersecurity standards. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Department of Information Technology – Generally  
 
DoIT and the Secretary of Information Technology are responsible for, among other things:  
(1) developing, maintaining, revising, and enforcing information technology (IT)  
policies, procedures, and standards; (2) providing technical assistance, advice, and 
recommendations to the Governor and any unit of State government concerning IT matters; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 957/ Page 3 
(3) reviewing agency project plans to make information and services available to the public 
over the Internet; and (4) developing and maintaining a statewide IT Master Plan, as 
specified. “Information technology” means all electronic information processing, including 
maintenance, telecommunications, hardware, software, and associated services. 
 
Cybersecurity 
 
Chapters 241, 242, and 243 of 2022 expanded and enhanced the State’s regulatory 
framework for State and local government cybersecurity. Among other things, the Acts 
required additional funding for cybersecurity, established leadership positions in State 
government for cybersecurity, codified existing cybersecurity requirements from a 
previous executive order, and required State and local governments to perform 
cybersecurity preparedness assessments.  
 
The Acts were modified by Chapters 164 and 165 of 2025 to distinguish and clarify the 
responsibilities established by Chapters 241, 242, and 243 between DoIT and the Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management (MDEM). Notably, and among other things, 
Chapters 164 and 165 (1) transferred the responsibility for supporting local governments 
in developing vulnerability assessments and cyber assessments from MDEM to OSM 
within DoIT and (2) clarified that OSM is not responsible for assisting local government 
entities in the development of cybersecurity preparedness and response plans.  
 
Chapters 241, 242, and 243 also created the Local Cybersecurity Support Fund as a special, 
nonlapsing fund administered by the Secretary of Emergency Management. Its purpose is 
to provide financial assistance to local governments to improve cybersecurity preparedness 
and assist local governments applying for federal cybersecurity preparedness grants. The 
fund may be used only (1) to provide financial assistance to local governments to improve 
cybersecurity preparedness, as specified; (2) to assist local governments applying for 
federal cybersecurity preparedness grants; and (3) for administrative expenses, as 
specified. 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
 
Blueprint legislation, including Chapter 771 of 2019; Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021; and 
Chapter 33 of 2022 established new programs and updated education funding formulas, to 
among other provisions provide additional support for schools serving high concentrations 
of students living in poverty, including community schools and wraparound services, and 
increased support for students learning English and students with disabilities. 
 
Blueprint legislation allows funding provided in the per-pupil foundation amount to be 
used for educational technology, including digital devices, broadband connectivity, and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 957/ Page 4 
IT staff. Local boards of education and schools must prioritize the purchase of digital 
devices with those funds. 
 
State Expenditures:  DoIT lacks staffing capacity to designate personnel to assist local 
school systems and ensure compliance with the bill’s requirements. Moreover, DoIT 
advises that it plans to pay for licenses for specialized cybersecurity software to assist local 
school systems in complying with the cybersecurity standards adopted in compliance with 
the bill. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures for DoIT increase by $932,389 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring three cybersecurity policy and strategy planners to work 
with and assist local school systems. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, ongoing operating expenses, and estimated license costs for cybersecurity software. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$304,967 
Software License Costs 
600,000 
Operating Expenses 
     27,422 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$932,389 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The estimate assumes an annual 
license cost of $25,000 for cybersecurity software for each of the State’s 24 local school 
systems; however, these costs may vary based on numerous factors, including whether each 
school system’s IT systems can accommodate the software and whether other software is 
necessary. It does not include the cost of any remediation that must be carried out as a 
result of the biennial cybersecurity assessments required by the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures for local school systems may increase to (1) comply 
with the State minimum cybersecurity standards beginning fiscal 2027; (2) conduct 
cybersecurity maturity assessments; and (3) remediate cybersecurity protocols as a result 
of those assessments. With one exception, local school systems that responded to a request 
for information for this fiscal and policy note did not provide estimates of the costs 
resulting from the bill: 
 
 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools anticipates the need for independent 
contracted services with specialized expertise to assist in implementing the required 
standards;  
 
Frederick County Public Schools advises that it can likely implement the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 957/ Page 5 
 
Montgomery County Public Schools and St. Mary’s County Public Schools 
anticipate the need for additional staff and technology upgrades to meet the bill’s 
requirements;  
 
Prince George’s County Public Schools anticipates the need for significant 
technology upgrades, both hardware and software, totaling more than $2.0 million, 
to meet the bill’s requirements; and 
 
Wicomico County Public Schools advises that, depending on the timeframe school 
systems are given to comply, the bill could be overly burdensome or impossible to 
implement in the short-term.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that actual expenditures by local school 
systems depend, at least in part, on the cybersecurity standards adopted by DoIT and level 
of assistance DoIT provides to the school systems, which cannot be reliably predicted at 
this time. Local school systems can designate a local point of contact for 
cybersecurity-related correspondence and update information included in mandated reports 
to MSDE using existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1309 and SB 907 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 601 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Department of Budget and Management; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5