START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 997 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 997 
(Delegate Valderrama) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Finance and Procurement - Prevailing Wage Rate - Calculation 
 
   
This bill prohibits the Commissioner of Labor and Industry from surveying and using wage 
data of employees directly employed by an investor-owned gas company, investor-owned 
electric company, or a combination investor-owned gas and electric company in 
determining a prevailing wage rate. On receipt of a petition for review of a determination 
of a prevailing wage rate determined to be using the prohibited wage data, the 
commissioner must vacate the prevailing wage rate and recalculate the rate as required 
under law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Any change to prevailing wage rates that may result from the bill is 
expected to be negligible and have no discernible effect on the costs of public work 
projects. The Maryland Department of Labor can implement the bill with existing budgeted 
resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is not expected to have a discernible effect on the cost of 
local public work projects. No effect on revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of the State’s prevailing wage law, please see the 
Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 997/ Page 2 
Applicability of Prevailing Wage for Investor-owned Gas and Electric Companies 
 
“Investor-owned gas company” means a gas company that is not a municipal gas utility or 
a gas cooperative. 
 
Eligible public work projects are subject to prevailing wage law in the State, but a structure 
or work whose construction is performed by a public service company under order of the 
Public Service Commission or other public authority is not considered a public work 
regardless of (1) public supervision or direction or (2) payment wholly or partly from 
public money.  
 
However, an investor-owned gas company, electric company, or combination gas and 
electric company must require a contractor or subcontractor to pay its employees at least 
the prevailing wage rate determined by the commissioner for projects involving the 
construction, reconstruction, installation, demolition, restoration, or alteration of any 
underground gas or electric infrastructure of the company, and any related traffic control 
activities.  
 
Review of a Determination of Prevailing Wage 
 
A determination of a prevailing wage rate is subject to review when a public body publishes 
a call for bids or proposals in which the determination is used for the first time following 
its issuance. Within 10 days after a public body publishes any call for bids or proposals, a 
petition for review of a determination or a prevailing wage may be submitted to the 
commissioner by (1) the public body; (2) a prospective bidder or offeror; (3) a 
representative of a group of employers engaged in the type of construction for which the 
prevailing wage rate was determined; or (4) a representative of a classification of worker 
for which the prevailing wage rate was determined.  
 
Within 20 days after a petition is submitted, the commissioner must conduct an 
investigation and hold a public hearing to review the petition. At the hearing, the 
Commissioner must introduce as evidence the investigation conducted and the other facts 
that formed the basis of the commissioner’s original determination, and any interested party 
may introduce other evidence material to the issue. Within 10 days after the conclusion of 
a review hearing, the commissioner must send to the public body and each interested party 
a determination of the prevailing wage rate. This determination is final and is the rate 
applicable in the locality for the remainder of the one-year period for which it was issued.  
 
On receipt of a copy of a petition to review a wage rate, a public body must extend the 
closing date for bids or proposals until five days after the commissioner publishes the final 
determination. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 997/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 675 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 997/ Page 4 
Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law 
 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland, 
including mechanical service contractors that are part of public works projects, must pay 
their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, including 
a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that are 
constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
 
Eligible public works projects are: 
 
● 
those carried out by the State; 
● 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is State 
money; 
● 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages; and 
● 
construction projects by investor-owned gas and/or electric companies involving 
any underground gas or electric infrastructure. 
 
Applicability in Maryland 
 
Generally, any public works contract valued at less than $250,000 is not required to pay 
prevailing wages. However, the prevailing wage law was amended in 2022 to include 
mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. Mechanical service contracts are 
defined as contracts for (1) heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, including duct work; 
(2) refrigeration systems; (3) plumbing systems, as specified; (4) electrical systems, as 
specified; and (5) elevator systems, as specified. 
 
The State prevailing wage rate also does not apply to (1) any part of a public works contract 
funded with federal funds for which the contractor must pay the prevailing wage rate 
determined by the federal government; (2) specified construction projects carried out by 
public service companies under order of the Public Service Commission (except the 
underground projects mentioned above); or (3) local House or Senate initiatives that 
receive State funds in the capital budget. 
 
Prevailing wages are wages paid to at least 50% of workers in a given locality who perform 
the same or similar work on projects that resemble the proposed public works project. If 
fewer than 50% of workers in a job category earn the same wage, the prevailing wage is 
the rate paid to at least 40% of those workers. If fewer than 40% receive the same wage 
rate, the prevailing wage is calculated using a weighted average of local pay rates. The 
State Commissioner of Labor and Industry is responsible for determining prevailing wages 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 997/ Page 5 
for each public works project and job category based on annual wage surveys, in which 
contractors and subcontractors working on both public works and private construction 
projects may participate. 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland, and the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) are all 
exempt from the prevailing wage law. However, USM and MSU advise that they 
voluntarily comply with prevailing wage requirements for contracts that exceed the 
$250,000 threshold. MSA largely administers its own prevailing wage program, using 
wage rates borrowed from the commissioner’s annual wage survey. 
 
Enforcement 
 
The commissioner has the authority to enforce contractors’ compliance with the prevailing 
wage law, including issuing a stop work order if the commissioner makes an initial 
determination that a contractor or subcontractor may have violated the prevailing wage 
requirements. Contractors found to have violated the prevailing wage law must pay 
restitution to the employees and liquidated damages to the public body in the amount of 
$20 a day for each worker who is paid less than the prevailing wage, or $250 per worker 
per day if the employer knew or reasonably should have known of the obligation to pay the 
prevailing wage. If an employer fails to comply with an order by the commissioner to pay 
restitution, either the commissioner or an employee may sue the employer to recover the 
difference between the prevailing wage and paid wage. The court may order the employer 
to pay double or triple damages if it finds that the employer withheld wages or fringe 
benefits willfully and knowingly or with deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard for the 
law. 
 
The Governor must include at least $385,000 in the budget each year for the  
Prevailing Wage Unit within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor). 
 
The number of prevailing wage projects rose dramatically following the Great Recession 
and has remained high each year since. MD Labor recently developed and unveiled a new 
pay log system, which provides more accurate tracking of prevailing wage projects than its 
previous database. Using the new system, MD Labor advises that, during fiscal 2025, its 
Prevailing Wage Unit monitored 889 projects, up from the 816 projects in fiscal 2024 and 
757 projects in fiscal 2023, and still significantly more than the 496 projects reported in 
fiscal 2014. 
 
To accommodate the increase in projects, the number of prevailing wage investigators has 
increased, starting with doubling investigative staff in the unit from three to six in 
fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2024, the legislature again increased staffing for the division allowing 
for eight investigators in the unit. The fiscal 2025 budget provided nine new wage and hour 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 997/ Page 6 
positions for the division, eight of which were assigned to the Prevailing Wage Unit. As of 
January 2026, the unit has seven investigators, including two bilingual Spanish speakers, 
and two interpreters/interviewers bilingual Spanish speakers. Although the unit is currently 
down one investigator from the previous year, the division has received hiring freeze 
exemptions for its vacancies and is in active recruitment to return to full staffing levels. 
 
History of the Prevailing Wage 
 
The federal Davis-Bacon Act, originally enacted in 1931, requires contractors working on 
federal public works contracts valued at more than $2,000 to pay their employees the 
prevailing local wage for their labor class, as determined by the U.S. Secretary of Labor. 
The general intent of the law, and similar state and local laws, is to stabilize local wage 
rates by preventing unfair bidding practices and wage competition. Thirty-two states and 
the District of Columbia currently have prevailing wage laws; since 1979, nine states have 
repealed their prevailing wage laws. 
 
Maryland adopted a prevailing wage law in 1945 (Chapter 999), but it only applied to road 
projects in Allegany, Garrett, and Washington counties. In 1969, the statute was amended 
to include State public works contracts of $500,000 or more. There have been periodic 
changes to the law and the definition of “prevailing wage.” In 1983, the law was broadened 
to include public works projects in which the State funds 50% or more of the total project 
costs and 75% or more in the case of public schools. Chapter 208 of 2000 reduced the 
prevailing wage threshold for public schools from 75% to 50% of construction costs, 
thereby bringing school construction projects in line with prevailing wage requirements for 
other public works projects. Chapters 281 and 282 of 2014 further lowered the State 
funding threshold for school construction projects to 25% of total construction costs, 
thereby requiring the vast majority of public school construction projects in the State to 
pay the prevailing wage, subject to the $500,000 contract value threshold.  
Chapters 57 and 58 of 2021 lowered the State funding threshold for all public works 
projects (including school construction) to 25% of total construction costs and lowered the 
contract value threshold for payment of prevailing wages to $250,000; however, legislative 
bond initiatives that receive State funds in the capital budget are exempt from the 
requirement to pay prevailing wages. As noted above, Chapter 51 of 2022 extended the 
prevailing wage requirement to mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. 
 
Six Maryland jurisdictions – Allegany, Baltimore, Charles, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City – have local prevailing wage laws requiring 
public works projects in the jurisdiction to pay prevailing wages. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 997/ Page 7 
Research on the Effects of Prevailing Wage on Contract Costs 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) has reviewed research on the effect of 
prevailing wage laws on the cost of public works contracts and has found inconsistent 
and/or unreliable results. The primary challenge confronted by all prevailing wage 
researchers is identifying an appropriate “control group” consisting of projects of similar 
type, timing, and location that do not pay the prevailing wage. In most jurisdictions that 
require a prevailing wage, all projects of a specified type and size are subject to it, so there 
is no natural control group. Some researchers have compared project costs in states or 
localities before and after they adopted prevailing wage requirements, but their findings 
are clouded by the difference in time, during which construction costs changed and other 
factors were not consistent. Another deficiency in the research is that it almost always relies 
on project bid prices (i.e., the anticipated cost prior to the beginning of construction) rather 
than actual final costs. As most construction projects experience change orders or cost 
overruns affecting their cost, reliance on bid prices negatively affects the validity of the 
findings. Therefore, research findings related to the effect of the prevailing wage on project 
costs are inconsistent and often inconclusive. A similar review of research conducted by  
MD Labor (at the time, the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation) for the  
Task Force to Study the Applicability of the Maryland Prevailing Wage Law also 
concluded that “data limitations create difficulty for researchers on both sides of the issue.” 
 
Local school systems occasionally solicit side-by-side bids with and without prevailing 
wages to help them decide whether they want to accept the full State match (and, thus, be 
subject to the prevailing wage) or a lesser State match without being subject to the 
prevailing wage. Data provided to the Public School Construction Program by 
Anne Arundel, Carroll, Frederick, Howard, and Washington counties, from 2012 through 
2015, shows that the cost differential between bids with and without prevailing wages for 
266 individual bids submitted for 26 different school construction and renovation projects 
averaged 11.7%, with a range from 0% to 49%. As with other research data, these represent 
bid prices, not actual construction costs. An independent analysis of the Maryland 
side-by-side bid data concluded that factors other than prevailing wages, including bid 
timing and the level of competition for the bids, accounted for most of the differences 
between the prevailing wage and nonprevailing wage bids. 
 
One area of the research in which there is a general consensus, and which is supported by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, is that labor costs represent between 20% and 30% of 
construction costs (with materials and site costs making up most of the rest). Therefore, a 
10% gap between prevailing wages and market wages could theoretically increase total 
contract costs by about 2.5%, and a 20% gap in wages could increase total contract costs 
by about 6%. Given the empirical evidence that prevailing wages tend to be higher than 
nonprevailing wages and that labor costs are a significant portion of overall project costs, 
DLS believes that it is reasonable to expect that the prevailing wage requirement adds 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 997/ Page 8 
between 2% and 5% to the cost of a public works project. Given the inconsistency and 
inconclusiveness of the empirical research, however, actual effects may vary by project, 
with some projects exhibiting higher cost differences and others experiencing negligible 
differences. 
 

END OF PAGE 8