START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 956 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 956 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Condominiums - Buildings More Than 40 Years Old - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
study buildings in the State that are more than 40 years old and contain a condominium. 
DHCD must submit its findings to the General Assembly by December 1, 2026. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $75,000 for 
DHCD in FY 2027 only for contractual services, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study mandated under the bill must determine: 
 
 
the number of buildings in the State that are more than 40 years old and contain a 
condominium; 
 
the number of condominium units within each building;  
 
the age of each condominium unit owner in each building;  
 
the annual income of each condominium unit owner in each building; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 956/ Page 2 
 
the date on which the most recent reserve study was completed for each building; 
and 
 
the difference between the current amount in each reserve fund and the amount that 
is required to be in each reserve fund for each building described, if any. 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to legislation enacted over the last several years, common 
ownership communities (COCs) in the State, subject to limited exception, are required to 
conduct reserve studies; statutory provisions specify the time by which initial and updated 
reserve studies must be completed. COCs are cooperatives, condominiums, and 
homeowners associations (HOAs). 
 
A reserve study means a study of the reserves required for future major repairs and 
replacement of the common elements or areas that: 
 
 
identifies, using an itemized list, each structural, mechanical, electrical, and 
plumbing component of the common elements and any other components that 
(1) are the responsibility of the cooperative, condominium, or HOA to repair and 
replace and (2) if applicable, meet a minimum cost of repair or replacement, as 
determined by the governing body of the community, that is reasonably based on 
the expenses of the community and not a minor expense that is otherwise addressed 
by the budget of the community; 
 
states the normal useful life (for cooperatives and condominiums) and the estimated 
remaining useful life of each identified component; 
 
states the estimated cost of repair or replacement of each identified component;  
 
states the estimated annual reserve amount necessary to accomplish any identified 
future repair or replacement; and 
 
states quantity or size of each identified component using the appropriate 
measurement.  
 
An updated reserve study means, for the common elements or areas since the prior reserve 
study was completed within the previous five years, a study that: 
 
 
revises replacement costs, remaining life, and useful life estimates; 
 
analyzes work performed and amounts spent; and 
 
identifies whether any maintenance contracts are in place. 
 
Statute includes additional requirements related to reserve studies and updated reserve 
studies, as well as the responsibilities of COCs to attain the necessary reserves and provide 
funding in accordance with the studies. This includes requirements for the governing body 
to develop a funding plan to fund necessary reserves in consultation with a person who 
satisfies the requirements to conduct a reserve study. In addition to other requirements, the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 956/ Page 3 
funding plan must prioritize adequate amounts for the repair and replacement of common 
elements/areas necessary for: 
 
 
the health, safety, and well-being of the occupants; 
 
ensuring structural integrity, such as roofing replacements and maintaining 
structural systems; 
 
essential functioning, such as plumbing, sewer, heating, cooling, and electrical 
infrastructure; and 
 
any other essential or critical purpose, as determined by the governing body. 
 
The reserves may be used for purposes other than those specified in the funding plan if the 
funds are repaid to the reserve fund within five years after their use.  
 
For more information on COCs, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for DHCD increase by an estimated 
$75,000 in fiscal 2027 only, which reflects the cost of acquiring contractual services to 
complete the study required under the bill (and assumes a 30-day start-up delay from the 
bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date). DHCD advises that it does not currently operate any 
condominium-specific programs and therefore lacks the expertise and staff necessary to 
complete the bill’s study with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 956/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 4