START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 900 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 900 
(Delegate Taylor, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Legislative Scholarship Programs - Eligibility and Use - Real Estate Appraisal 
Program 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for both senatorial and delegate scholarships to include 
applicants planning to complete the Real Property Appraiser Qualification Criteria of the 
Practical Applications of Real Estate Appraisal (PAREA) program (adopted by the 
Appraisal Foundation Appraiser Qualifications Board authorized under the federal 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989). The bill likewise 
expands authorized uses of both senatorial and delegate scholarships to include expenses 
to register for and complete a PAREA program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility and authorized uses of senatorial and delegate 
scholarships does not alter overall spending. However, the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission (MHEC) general fund expenditures increase by $10,000 in FY 2027 for 
needed enhancements to the Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS). 
Revenues are not affected.    
 
Local Effect:  None.     
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Senatorial Scholarships 
 
Until June 30, 2019, each senator could award $138,000 in scholarship funds each year. 
Beginning on July 1, 2019, that amount grows by the increase in tuition and mandatory 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 900/ Page 2 
fees over the previous year at the University System of Maryland (USM) institution with 
the highest annual expenses for a full-time resident undergraduate student other than the 
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) and the University of Maryland, 
Baltimore Campus (UMB). 
 
To qualify for an award, an individual must be eligible for in-state tuition, be domiciled in 
the legislative district from which the applicant seeks an award, and demonstrate a definite 
financial need. Each senator must consider an applicant’s financial need. Applicants must 
be accepted for admission in the regular undergraduate, graduate, or professional program 
at an eligible institution or be enrolled in a two-year terminal certificate program in which 
the course work is acceptable for transfer credit for an accredited baccalaureate program in 
an eligible institution. In certain situations, an individual may need to take a competitive 
examination administered by the Office of Student Financial Assistance to qualify for an 
award. An award under the program may not be less than $400 and may not exceed the 
tuition and mandatory fees at the USM institution with the highest annual tuition and fees, 
not including UMGC and UMB. 
 
Except under certain circumstances, a scholarship may be held for up to four years of 
full‑time study or eight years of part-time study. Full-time scholarship recipients may hold 
the scholarship for up to four years of full-time study provided the student continues to be 
eligible for in-state tuition and takes at least 12 semester hours of courses as an 
undergraduate or 9 semester hours of courses as a graduate student each semester leading 
to a degree. Part-time scholarship recipients may hold the scholarship, appropriately 
prorated, for up to eight years of part-time study if the recipient continues to be eligible for 
in‑state tuition and takes at least 6 semester hours of courses each semester leading to a 
degree. On request, MHEC may waive the minimum semester hour requirement for 
applicants with a documented disability. 
 
Senatorial Scholarships – Eligible Institutions 
 
A senatorial scholarship may be used at any undergraduate, graduate, or professional 
school in the State or at select in-state private career schools that offer two-year certificate 
programs that can transfer to a baccalaureate degree, including (1) at a degree‑granting 
institution of higher education, if the curriculum is approved by MHEC; (2) at a hospital 
diploma school for training registered nurses; or (3) to attend as a full-time student a private 
postsecondary proprietary institution that is accredited by a national accrediting association 
approved by the U.S. Department of Education.  
 
Each senator may award at most 10% of scholarship funds to applicants planning to attend 
accredited undergraduate, graduate, or professional institutions outside of the State. Those 
students must be studying an academic area that is not offered in a program that is 
accredited by a national accrediting association approved by the U.S. Department of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 900/ Page 3 
Education in any institution in the State or be a person with a hearing impairment who will 
be studying at an institution outside the State that makes special provisions for persons 
with a hearing impairment. A senatorial scholarship may also be used at an out‑of‑state 
institution of higher education if the applicant is an individual who is an active duty service 
member and domiciled in the State. 
 
Delegate Scholarships 
 
During a term in office, each delegate may award the equivalent of four four-year, full‑time 
scholarships or two part-time scholarships for each full-time scholarship available. A 
part‑time scholarship may not be for more than twice as many years as a full‑time 
scholarship. Each recipient of a part-time scholarship must carry at least six semester hours 
of courses each semester in a program leading to a degree. On request, MHEC may waive 
the minimum semester hour requirement for applicants with a documented disability. 
 
A delegate may select scholarship recipients on any basis he or she considers appropriate. 
The annual amount of a scholarship for any one recipient may not exceed the tuition and 
mandatory fees at the USM institution with the highest annual tuition and fees, not 
including UMGC and UMB. A scholarship award may be used to pay tuition and 
mandatory fees at a Maryland institution of postsecondary education or, when the desired 
program of study or appropriate accommodations are not available in Maryland, an 
out‑of‑state institution. Instead of awarding the scholarships himself or herself, a delegate 
may authorize MHEC to award funding to eligible applicants under the 
Delegate Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards program. 
 
Delegate Scholarships – Eligible Institutions 
 
A delegate scholarship may be used at a public or private nonprofit institution of higher 
education in the State that possesses a certificate of approval from MHEC or, an accredited 
undergraduate, graduate, or professional institution outside the State under certain 
circumstances. To use a scholarship at an institution outside the State, an individual must 
either (1) be studying an academic area that is not offered in a program that is accredited 
by a national accrediting association approved by the U.S. Department of Education in any 
institution in the State; (2) be disabled and studying at an institution outside the State that 
makes special provisions for disabled students that are not available to the applicant at an 
institution in the State; or (3) be an active service member and domiciled in the State. The 
scholarship may also be used at a private career school within the State that is approved by 
MHEC and that is accredited by a national accrediting association that is approved by the 
U.S. Department of Education. A recipient of a delegate scholarship who is currently 
enrolled, or was enrolled within the last two years, in a certificate or license program, 
course, or sequence of courses at a community college that leads to certification or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 900/ Page 4 
licensure may use the scholarship to reimburse specified educational expenses, including 
tuition, mandatory fees, and room and board. 
 
Practical Applications of Real Estate Appraisal 
 
In general, real estate appraisers provide estimates of the value of commercial and 
residential real property to their clients. Real estate appraisals are most often associated 
with the purchase of a home and are often shared with the buyer, seller, and broker involved 
in a real estate transaction. Generally, however, an appraiser’s client is a mortgage lender 
seeking an accurate value for the home that serves as collateral in the loan transaction. 
Appraisal services are also used for a variety of other purposes, including estate planning 
and property insurance.  
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed or certified by the State Commission of Real 
Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and Home Inspectors in the 
Maryland Department of Labor before the individual may provide real estate appraisal 
services or certified real estate appraisal services, respectively, in the State. 
 
Statute establishes that, in addition to other requirements, an applicant for initial licensure 
or certification must have completed at least 1,000 or 1,500 hours (respectively) of real 
estate appraiser services as a trainee under the supervision of a certified appraiser. 
Regulations specify these requirements must be completed over a period of at least 
6 months for licensure and 12 months for certification.  
 
A bachelor’s degree is not required to become a licensed real estate appraiser. Additionally, 
while not a requirement, a certified residential real estate appraiser may meet examination 
eligibility requirements by holding a bachelor’s degree or higher (in addition to meeting 
required classroom hours). Chapter 341 of 2025 prohibits the commission from requiring 
an applicant to hold a bachelor’s degree or higher to qualify for licensure as a real estate 
appraiser or for certification as a residential real estate appraiser.  
 
There are two ways to meet the experience hour requirement to become an appraiser, the 
traditional supervisor/trainee method and PAREA, which was recently approved by the 
State of Maryland. PAREA is designed to offer practical experience in a virtual 
environment combining appraisal theory and methodology in real-world simulations.  
 
State Expenditures:  For senatorial scholarships, the bill does not alter the total dollar 
amount a senator may award each year. For delegate scholarships, the bill similarly does 
not alter the overall number of scholarships a delegate may award during a term in office 
or the maximum award amounts. Therefore, allowing recipients to attend PAREA 
programs as specified has no direct effect on senatorial or delegate scholarship spending. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 900/ Page 5 
MHEC advises that enhancements to MDCAPS are needed to add additional award 
eligibility criteria, enhance applications, and implement award processes for the new 
category of eligibility. MHEC estimates such upgrades to MDCAPS necessitate $10,000 in 
one-time contractual costs in fiscal 2027.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 609 and SB 583 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5