START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 934 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 934 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Washington County Salary Study Commission - Membership - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Washington County Salary Study Commission by 
replacing the member from the Cumberland Valley Associated Builders and Contractors 
with a member from the Washington County Home Builders Association.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Washington County operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Washington County Salary Study Commission is charged with 
studying the salaries of specified public officials in the county and making 
recommendations to the county commissioners for review and consideration. Within 
60 days after receiving the recommendations of the commission, the county commissioners 
may accept, reduce, or reject the salary recommendations but may not increase them. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 934/ Page 2 
Designated Cross File:  SB 498 (Washington County Senators) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2