START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 921 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 921 
(Delegate Moreno) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Juvenile Law - Confinement and Restrictive Housing - Limitations 
 
 
This bill limits the circumstances under which a minor may be placed in restrictive housing 
within a facility operated by the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS). The bill specifies 
the criteria for these placements, the duration of these placements, and services a minor 
must receive while in restrictive housing. The bill also establishes procedures DJS must 
follow when a minor’s placement in restrictive housing expires. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DJS can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill prohibits a minor from being placed in restrictive housing in a 
DJS facility solely for the purposes of discipline, punishment, administrative convenience, 
retaliation, or staffing shortages. A minor may be placed in restrictive housing as a 
temporary measure if: 
 
 
the managing official of the facility finds by clear and convincing evidence that 
there is an immediate and substantial risk (1) of physical harm to the minor, other 
incarcerated individuals, or staff or (2) to the security of the facility;  
 
there are no other reasonable means to eliminate the risk;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 921/ Page 2 
 
restrictive housing is used only to the extent necessary to eliminate the identified 
risk;  
 
restrictive housing occurs under the least restrictive conditions practicable and 
consistent with the rationale for the minor’s placement in restrictive housing;  
 
facility staff promptly notifies the minor of the rationale for the minor’s placement 
in restrictive housing; and  
 
facility staff develops a plan that will allow the minor to leave restrictive housing 
and return to the general population as soon as possible. 
 
A health care or mental health care provider must conduct a mental health screening of a 
minor placed in restrictive housing within one hour of the minor’s placement. Following 
this mental health screening, DJS must provide the minor with any necessary mental health 
services. 
 
A minor placed in restrictive housing must be housed in restrictive housing for the shortest 
amount of time necessary, not to exceed six hours. At the end of this time, DJS must 
(1) return the minor to the general population; (2) transport the minor to an emergency 
department; (3) transfer the minor to the medical unit in the facility; or (4) provide special 
individualized programming outside of restrictive housing, as specified. 
 
A minor may be placed in restrictive housing at the minor’s request. A minor may revoke 
their request at any time; if the minor revokes their request, they must be immediately 
returned to the general population. 
 
A minor placed in restrictive housing must be provided the same standard of access that is 
provided to incarcerated individuals not in restrictive housing to specified items 
(e.g., phone calls, visits, food, showers, and sanitary supplies) and educational services and 
reading materials, medical care, mental health care, and dental health care. Unless it would 
pose a risk of physical harm to the minor or another, the minor must also have maximized 
access to recreation, education, and programming. If any of these privileges or conditions 
are not provided to the minor, the managing official or the managing official’s designee 
must record the reason in the minor’s file. 
 
Current Law:  A minor may not be placed in restrictive housing in a facility operated by 
a “correctional unit” unless the managing official of the facility finds by clear and 
convincing evidence that there is an immediate and substantial risk (1) of physical harm to 
the minor, other incarcerated individuals, or staff or (2) to the security of the facility. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 921/ Page 3 
A minor placed in restrictive housing must be provided:   
 
 
daily physical and mental health assessments to determine whether the minor may 
be released from restrictive housing;  
 
the same standard of access that is provided to incarcerated individuals not in 
restrictive housing to specified items (e.g., phone calls, visits, food, showers, and 
sanitary supplies) and medical care, mental health care, and dental health care; and  
 
unless it would pose a risk of physical harm to the minor or another, maximized 
access to recreation, education, and programming. 
 
If any of these privileges or conditions is not provided to the minor, the managing official 
or the managing official’s designee must record the reason in the minor’s file. 
 
A “correctional unit” means a unit of the State or local government that is directly 
responsible for the care, custody, and control of individuals committed to the custody of 
the unit for the commission or alleged commission of a crime or an act that would be a 
crime if committed by an adult. “Correctional unit” includes (1) the Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; (2) DJS; and (3) offices of a county sheriff or a local 
government unit responsible for operating a local correctional facility or county detention 
center.  
 
“Restrictive housing” means a form of physical separation that has not been requested by 
the incarcerated individual in which the incarcerated individual is placed in a locked room 
or cell for approximately 22 hours or more out of a 24-hour period. Restrictive housing 
includes administrative segregation and disciplinary segregation.  
 
“Administrative segregation” means a form of physical separation of an inmate from the 
general population determined by the classification process or authorized personnel when 
the continued presence of an inmate in the general population would pose a serious threat 
to (1) life; (2) property; (3) self; (4) staff or other inmates; (5) the security or orderly 
functioning of the facility; or (6) the well-being of society.  
 
“Disciplinary detention” means a form of physical separation in which an inmate found 
guilty at a disciplinary hearing is confined apart from the general population for a 
designated period of time. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 921/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. However, similar provisions have been considered. For example, see HB 1107 
and SB 827 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Charles, Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester 
counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Juvenile Services; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4