START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 936 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 936 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Montgomery County Public Schools - Local Food Procurement  
MC 7-26 
 
 
This bill requires, by September 1, 2027, Montgomery County Public Schools (MCPS) to 
identify the dollar amounts of food procured for school meals in the 2026-2027 school year 
from certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive species providers, and publish 
the data on the school system’s website. Using the data for the 2026-2027 school year as a 
baseline, MCPS must set target increases for the dollar amount of food procured from 
certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive species providers for the  
2028-2029, 2030-2031, 2031-2032, 2033-2034, and 2036-2037 school years. MCPS, in 
coordination with the Montgomery County Office of Food Systems Resilience and Public 
Input, must establish a plan to meet the target increases. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only MCPS. 
  
Local Effect:  MCPS expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount in FY 2027 for 
staffing and one-time information technology costs. MCPS expenditures for purchasing 
food also likely increase with higher targets for purchasing local food under the bill, as 
discussed below. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 936/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Certified Local Farm and Fish Program  
 
Chapters 2 and 32 of 2021 established the Certified Local Farm Enterprise Program and 
office in the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) to encourage State agencies 
(including public four-year universities) to achieve an overall goal of purchasing 20% of 
food from certified local farm enterprises. Chapters 575 and 576 of 2023 added certified 
Chesapeake invasive species providers to the calculation of the 20% goal as well as to 
certification requirements and grant-making opportunities. The Acts also renamed the 
program as the Certified Local Farm and Fish Program. The Office for the Certified Local 
Farm and Fish Program within MDA administers the program, including certifying local 
farms and invasive species providers. 
 
A certified local farm is a local farm enterprise that (1) meets the nutrient management 
requirements established in statute and (2) is certified by MDA. 
 
Each State agency must structure its procurement procedures to try to achieve an overall 
percentage goal of 20% of its total dollar value of procurement contracts for food being 
made directly or indirectly to certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive 
species providers. An agency may achieve the goal through competitive sealed bids and 
proposals and small procurements under terms in current law. 
 
Jane Lawton Farm-to-School Program 
 
MDA currently runs the Jane Lawton Farm-to-School Program to (1) promote the sale of 
farm products grown in Maryland to schools; (2) solicit farmers to sell their farm products 
to Maryland schools; (3) develop and regularly update a database of farmers interested in 
selling their farm products to Maryland schools, including what and when the farmers want 
to sell; (4) facilitate purchases from farmers by interested Maryland schools, in consultation 
with MSDE; and (5) provide outreach and guidance to farmers concerning the value of and 
procedure for selling their farm products to interested Maryland schools. In consultation 
with MSDE, school food service directors, and interested farming organizations, the 
program also supports events that promote State agriculture and farm products to children 
through school meal and classroom programs. At the start of each calendar year, each local 
school system participating in the program must report to MDA the types and amounts of 
farm products purchased from farms in the State. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 936/ Page 3 
State Program to Facilitate Purchase of Local Foods 
 
Chapters 1 and 15 of the 2025 Special Session required (when funding is available) the 
establishment of a State program to procure local food for local school systems, including 
the creation of a centralized platform to facilitate the procurement of foods for local school 
systems, such as those from certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive species 
providers. 
 
Local Expenditures:  MCPS does not currently track the dollar amount spent on food 
procured from certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive species providers. 
MCPS advises that it will need to create a system to identify food items that meet the bill’s 
criteria and to track purchases. MCPS will also need to hire a full-time staff person to 
manage the county’s program and ensure that it meets specified targets. Accordingly, 
expenditures for MCPS increase in fiscal 2027 for one-time contractual services to develop 
a system to track applicable purchases and to hire one staff person to oversee the program. 
MCPS did not specify a total expenditure amount. 
 
Furthermore, to the extent that foods that meet the specified criteria under the bill are higher 
in cost than food purchased from noncertified vendors, increasing targets for purchases of 
foods from certified farms and seafood providers may increase MCPS’ expenditures for 
food. However, a reliable estimate of the magnitude of any such increases is not feasible. 
 
MCPS notes that food vendors do not detail which items on their invoices meet the criteria 
in the bill, making it difficult to track the source of foods that are not purchased directly 
from certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive species providers. To the 
extent that food from some vendors cannot be verified as meeting the county’s targets, 
MCPS may need to shift purchases to vendors that can provide the required documentation 
regarding the source of the food; doing so may increase food procurement costs. However, 
to the extent that State funds become available to assist local school systems in the 
procurement of the specified foods, local expenditures may be mitigated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Sales for small businesses that are certified local farms or certified 
Chesapeake invasive species providers may increase as MCPS’ targets for buying from 
those vendors increase. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 936/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Natural Resources; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4