START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 958 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 958 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Natural Gas – Connection and Line Extension – Discounts and Payment Plans 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Public Service Commission (PSC) from adopting or enforcing any 
regulation or order that prevents a public service company from offering a discount or 
payment plan for the connection or extension of a natural gas line to a customer’s property.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can handle the bill’s changes with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. The potential effect on utility rates is discussed in the Additional 
Comments section below.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operation. The 
potential effect on utility rates is discussed in the Additional Comments section below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. The potential effect on utility rates is 
discussed in the Additional Comments section below. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Regulation of Gas Companies, Generally  
 
PSC regulates gas companies, including monitoring retail competition and customer 
choice, to ensure that safe, reliable, and affordable gas service is provided. Rates charged 
by a gas distribution company are specified in the company’s tariff and are approved 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 958/ Page 2 
through an order made by PSC. Through the rate making process, a gas company is allowed 
to charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services it renders.  
 
Public Service Company Rates 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that:  
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article;  
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and  
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public.  
 
Generally, a public service company must file a tariff schedule of its rates and charges for 
its regulated services and for standard offer service with PSC. A public service company 
may not sell, render services, or furnish a commodity until it files and publishes its rate 
schedules with PSC. Additionally, a public service company may not demand or collect 
(1) compensation that differs from compensation specified in its rate schedules that are in 
force at the time of the demand or collection or (2) a charge that violates the statutory 
provisions that govern public utilities.   
 
Extension Plan Rates 
 
Current regulations require a gas company’s tariff to include (1) each schedule of rates for 
service together with the applicable riders and (2) the gas company’s rules, or terms and 
conditions, describing the gas company’s policies and practices in rendering service. These 
rules must include, among other things, the gas company’s plan for the installation of 
extensions of main and service lines where these facilities are in excess of those included 
in the regular rates for service and for which the customer must be required to pay all or 
part of the cost. The customer’s payment under this plan should be related to the investment 
that the gas company prudently can make in consideration of the probable revenue.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that wish to have natural gas service extended 
to their facility may benefit from existing gas company practices related to new customer 
service extensions. The effect on utility rates, generally, is discussed in the Additional 
Comments section below.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 958/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  In its June 2025 Order No. 91683, PSC found that, currently, new 
gas service and main line extensions are encouraged by subsidies that reduce or eliminate 
any charge to the new customer for such extensions. Further, it found that those and similar 
tariff provisions mask the true cost of extending gas service to a new customer, even though 
such an extension may not be economically justified over the life of the new facilities. The 
order directed commission staff to draft regulations for commission consideration 
addressing specific principles, including that the cost for new gas service and/or main line 
extensions be determined using actual per-project costs or actual current construction costs 
for similar projects. As of February 25, 2026, the rulemaking proceeding (RM 92) is 
ongoing.  
 
Therefore, the bill may preclude PSC from adopting regulations to end existing gas 
company practices related to new customer service extensions, resulting in foregone 
savings for existing gas customers – including the State, local governments, and small 
businesses.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3