START OF PAGE 1
HB0912/443425/1

BY: Environment and Transportation Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 912
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “and Terrasa” and substitute “Terrasa,
Healey, Lewis, and Ziegler”; in line 5, strike “a certain prohibition against
abandoning” and substitute “certain provisions of law prohibiting the abandonment or
certain neglect of”; in line 6, strike “does” and substitute “do”; and in line 12, after
“Section” insert “10–604 and”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, after line 22, insert:

“10–604.

(a) [A] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A person may not:

(1) overdrive or overload an animal;

(2) deprive an animal of necessary sustenance;

(3) inflict unnecessary suffering or pain on an animal;

(4) cause, procure, or authorize an act prohibited under item (1), (2), or
(3) of this subsection; or

(5) if the person has charge or custody of an animal, as owner or
otherwise, unnecessarily fail to provide the animal with:

(i) nutritious food in sufficient quantity;
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0912/443425/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 912
Page 2 of 3

(ii) necessary veterinary care;

(iii) proper drink;

(iv) proper air;

(v) proper space;

(vi) proper shelter; or

(vii) proper protection from the weather.

(b) A PERSON WHO PROVIDES CARE TO A COMMUNITY CAT UNDER A
TRAP–NEUTER–RETURN POLICY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 1–1321 OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE MAY NOT BE DEEMED AS HAVING CHARGE OR CUSTODY
OF THE COMMUNITY CAT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(5) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on
conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or both.

(2) As a condition of sentencing, the court may order a defendant
convicted of violating this section to:

(i) participate in and pay for psychological counseling; and

(ii) pay, in addition to any other fines and costs, all reasonable
costs incurred in removing, housing, treating, or euthanizing an animal confiscated from
the defendant.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0912/443425/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 912
Page 3 of 3

(3) As a condition of probation, the court may prohibit a defendant from
owning, possessing, or residing with an animal.”.

On page 3, in line 19, after “REQUIRED” insert “OR A LOCATION IS DEEMED
UNSAFE FOR RETURN OF AN EARTIPPED CAT”.
END OF PAGE 3