START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 908 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 908 
(Delegate Schmidt) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Civil Actions - Failure to Restrict Distribution of Sexual Material Harmful to 
Minors 
 
 
This bill requires a “commercial entity” that knowingly and intentionally distributes sexual 
material harmful to minors on the Internet from a website that contains a substantial portion 
of sexual material harmful to minors (more than one-third of the total material on the 
website) to perform “reasonable age verification methods” to verify the age of individuals 
attempting to access the material. A commercial entity or third party that performs a 
required age verification may not retain any identifying information about individuals 
attempting to access sexual material harmful to minors after access to the material has been 
granted or denied. The bill may not be construed to impose liability on an internet service 
provider or other specified entities and does not apply to any bona fide news or public 
interest broadcast, website video, report, or event and may not be construed to affect the 
rights of any “news‐gathering organization employees.” A parent or legal guardian of a 
minor may bring a civil action against a commercial entity that violates the age-verification 
requirement for damages resulting from the minor’s accessing of sexual material harmful 
to minors. A person may bring a civil action against a commercial entity that violates the 
prohibited data retention provisions for damages resulting from the retention of identifying 
information of an individual. A court may award costs, reasonable attorney’s fees, and any 
other appropriate relief to a prevailing plaintiff. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 908/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill incorporates the definition of “obscene” under § 11-203 of the 
Criminal Law Article and defines (or provides additional context for) numerous terms. 
Notably, “sexual material harmful to minors” means material that is (1) obscene and 
(2) exploits, is devoted to, or principally consists of descriptions of actual, simulated, or 
animated displays or depictions of specified areas of the human body and specified sexual 
activities. “Reasonable age verification methods” specifically includes verifying that a 
person seeking to access sexual material harmful to minors is at least age 18 by requiring 
the person attempting to access the material to comply with a commercial age verification 
system that verifies using at least one of the following ways:  (1) government-issued 
identification; (2) any commercially reasonable method that relies on public or private 
transactional data to verify that the person attempting to access the information is at least 
age 18; or (3) “digital identification” (as defined under the bill). 
 
Current Law:  Section 11-203 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from 
willfully or knowingly displaying or exhibiting or engaging in the business of displaying, 
exhibiting, selling, showing, advertising for sale, or distributing to a minor an “item” 
(1) the cover or content of which is principally made up of an obscene description or 
depiction of illicit sex or (2) that consists of an obscene picture of a nude or partially nude 
figure. If a newsstand or other place of business is frequented by minors, the owner, 
operator, franchisee, manager, or an employee with managerial responsibility may not 
openly and knowingly display at the place of business an item whose sale, display, 
exhibition, showing, or advertising is prohibited as specified above. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to one year 
and/or a $1,000 maximum fine for a first violation and imprisonment for up to three years 
and/or a $5,000 maximum fine for each subsequent violation. 
 
Under § 11-203, “obscene” means (1) that the average adult applying contemporary 
community standards would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient 
interest; (2) that the work depicts specified sexual conduct in a way that is patently 
offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what 
is suitable material; and (3) that the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious artistic, 
educational, literacy, political, or scientific value. An “item” means a still picture, 
photograph, book, pocket book, pamphlet, magazine, videodisc, videotape, video game, 
film, computer disc, or recorded telephone message. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that small businesses in the State are subject to the 
bill’s provisions (including potential civil litigation) and depending on the cost of 
compliance with the age verification requirements under the bill, the bill may have a 
meaningful impact on small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 908/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 394 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3