START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 922 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 922 
(Delegates Hutchinson and Adams) 
Health 
 
 
Behavioral Health Administration - Behavioral Health Program Relocation - 
Regulations 
 
 
This bill requires the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) to adopt regulations that 
authorize a behavioral health program to relocate to another site. The regulations must 
(1) provide an expedited approval process for the relocation of an existing behavioral 
health program, separate from the application process for a new program; (2) authorize a 
relocating program to use documentation previously submitted to BHA if the 
documentation is unchanged or not relevant to the relocation; (3) authorize temporary 
approval for a relocating program to begin practicing at the new site upon determination 
by BHA that the new location meets safety standards; (4) authorize BHA to consider the 
program’s regulatory record as a basis for streamlining the review and approval process 
for relocation; and (5) require BHA to provide clear timelines and standards for the review 
and approval process for relocation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  BHA can adopt the required regulations with existing budgeted resources. 
To administer the expedited approval process required under the regulations, Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase by $155,300 beginning 
in FY 2027 for personnel. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
155,300 
181,200 
189,700 
198,300 
207,000 
Net Effect 
($155,300) 
($181,200) 
($189,700) 
($198,300) 
($207,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 922/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  BHA is required to adopt regulations that include:   
 
 
requirements for licensure of a behavioral health program, including a requirement 
that the program (1) establish and implement a plan for the safety of patients or 
(2) implement a safety or emergency plan established by the program for another 
purpose and revise the safety plan at least every five years; 
 
the process for a program to apply for a license; 
 
a description of programs that are required to be licensed; 
 
requirements for the governance of a behavioral health program, including (1) a 
provision prohibiting a conflict of interest between the interests of a provider and 
patient; (2) a provision authorizing a program licensed as an outpatient mental 
health center to satisfy any regulatory requirement that the medical director be on 
site through the use of telehealth by the director; and (3) a provision authorizing a 
psychiatric nurse practitioner to serve as a medical director of an outpatient mental 
health center, including through telehealth; 
 
provisions for inspections of a program, including inspection and copying of the 
program’s records in accordance with State and federal law; and 
 
provisions for denials, sanctions, suspensions, and revocations of licenses, including 
imposition of civil money penalties and hearings. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.63.06.07), a community-based behavioral health 
program may not change its program sites by adding, closing, or moving locations without 
prior approval from BHA. To request a change in sites, a licensed program must submit an 
application modification on the required form; evidence that the program has notified 
BHA, program participants, and other relevant parties of the proposed modification; and 
copies of all permits required by local jurisdictions. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  BHA advises that licensing staff spend a significant amount of time 
reviewing and approving program relocation under current law. BHA asserts that the 
expedited process required by the bill should entail shorter time frames for approval and, 
thus, require additional resources (an estimated eight additional staff for the licensing 
division). Under that scenario, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $597,356 in 
fiscal 2027. The MDH estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 922/ Page 3 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that, as licensing staff already deal with 
program relocation review and approval, much of the workload of an expedited process 
could likely be absorbed by existing staff, especially since the regulations required by the 
bill establish that previously reviewed documentation can be reused for the relocation 
application. Nevertheless, to the extent that BHA must certify a new location more quickly 
under the regulations, some additional staff may be necessary to meet required timelines. 
 
Accordingly, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $155,347 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring two special program coordinators to handle the expedited process. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$137,065 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$155,347 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
To the extent that BHA requires even more licensing staff to implement the regulations, 
general fund expenditures may increase further beginning as early as fiscal 2027, at a cost 
of about $75,000 annually for each additional hire. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 702 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3