START OF PAGE 1
HB0998/243120/1

BY: Senator Hayes

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 998
(Third Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 3, after the first “of” insert “authorizing the Board of License
Commissioners for Baltimore City to issue a Class 7 micro–brewery license to the holder
of a Class B–D–7 license in the 46th alcoholic beverages district, subject to a certain
limitation; requiring the Board to establish a standard template for certain memoranda
of understanding by a certain date;”; in the same line, strike “of License Commissioners
for Baltimore City”; in line 5, after “district;” insert “authorizing certain holders of
certain Class D licenses in the 46th alcoholic beverages district to apply for a 7–day
sales privilege under certain circumstances; requiring the Board to adopt regulations
establishing certain tiered penalties for license violations;”; in line 8, strike “an”; in line
9, strike “license” and substitute “licenses”; in the same line, strike “a”; in the same line,
strike “area” and substitute “locations”; after line 15, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–403
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”;

and in line 18, strike “12–1604(k)” and substitute “12–1408, 12–1604(k), 12–1604.2,
and 12–2802(g)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 2, after line 3, insert:

“12–403.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0998/243120/01 Hayes
Amendments to HB 998
Page 2 of 6

(a) This section applies to a Class 7 micro–brewery license in the City.

(b) (1) The license may be issued only to the holder of:

[(1)] (I) a Class B beer, wine, and liquor (on–sale) license that is
issued for use on the premises of a restaurant located in the City; or

[(2)] (II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, a
Class [D] B–D–7 alcoholic beverages license that is issued for use on the premises of
the existing Class [D] B–D–7 license located in the [40th] 46TH alcoholic beverages
district of the City.

(2) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE A LICENSE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II)
OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE HOLDER OF THE CLASS B–D–7 LICENSE RECEIVES
A LETTER OF SUPPORT FROM THE RIDGELY’S DELIGHT ASSOCIATION.

(c) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of this subsection, the holder
of a Class 7 micro–brewery license may:

(i) brew in two locations using the same Class 7 micro–brewery
license; and

(ii) obtain a Class 2 rectifying license for the premises at the two
locations authorized under item (i) of this paragraph.

(2) The holder of a Class 7 micro–brewery license may brew in two
locations using the same Class 7 micro–brewery license if the license holder:

(i) requests permission by submitting a written application to
the Executive Director; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0998/243120/01 Hayes
Amendments to HB 998
Page 3 of 6

(ii) obtains written approval from the Executive Director.

(3) Before authorizing a holder of a Class 7 micro–brewery license to
brew in two locations using the same Class 7 micro–brewery license, the Executive
Director shall:

(i) make a determination that a second location to brew
additional capacity is necessary due to insufficient space at the existing Class 7 license
location; and

(ii) consider any other factor relevant to approval of the
application.

(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a holder of a
Class 7 micro–brewery license may not serve or sell beer for on– or off–premises
consumption at the second brewing location authorized under this subsection.

12–1408.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2027, THE BOARD SHALL

ESTABLISH A STANDARD TEMPLATE FOR MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN APPLICANTS FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSES AND LOCAL
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE.

(2) INDIVIDUAL NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS MAY INCLUDE
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON THE STANDARD TEMPLATE ESTABLISHED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) IF AN APPLICANT FOR THE ISSUANCE OF A NEW, TRANSFERRED, OR
EXPANDED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSE IS REQUIRED TO SUBMIT A
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING, THE BOARD MAY NOT CONSIDER THE

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB0998/243120/01 Hayes
Amendments to HB 998
Page 4 of 6

APPLICATION TO BE COMPLETE UNLESS A COMPLETED MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING IS INCLUDED WITH THE APPLICATION.”;

after line 11, insert:

“12–1604.2.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A HOLDER OF A CLASS D LICENSE
FOR USE IN THE 46TH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DISTRICT.

(B) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING § 12–2004(F) OF THIS TITLE, A HOLDER OF
A VALID CLASS D LICENSE MAY APPLY TO THE BOARD TO SELL ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES MONDAY THROUGH SUNDAY IF THE LICENSE HOLDER:

(I) MAINTAINS AVERAGE DAILY RECEIPTS FROM THE SALE
OF FOOD THAT ARE AT LEAST 51% OF THE TOTAL DAILY RECEIPTS FROM THE
ESTABLISHMENT;

(II) EXECUTES A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH

THE RELEVANT LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION AS DETERMINED BY THE
BOARD;

(III) OPERATES AN ESTABLISHMENT WITH NOT MORE THAN
100 SEATS; AND

(IV) PAYS A ONE–TIME FEE OF $15,000, IN ADDITION TO
ANNUAL RENEWAL FEES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CLASS D LICENSE.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HB0998/243120/01 Hayes
Amendments to HB 998
Page 5 of 6

(2) (I) A CLASS D LICENSE THAT IS GRANTED A 7–DAY

PRIVILEGE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED TO A NEW
LOCATION.

(II) A NEW HOLDER OF A CLASS D LICENSE THAT IS
GRANTED A 7–DAY PRIVILEGE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MUST COMPLY WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) THE BOARD SHALL USE THE ONE–TIME FEE PAID BY THE LICENSE
HOLDER UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1)(IV) OF THIS SECTION FOR ENFORCEMENT OF
THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION
(B)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

12–2802.

(G) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT ESTABLISH TIERED
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS UNDER THIS TITLE, INCLUDING THE REVOCATION
OF A 7–DAY SALES PRIVILEGE GRANTED UNDER § 12–1604.2 OF THIS TITLE IF
THE LICENSEE VIOLATES THE PROVISIONS OF THE REQUIRED MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING THREE OR MORE TIMES WITHIN A 2–YEAR PERIOD.”;

and in line 25, strike “, notwithstanding” and substitute “:

(a) Notwithstanding § 12–1705 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Article, a Class D beer and wine license issued for a premises in the 800 block of St.
Paul Street shall be considered unexpired until July 1, 2027, for the purpose of
completing a transfer of ownership at the same location.

(b) Notwithstanding § 12–2202 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Article, a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license issued for a premises in the 6500 block

(Over)
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
HB0998/243120/01 Hayes
Amendments to HB 998
Page 6 of 6

of Eastern Avenue shall be considered unexpired until the end of July 1, 2027, for the
purpose of being renewed to the current license year by the licensee.

(c) Notwithstanding”.
END OF PAGE 6