START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 915 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 915 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Workgroup on Aging Out of Foster Care 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup on Aging Out of Foster Care, to be staffed by the State 
Council on Child Abuse and Neglect (SCCAN). The workgroup must (1) identify the types 
and effectiveness of resources currently available for youth who have aged out of foster 
care to achieve self-sufficiency, as specified; (2) determine the effectiveness of currently 
available resources, and identify challenges with current services and programs offered 
before a youth ages out of the foster care system and seek to assist youth to successfully 
transition into adulthood and self‑sufficiency; (3) determine the types of resources that 
youth who have aged out of foster care are most likely to utilize when seeing continuing 
support, such as adults, peers, financial assistance organizations, and community groups; 
(4) identify the circumstances under which youth in foster care were removed from the 
youth’s home county during any period of foster care; and (5) identify programs that have 
successfully improved outcomes for youth who have aged out of foster care, such as a 
hotline or anonymous support line. Members of the workgroup are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State Travel Regulations. By June 1, 2027, 
the workgroup must submit a report of its findings to the General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SCCAN can staff the workgroup using existing budgeted resources. Any 
expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be absorbable within 
existing budgeted resources. The bill does not otherwise materially affect State operations 
or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 915/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Department of Human Services (DHS), through its Social Services 
Administration, has the primary responsibility for child welfare services throughout the 
State, which are provided primarily by the local departments of social services. 
 
DHS is required to establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor children 
(1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 180 days, by 
a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who are abused, 
abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that continued 
residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has committed the child 
to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with the approval of DHS, 
are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under a voluntary placement 
agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a mental illness, as 
specified. 
 
An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, group and residential care, 
kinship care, and treatment foster care. “Foster care” means continuous 24-hour care and 
supportive services provided for a minor child placed by a child placement agency in an 
approved family home.  
 
State Council on Child Abuse and Neglect 
 
SCCAN is part of DHS for budgetary and administrative purposes. Under § 5-7A-06 of the 
Family Law Article, SCCAN is tasked with evaluating the extent to which State and local 
agencies are effectively discharging their child protection responsibilities. SCCAN must 
coordinate its activities with the State Citizens Review Board of Children, local citizen 
review panels, child fatality review teams, and the Child Abuse Medical Providers 
Initiative in order to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. Under § 5-7A-09 of the 
Family Law Article, SCCAN must report and make recommendations annually to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on matters relating to the prevention, detection, 
prosecution, and treatment of child abuse and neglect, including policy and training needs 
and any data collected on child abuse and neglect diagnoses and treatment.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 915/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3