START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 994 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 994 
(Delegate Boafo, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Regulation - Travel Services - Special Fund, Fees, and Surety 
Requirement (Don't You Worry (Wurie) Act) 
 
 
This bill requires specified sellers of travel services and independent agents to annually file 
with the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) proof of professional liability and 
errors and omissions insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000. MD Labor must 
(1) provide reasonable notice of the requirements of the bill to consumers and sellers of 
travel; (2) enforce the bill’s requirements; and (3) adopt regulations to carry out the bill, 
including regulations establishing requirements and procedures for the registration of 
sellers of travel and providing for the enforcement of the bill. The bill also establishes the 
Sellers of Travel Services Registration Fund, administered by MD Labor, to receive fee 
revenue and cover MD Labor’s administrative costs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by at least $99,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2027 due to filing fees. Special and general fund expenditures increase by $106,500 in 
FY 2027 for staffing and one-time start-up costs (with $5,500 covered by general funds 
due to a shortfall in fee revenue that year). Future years reflect only special funds being 
used, annualization, inflation, and ongoing operating costs. General fund revenues increase 
minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$99,000 
$111,400 
$111,400 
$111,400 
$111,400 
GF Expenditure 
$5,500 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$106,500 
$95,400 
$99,900 
$104,400 
$109,000 
Net Effect 
($13,000) 
$16,000 
$11,500 
$7,000 
$2,400  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 994/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Independent agent” means a person that offers or undertakes to arrange for (or provide) 
specified travel services but does not (1) receive money or other valuable consideration 
directly from the purchaser for the sale of travel services or from the ultimate travel 
supplier; (2) possess at any time any unissued ticket stock or travel document; or (3) have 
the ability to issue tickets, vacation certificates, or any other travel documents. 
 
“Seller of travel” means a person that (1) is located in the State or offers to sell travel 
services to a person located in the State; (2) offers or undertakes to arrange or provide travel 
reservations (or accommodations), tickets for travel by any mode of transportation, hotel 
or motel accommodations, car rentals, or sightseeing tours; and (3) receives valuable 
consideration directly from the purchaser for the sale of travel services or from the ultimate 
travel supplier. However, “seller of travel” does not include specified entities (e.g., an air 
carrier, an ocean carrier, certain hotels and motels). 
 
Sellers of Travel Services Registration Fund 
 
The Sellers of Travel Services Registration Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund. MD Labor 
must pay all fees collected under the bill to the Comptroller’s Office, which must distribute 
the fees to the fund. The fund must be used to cover the actual documented direct and 
indirect costs of fulfilling the statutory and regulatory duties of MD Labor under the bill. 
The Legislative Auditor must audit the fund, as specified. Any investment earnings of the 
fund must be credited to the general fund. 
 
MD Labor must annually calculate the direct and indirect costs attributable to the regulation 
of sellers of travel services and establish fees based on the calculations. Each fee 
established may not be increased annually by more than 12.5%, as specified. The initial 
filing fee is set at $300. 
 
Evidence of Financial Security 
 
Each seller of travel or independent agent must annually file with MD Labor proof of 
professional liability and errors and omissions insurance in the amount of at least 
$1,000,000. In addition, each seller of travel must file annually with MD Labor a list of 
affiliated independent agents. A person may not receive valuable consideration in payment 
for services offered for sale by a seller of travel or an independent agent unless, at the time 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 994/ Page 3 
of receiving the payment, the annual filing requirements have been met (including payment 
of the filing fee).  
 
Current Law:  Travel agents are not subject to licensure or regulation under Maryland 
law. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Enforcement Costs 
 
As the bill requires MD Labor to collect filing fees and confirm proof of professional 
liability and errors and omissions insurance, MD Labor requires additional staff. Therefore, 
special (and some general) fund expenditures increase by $106,513 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one executive director to establish a new office of travel services within MD Labor. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including information 
technology (IT) costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The need for additional staff 
beyond the executive director (e.g., for enforcement) is dependent on regulations adopted 
by MD Labor pursuant to the bill’s authorization; any such impact would be due to the 
regulations, rather than the bill.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$72,372 
IT Costs 
25,000 
Operating Expenses 
     9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$106,513 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and termination of one-time IT 
costs. 
 
Fee Revenues 
 
MD Labor estimates approximately 330 individuals/entities are subject to the initial 
$300 filing fee requirement established by the bill, which generates special fund revenues 
of at least $99,000 annually under the bill. As this falls short of the amount necessary to 
implement the bill in fiscal 2027, it is assumed that general funds (totaling $5,513) are 
needed that year to cover the funding gap. Because the bill does not authorize general funds 
to be paid to the special fund, this analysis assumes that they are not. 
 
For fiscal 2028, this analysis assumes no new providers of travel services and that 
MD Labor increases the filing fee by 12.5%, as authorized by the bill, which is sufficient 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 994/ Page 4 
to cover implementation costs (i.e., without further general fund support), as shown in 
Exhibit 1 and allows the fund to begin to build a small balance. Beginning in fiscal 2028, 
assuming no new providers and no additional annual fee increases, fee revenues are 
sufficient to cover anticipated ongoing implementation costs for a few years. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sellers of Travel Registration Fund Finances 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Starting Fund Balance 
$0 
$0 
$15,970 
$27,478 
$34,459 
Fee Revenues 
99,000 
111,375 
111,375 
111,375 
111,375 
Enforcement Costs 
106,513 
95,405 
99,867 
104,394 
108,952 
General Funds 
5,513 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Fund Balance 
$0 
$15,970 
$27,478 
$34,459 
$36,882 
 
Note:  Assumes fee increase of 12.5% in fiscal 2028 and no increases in subsequent years. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
MD Labor also advises that other costs may be incurred due to the bill’s requirements – 
including ongoing legal expenses. The Department of Legislative Services notes that any 
additional contractual costs – particularly those related to legal expenses – are likely 
unnecessary, given the bill provides no explicit enforcement authority. Nevertheless, to the 
extent additional costs are incurred, MD Labor can annually increase the filing fee (or other 
authorized fees) beyond the rate assumed in Exhibit 1 beginning in fiscal 2028 as needed. 
However, should the bill’s fee cap prevent MD Labor from collecting sufficient fee revenue 
to cover any such costs, additional general funds may be needed to bridge any gaps again. 
This additional funding can be requested through the annual budget process. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small travel agents are meaningfully affected by the bill, which 
requires proof of professional liability and errors and omissions insurance to be filed with 
MD Labor on an ongoing basis. They must also pay annual filing fees of at least $300. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 994/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1106 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services - Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5