START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 941 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 941 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Health - Public Buildings - Hygiene Products 
 
 
This bill requires all public restrooms located in public buildings to provide an adequate 
supply of hand soap, toilet paper, towels or other hand drying devices, water, waste 
containers, and menstrual hygiene products. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and special fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in FY 2027 to supply menstrual hygiene products in every public restroom in a 
building owned, leased, or operated by the State. However, a reliable estimate of the 
increase is not feasible, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  Expenditures for many local governmental units increase beginning in  
FY 2027 to supply menstrual hygiene products in every public restroom in a public 
building owned, leased, or operated by a political division of the State. However, a reliable 
estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. This bill may impose 
a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Menstrual hygiene products” means appropriately sized tampons, 
sanitary napkins, and sanitary pads for use in connection with the menstrual cycle. “Public 
building” means a building, structure, or improved area that is owned leased, or operated 
by the State or a political subdivision of the State. “Public building” includes (1) a public 
mass transportation accommodation, such as a terminal or station, that is supported by 
public funds and (2) an improvement of a public area used for gathering or amusement, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 941/ Page 2 
including a public park or recreation center, but does not include a facility that is primarily 
used to provide primary or secondary education. “Public restroom” means a sanitary 
facility available to the general public that contains at least one toilet or urinal. 
 
Current Law:  While State law does not require public buildings as a whole to provide 
the specified sanitary products in public restrooms, it does impose similar requirements for 
specific facilities. Both State and local correctional facilities are required to provide 
menstrual hygiene products at no cost to female incarcerated individuals, and the facilities 
must have a sufficient supply of menstrual hygiene products available to meet the needs of 
the incarcerated population at all times. Each correctional facility must maintain records 
on the provision and availability of menstrual hygiene products to incarcerated women. 
Furthermore, every public middle and high school in the State must furnish menstrual 
hygiene products at no charge to students through menstrual hygiene product dispensers 
installed in all women’s restrooms. 
 
Regulations require that food service facilities keep toilet facilities supplied with toilet 
tissue and waste receptables at all times, and handwashing facilities must be equipped with 
an adequate supply of hand-cleaning soap or detergent and a means of drying hands such 
as individual towels in dispensers or an effective hand-drying device. 
 
State Expenditures:  With the exception of public four-year institutions of higher 
education, most State buildings are owned and/or managed by three agencies: the 
Department of General Services (DGS), the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT), and the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Based on agency responses, 
this analysis assumes that public restrooms in State buildings already supply hand soap, 
toilet paper, towels (or other hand drying devices), water, and waste containers. The 
primary cost resulting from the bill is the requirement to provide menstrual hygiene 
products in every public restroom. 
 
Standard rental agreements by DGS require that restrooms be stocked with all of the items 
required by the bill, so there is little or no effect on facilities owned, managed, or leased by 
DGS. 
 
DNR advises that its facilities generally do not provide menstrual hygiene products in 
public bathrooms, and that installing dispensers would cost approximately  
$600 per dispenser plus regular costs to keep them stocked. The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) notes that the bill does not require the installation of dispensers, but that 
costs nevertheless increase to provide the products in many or all DNR bathrooms. 
 
MDOT advises that BWI Marshall Airport stopped supplying menstrual hygiene products 
in public bathrooms and therefore would incur costs to restore them. Similarly, the 
Maryland Transit Administration and the Motor Vehicle Administration indicate that they 
incur costs to supply menstrual hygiene products in some of their public bathrooms. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 941/ Page 3 
Therefore, general fund and special fund expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2027 to 
stock all public restrooms with menstrual hygiene products to the extent that they are not 
already provided (DLS notes that the bill does not exempt men’s restrooms). A reliable 
estimate for these costs is not feasible without further information on which public 
restrooms currently provide menstrual hygiene products, but it is estimated that the costs 
could be significant.  
 
The bill does not define what constitutes an “adequate supply.” To the extent that “adequate 
supply” means that public restrooms cannot run out of any of the required supplies, some 
agencies may incur costs to employ additional custodial staff to ensure that public 
bathrooms remain stocked at all times with the items required by the bill, but any such 
costs cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Local Expenditures:  As with State buildings, some public restrooms in buildings owned, 
leased, or operated by local governments do provide menstrual hygiene products, but many 
do not, and will need to consistently purchase and distribute those products to their 
restrooms in order to meet the requirements of the bill (assuming all other requirements of 
the bill are already being met). To the extent that menstrual hygiene products are not 
provided in all applicable public restrooms, local government expenditures increase 
beginning in fiscal 2027. However, a reliable estimate of these costs is not feasible.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Calvert, Howard, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Cities of Frederick and 
Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Library Agency; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; 
Legislative Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3