START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 919 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 919 
(Delegate Taylor, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission - Practical Applications of Real Estate 
Appraisal (PAREA) Grant Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Practical Applications of Real Estate Appraisal (PAREA) Grant 
Program in the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to (1) assist in closing 
appraisal gaps that occur in historically redlined neighborhoods and underrepresented 
communities; (2) award grants to minorities who reside in historically redlined 
neighborhoods and underrepresented communities with the goal of pursuing PAREA; and 
(3) diversify the appraisal field. MHEC must administer the program. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHEC general fund expenditures increase beginning in FY 2027. For 
illustrative purposes, if 10 individuals receive a grant for PAREA (including license fees) 
annually, general fund expenditures increase by an estimated $88,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2027. MHEC general fund expenditures also increase by an estimated $50,000 in 
FY 2027 only for one-time programming costs. Special fund revenues may increase 
minimally, likely beginning in FY 2028, due to license fees paid by grant recipients.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, real estate appraisers provide estimates of the value of 
commercial and residential real property to their clients. Real estate appraisals are most 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 919/ Page 2 
often associated with the purchase of a home and are often shared with the buyer, seller, 
and broker involved in a real estate transaction. Generally, however, an appraiser’s client 
is a mortgage lender seeking an accurate value for the home that serves as collateral in the 
loan transaction. Appraisal services are also used for a variety of other purposes, including 
estate planning and property insurance.  
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed or certified by the State Commission of Real 
Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and Home Inspectors in the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) before the individual may provide real estate 
appraisal services or certified real estate appraisal services, respectively, in the State. 
 
Statute establishes that, in addition to other requirements, an applicant for initial licensure 
or certification must have completed at least 1,000 or 1,500 hours (respectively) of real 
estate appraiser services as a trainee under the supervision of a certified appraiser. 
Regulations specify these requirements must be completed over a period of at least 
6 months for licensure and 12 months for certification.  
 
A bachelor’s degree is not required to become a licensed real estate appraiser. Additionally, 
while not a requirement, a certified residential real estate appraiser may meet examination 
eligibility requirements by holding a bachelor’s degree or higher (in addition to meeting 
required classroom hours). Chapter 341 of 2025 prohibits the commission from requiring 
an applicant to hold a bachelor’s degree or higher to qualify for licensure as a real estate 
appraiser or for certification as a residential real estate appraiser. 
 
There are two ways to meet the experience hour requirement to become an appraiser, the 
traditional supervisor/trainee method and PAREA, which was recently approved by the 
State of Maryland. PAREA is designed to offer practical experience in a virtual 
environment combining appraisal theory and methodology in real-world simulations. 
 
Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program 
 
Chapters 702 and 703 of 2021 established the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining 
Financial Assistance Program and related fund within the Department of Housing and 
Community Development (DHCD). As modified by Chapters 155 and 156 of 2024, the 
purpose of the program is to help close appraisal gaps that occur in historically redlined 
neighborhoods by making financial assistance available to affordable housing developers 
working in low-income census tracts and sustainable communities and individuals who 
purchase a qualified property (1) after a qualified project is completed; (2) at an affordable 
sales price as determined by regulations adopted by DHCD; and (3) as an owner-occupant.  
 
Generally, in the fiscal year in which a qualified project is proposed, an individual or 
business entity may apply to DHCD for financial assistance to cover the appraisal gap for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 919/ Page 3 
the project. “Qualified project” means the construction or substantial rehabilitation of a 
qualified property if the eligible construction expenses do not exceed $500,000. Subject to 
specified funding limits and regulations, DHCD must accept an application for financial 
assistance from an individual or business entity that proposes to develop a qualified project 
and an individual that proposes to purchase a qualified property. The application must be 
in the form and must contain any information that DHCD requires by regulation. DHCD 
must approve all applications that qualify for financial assistance in a timely manner. The 
fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes $10.0 million in general obligation bond 
proceeds for the program.  
 
Chapters 702 and 703 also required DHCD to conduct a study, aggregated by race, 
zip codes, and census tracts, of housing values, appraisals, and refinancing rates across the 
State over the past 30 years, including the impact of State and federal policies, such as 
infrastructure (road, park, and water and sewer) and other investments, on those 
communities. DHCD was required to submit the findings of the study to the Governor and 
the General Assembly by June 30, 2022; that report can be read here. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, general fund expenditures for 
PAREA grants increase. Any actual increase depends on the funding appropriated for the 
program and the guidelines established by MHEC, including grant amounts and the number 
of recipients. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, MHEC general fund expenditures for awards made under 
the PAREA Grant Program may increase by $88,000 annually to cover the cost of 
PAREA programs and related licensing fees. This estimate is based on the cost of 
attendance for the Appraisal Institute’s licensed residential PAREA program, which is a 
program approved by the Appraiser Qualifications Board. For non-Appraisal Institute 
members, attendance costs $8,430 for a 6- to 18-month course. In Maryland, real estate 
appraiser licenses, residential appraiser certifications, and general appraiser certifications 
each require a $250 license fee plus a $120 national registry fee. 
 
This estimate assumes the PAREA Grant Program provides awards to 10 prospective real 
estate appraisers, that participants complete the program in approximately one year, and 
that the grant covers the full cost of attendance at the Appraisal Institute’s licensed 
residential PAREA course along with the required license and registry fees.  
 
For administration of the program, MHEC advises that the agency requires meaningful 
additional programming expenditures associated with developing procedures, rules, and 
application systems for the new grant program, as well as three new permanent staff 
members associated with administering the program. However, the Department of 
Legislative Services advises that the scope of the program is not likely large enough to 
necessitate the level of staffing and expenditures estimated by MHEC. Instead, this analysis 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 919/ Page 4 
assumes $50,000 in one-time programming costs for configuration, programming, testing, 
and reporting of a grant administration system are incurred in fiscal 2027 only. This 
analysis further assumes existing staff at MHEC can collect and review applications for 
awards on an ongoing basis with existing resources. 
 
To the extent additional individuals apply for an appraiser license due to the bill, 
special fund revenues for MD Labor increase by $250 per licensee. However, any impact 
is likely minimal. 
 
This estimate does not account for any costs associated with classroom hours or 
credit hours that may be required to obtain a license in addition to the PAREA 
requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 607 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 657 (Senator Henson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
University System of Maryland; Maryland Independent College and University 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 18, 2026 
 
caw/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4