START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 914 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 914 
(Delegates Hartman and Anderson) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Worcester County - Board of License Commissioners - Membership 
 
 
This bill increases, from three to five, the number of members that the Governor must 
appoint to the Worcester County Board of License Commissioners. The terms of the 
members are staggered as required by the terms provided for board members on 
June 1, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Worcester County salary expenditures increase by $4,200 beginning in 
FY 2027 due to the increase in the number of board members under the bill. 
Worcester County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The terms of the three members of the board who are in office on the 
effective date of the bill must expire as follows:  (1) the term of the one member whose 
term is scheduled to expire on June 30, 2027, must expire on June 30, 2027; and (2) the 
term of the two members whose terms are scheduled to expire on June 30, 2029, must 
expire on June 30, 2029. The initial terms of the two additional members of the board under 
the bill must begin July 1, 2026. 
 
Current Law:  The Worcester County Board of License Commissioners is composed of 
three members appointed by the Governor at the advice and consent of the Senate. Each 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 914/ Page 2 
member of the board must be a resident and voter of the county, and an individual of high 
character and integrity and of recognized business capacity. The term of a member is 
four years. The terms of the members are staggered as required by the terms provided for 
the members of the board on July 1, 2016. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The annual salary for each member of the board is $2,100. Therefore, 
Worcester County expenditures increase by $4,200 beginning in fiscal 2027 from the 
addition of two board members. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 681 (Senator Carozza) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Worcester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2