START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 963 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 963 
(Delegate Woorman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Registers of Wills - Appointment of Personal Representatives 
 
 
This bill repeals a prohibition against letters of administration (which authorize a personal 
representative to administer an estate), being granted to a person who is not a citizen of the 
United States unless the person is a permanent resident of the United States and is the 
spouse, an ancestor, a descendant, or a sibling of the decedent. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The duties and powers of a personal representative to administer an estate 
commence on the issuance of the personal representative’s letters. Statute establishes a 
specified order of priority of classes of persons for the court and register of wills to follow 
in granting letters in administrative or judicial probate, beginning with personal 
representatives named in a will admitted to probate. 
 
Statute prohibits letters of administration from being granted to a person, who, at the time 
a determination of priority is made, has filed with the register a declaration in writing that 
the person renounces the right to administer or is: 
 
 
younger than age 18; 
 
mentally incompetent; 
 
convicted of a serious crime, unless the person shows good cause for the granting 
of letters; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 963/ Page 2 
 
not a citizen of the United States unless the person is a permanent resident of the 
United States and is the spouse, an ancestor, a descendant, or a sibling of the 
decedent;  
 
a full-time judge of a court established under the laws of Maryland or the 
United States including a judge of an orphans’ or probate court, or a clerk of court, 
or a register, unless the person is the surviving spouse or is related to the decedent 
within the third degree; or 
 
a nonresident of the State, unless there is on file with the register an irrevocable 
designation by the nonresident of an appropriate person who resides in the State on 
whom service of process may be made in the same manner and with the effect as if 
it were served personally in the State on the nonresident. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1420 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2