START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 968 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 968 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Corporations and Associations - Maryland Securities Act - Filing Fees 
 
 
This bill increases specified filing fees under the Maryland Securities Act. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by an estimated $383,600 in FY 2027 and 
by $511,500 annually thereafter. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$383,600 
$511,500 
$511,500 
$511,500 
$511,500 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$383,600 
$511,500 
$511,500 
$511,500 
$511,500  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Maryland Securities Act – Prohibitions, Exemptions, and Filings 
 
Section 11‐501 of the Corporations and Associations Article (part of the 
Maryland Securities Act) prohibits a person from offering or selling any security in the 
State unless (1) the security is registered under the Act; (2) the security or transaction is 
exempted under Subtitle 6 of the Act; or (3) the security is a federal covered security. Under 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 968/ Page 2 
the statute, “person” means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a 
joint-stock company, a trust where the interests of the beneficiaries are evidenced by a 
security, an unincorporated organization, a government, or a political subdivision of a 
government. 
 
Under § 11‐503.1 of the Maryland Securities Act, a person may generally not offer or sell 
a federal covered security in the State unless specified documents are filed and any required 
fees are paid. Pursuant to § 11‐503.1(c), with respect to a security that is a federal covered 
security (as specified in federal law), the Securities Commissioner may require, by rule, 
order, or otherwise, the issuer to file (1) a consent to service of process signed by the issuer; 
(2) the fee required under § 11‐506 of the statute; and (3) any document filed with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act of 1933.  
 
Also pursuant to the Maryland Securities Act (specifically, § 11‐205), the 
Securities Commissioner, by rule or order, may require the filing of any prospectus, 
pamphlet, circular, form letter, advertisement, or other sales literature or advertising 
communication, whether communicated in hard copy, electronic means, or otherwise, 
addressed or intended for distribution to prospective investors, including clients or 
prospective clients of an investment adviser, unless the security or transaction is otherwise 
exempted by Subtitle 6, or as otherwise specified. 
 
Section 11‐601 of the Corporations and Associations Article lists specified securities that 
are exempted from the above requirements under § 11‐205 (filing of sales/advertising 
literature) and § 11‐501 (registration requirement) of the Maryland Securities Act. Pursuant 
to § 11‐601(16), any security issued by an entity formed, organized, or existing under 
State law is exempted to the extent permitted by the Securities Commissioner (by rule or 
order), if certain conditions are applicable, including (1) the offer and sale of the security 
are made only to residents of the State; (2) the aggregate price of securities in an offering 
does not exceed $100,000; (3) the total consideration paid by any purchaser of securities 
in an offering does not exceed $100; and (4) the security is sold in an offering conducted 
in compliance with any conditions established by rule or order of the 
Securities Commissioner, as specified (e.g., restrictions on the nature of the issuer, 
limitations on the number of offerings, etc.). 
 
Filing Fees 
 
A person required to submit a filing in accordance with an exemption under the 
Maryland Securities Act is generally required to pay a filing fee of $400 for each filing. 
However, a person required to submit a filing fee in accordance with the exemption granted 
under § 11-601(16) must pay a fee of $100 for each filing. A person required to submit 
notice of the offer or sale of federal covered securities under 11‐503.1(c) must pay (1) a 
fee of $100 for each filing and (2) an additional fee of $150 for each filing made after the 
filing due date. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 968/ Page 3 
The bill: 
 
 
increases, from $100 to $250, the applicable filing fee in regard to § 11‐601(16); 
and 
 
in regard to filings under 11‐503.1(c), increases, from $100 for each filing to $250 
for the initial filing, the applicable filing fee. (The bill does not alter the current 
additional fee of $150 for each filing made after the filing due date.) 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase by an estimated $383,625 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by approximately 
$511,500 annually thereafter due to the increase of filing fees under the bill. This estimate 
is based on fiscal 2024 filings reported by the Office of the Attorney General (the latest 
information readily available) and assumes that the following number of filings occur 
annually: 
 
 
10 filings in accordance with the exemption granted under § 11‐601(16); and 
 
3,400 initial filings of a notice of the offer or sale of federal covered securities under 
§ 11-503.1(c). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 917 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Securities Division); Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3