START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 917 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 917 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Retroactive Denial of Reimbursement 
 
 
This bill alters the circumstances and timeframe under which a carrier (including a 
Medicaid managed care organization (MCO)) may retroactively deny reimbursement for 
claims. Each carrier that retroactively denies reimbursement must develop a plan for 
training health care providers on reimbursement protocols, billing standards, and 
compliance requirements related to the retroactive denial of reimbursement. The bill cannot 
be construed to prohibit a health care provider or insured from appealing a retroactive 
denial of reimbursement. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all 
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any additional 
workload can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Medicaid expenditures increase 
by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2027; federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. Expenditures for the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program increase by a significant amount beginning in FY 2027. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A carrier may retroactively deny reimbursement to a health care provider 
only if (1) the retroactive denial is for services subject to the coordination of benefits with 
another carrier, Medicaid, or Medicare and is made within 18 months after the date the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 917/ Page 2 
carrier paid the provider and (2) the carrier has previously provided the health care provider 
with training on reimbursement protocols, billing standards, and compliance requirements 
related to the retroactive denial of reimbursement and the denial is made during the 
three-month period after the date the services were provided. 
  
A carrier that retroactively denies a claim must provide the health care provider, in addition 
to the written statement required under current law, any supporting documents and 
calculations regarding the retroactive denial. 
 
A carrier is prohibited from retroactively denying reimbursement for a service (1) based 
on the outcome of the service or (2) before having a conversation with the provider in 
which the provider is given the opportunity to explain the circumstances, rationale, or 
justification for the service being considered for retroactive denial and without taking into 
account the totality of the circumstances as viewed prospectively based on the 
circumstances, rationale, or justification offered by the provider. 
 
Current Law:  An insurer, nonprofit health service plan, health maintenance organization, 
dental plan organization, Medicaid MCO, and any other person that provides health benefit 
plans subject to State regulation (collectively carriers) may only retroactively deny 
reimbursement for services within six months after the date that the carrier paid the 
provider. Claims for services subject to coordination of benefits with another carrier, 
Medicaid, or Medicare may be denied for up to 18 months. 
 
A carrier that retroactively denies reimbursement to a health care provider must provide 
the health care provider with a written statement specifying the basis for the retroactive 
denial. If the retroactive denial of reimbursement results from coordination of benefits by 
a carrier that is not an MCO, the written statement must provide the name and address of 
the entity acknowledging responsibility for payment of the denied claim. 
 
A carrier that does not comply with these requirements may not retroactively deny 
reimbursement or attempt in any manner to retroactively collect reimbursement already 
paid to a health care provider. 
 
A carrier may retroactively deny reimbursement at any time if information submitted was 
fraudulent or improperly coded, if the claim was duplicative, or, for a claim submitted to 
an MCO, if the claim was for services provided during a time period for which Medicaid 
has permanently retracted the capitation payment for the recipient from the MCO. If a 
carrier retroactively denies reimbursement for services as a result of coordination of 
benefits, the health care provider must have six months from the date of denial (unless the 
carrier permits a longer time period) to submit a claim for reimbursement for the service to 
the carrier, Medicaid, or Medicare program responsible for the payment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 917/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Medicaid 
 
As the bill’s restrictions and requirements on the retroactive denial of claims apply to 
Medicaid MCOs, the Maryland Department of Health advises that Medicaid expenditures 
increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2027 (general and federal funds) 
due to increased administrative expenses for MCOs, specifically due to the new training 
requirements and denial conditions. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Plan 
 
The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is largely 
self-insured for its medical contracts except for the one fully insured integrated health 
model medical plan (Kaiser). The Department of Budget and Management advises that 
limiting the ability of carriers to retroactively deny reimbursement to the three-month 
window following the provision of services and requiring the development of a plan for 
training health care providers surrounding retroactively denied reimbursement likely 
results in significant increased expenditures for the program (general, special, and federal 
funds) – which could be as much as $15.0 million in the first year alone. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care providers benefit from fewer 
retroactively denied claims. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3