START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 983 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 983 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means and Economic Matters 
 
 
State Tax Credits, Modifications, and Exemptions - Alterations and Repeal 
 
 
This bill (1) alters and sunsets the enterprise zone program and several other business tax 
credit programs; (2) disallows the dividends paid deduction for real estate investment trusts 
(REITs) under the income tax; (3) repeals various sales and use tax exemptions; (4) repeals 
the motor fuel tax cost of collection allowances; and (5) limits the tobacco tax exemption 
for cigarettes brought into the State by a consumer to one carton of cigarettes (reduced 
from five cartons). The bill generally takes effect June 1, 2026. Income tax provisions 
generally take effect July 1, 2026, and apply to tax year 2026 and beyond. Sales and 
use tax, tobacco tax, and motor fuel tax provisions take effect July 1, 2026. Other 
provisions affecting the Tax-Property Article apply to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  In FY 2027, quantified general and special fund revenue increases total 
$0.4 million and $1.6 million, respectively, and quantified Transportation Trust Fund 
(TTF) expenditures for local highway user revenue grants total $0.3 million. Future years 
reflect the timing of tax credit sunset provisions and ongoing revenues. General and special 
fund revenues and TTF expenditures increase further in FY 2027 and future years due to 
certain unquantified provisions (not shown below). General and special fund expenditures 
for the Department of Commerce decrease by $4.7 million and $7.3 million, respectively, 
in FY 2027 and by $12.0 million in total in FY 2028, as discussed below. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0.4 
$0.8 
$2.4 
$0.8 
$0.8 
SF Revenue 
$1.6 
$1.6 
$1.9 
$1.6 
$1.5 
GF Expenditure 
($4.7) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
($7.0) 
$0.2 
$0.3 
$0.2 
$0.2 
GF/SF Exp. 
$0 
($12.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$13.6 
$14.1 
$4.0 
$2.1 
$2.1  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 983/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues increase by at least $0.3 million in FY 2027 
and similar amounts thereafter. Local property tax revenues may also increase, as discussed 
below. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Terminated Tax Credit Programs 
 
Terminated tax credit programs and their sunset provisions under current law and under 
the bill are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sunset Provisions for Terminated Tax Credit Programs 
Current Law vs. the Bill 
 
Program 
Current Law 
The Bill 
Enterprise Zone Program 
None 
January 1, 20311 
One Maryland Tax Credit 
None 
January 1, 2027 
BIITC Program 
June 30, 2028 
June 30, 2026 
Employer Security Clearance Costs Tax Credit 
Tax Years After 2027 
Tax Years After 2026 
Buy Maryland Cybersecurity Tax Credit 
None 
Tax Years After 2026 
Businesses that Create New Jobs Tax Credit2 
None 
January 1, 2027 
 
BIITC:  Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit 
 
1 A business entity that locates in an enterprise zone before January 1, 2031, remains eligible for existing 
program benefits, subject to existing eligibility requirements and conditions. 
2 The bill sunsets only the State tax credit component of the businesses that create new jobs tax credit 
program. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Repealed Sales and Use Tax Exemptions 
 
The bill repeals existing sales and use tax exemptions for: 
 
 
the sale of machinery and equipment used to produce bituminous concrete and 
utilities used to operate the machinery and equipment; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 983/ Page 3 
 
the pre-2008 sale of machinery and equipment that (1) enables a television or radio 
station to originate and broadcast or receive and broadcast digital signals and 
(2) was or is purchased to comply with or facilitate compliance with the 
Telecommunications Act of 1996; and 
 
the sale of construction material and warehousing equipment that is purchased by a 
person solely for use in a specified target redevelopment area in Baltimore County, 
if the buyer provides the vendor with evidence of eligibility for the exemption issued 
by the Comptroller. 
 
Modified Tax Credit Programs 
 
 
Enterprise Zone 
 
The bill modifies criteria for the designation of enterprise zones and focus areas within 
enterprise zones such that certain criteria must be met within each census tract within the 
area, and reasonable proximate areas may be considered for purposes of establishing 
eligibility only if fewer than 1,500 individuals reside in a census tract within the area. The 
Secretary of Commerce may not designate new enterprise zones or grant expansions to 
existing enterprise zones in a given fiscal year if the Secretary reasonably anticipates that 
aggregate enterprise zone property tax credits may exceed $60.0 million for the 
immediately preceding fiscal year. 
 
As noted above, the bill terminates eligibility for the enterprise zone property and income 
tax credits on January 1, 2031. A business entity that locates in an enterprise zone before 
this termination date remains eligible for program benefits, subject to the applicable 
requirements and conditions. 
 
The bill caps the enterprise zone income tax credit at $250,000 per taxpayer for any  
tax year and limits aggregate tax credit claims to $2.0 million annually. The bill also (1) 
caps the enterprise zone property tax credit to $500,000 per qualified property per  
taxable year and (2) modifies the enhanced enterprise zone property tax credit for newly 
constructed qualified property that provides both office and retail space and became 
eligible for the property tax credit on or after January 1, 2019, but before January 1, 2022. 
Specifically:  (1) for such property that became eligible in 2019, the enhanced credit may 
be claimed for 12 taxable years (reduced from 13), with a credit percentage of 80% in each 
of the first 7 taxable years (reduced from 8); (2) for such property that became eligible in 
2020, the enhanced credit may be claimed for 11 taxable years (reduced from 13), with a 
credit percentage of 80% in each of the first 6 taxable years (reduced from 8); and (3) for 
such property that became eligible in 2022, the enhanced credit is eliminated. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 983/ Page 4 
 
Film Production Activity 
 
The aggregate amount of unused tax credit funding that may be carried forward from all 
prior fiscal years is limited to $12.0 million. The bill specifies that the purpose of the  
tax credit is to incentivize and promote film production activity in the State to stimulate 
the local economy by creating jobs, fostering investment in industry infrastructure, and 
boosting tourism. By December 1, 2026, Commerce must evaluate and submit a specified 
report to the General Assembly on the tax credit as modified by the bill. The report must 
include recommendations on how the tax credit could be improved or streamlined, 
including potential reforms to the list of eligible production activities; eligibility 
requirements for small and independent film entities; minimum in-State spending 
requirements for larger film production entities; and qualifying costs, including whether 
qualifying costs would be better defined by administrative regulation. 
 
 
Businesses that Create New Jobs 
 
As noted above, the bill eliminates the State tax credit component of the businesses that 
create new jobs program for taxable years ending before January 1, 2027. The bill also 
requires local governments that grant tax credits under the program to annually report 
specified information to the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT), 
Commerce, and the Comptroller, including the investment and number of jobs associated 
with each credit and other information about business entities that receive credits. SDAT 
must aggregate these reports and submit an annual combined report to the  
General Assembly, along with any findings or recommendations. 
 
Tax Credit for Class F Vehicle Registration 
 
The bill limits eligibility for the obsolete State income tax credit for Class F vehicle 
registration to individuals and corporations headquartered in the State. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Enterprise Zone Program 
 
The State’s enterprise zone program offers property and income tax credits to businesses 
located within designated enterprise zones. The purpose of the program is to attract, retain, 
and encourage commercial development in economically distressed areas of the State. 
 
 
Designation of Enterprise Zones 
 
A political subdivision (as defined) may apply to the Secretary of Commerce for the 
designation of an enterprise zone or the expansion of an existing enterprise zone. An area 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 983/ Page 5 
may be designated as an enterprise zone if (1) located in a priority funding area (PFA) or 
in a qualified opportunity zone (QOZ) in Allegany, Garrett, Somerset, or Wicomico County 
and (2) at least one of four specified criteria (relating to unemployment, qualification as a 
low‑income poverty area, median family income, and population decline due to chronic 
abandonment or demolition of property or substantial property tax arrearages) are met in 
the area or within a reasonable proximity to the area but in the same county. An enterprise 
zone designation is effective for 10 years. The Secretary may designate up to six enterprise 
zones per calendar year (up to two enterprise zones per county per calendar year). The 
expansion of an existing enterprise zone does not count toward the aforementioned 
limitations if it does not exceed 25% of the existing geographic area of the enterprise zone; 
however, the Secretary may grant one extraordinary expansion of an enterprise zone each 
calendar year for an area that has suffered a significant loss of economic base or merits 
inclusion in an enterprise zone for a compelling economic reason. 
 
A political subdivision may request the Secretary to designate all or part of an enterprise 
zone as a focus area for the lesser of 5 years or the remainder of the 10‑year term of the 
enterprise zone. The Secretary may grant the request if the area meets at least three of five 
specified criteria (relating to unemployment, incidence of poverty, crime, percentage of 
substandard housing, and vacant commercial property) in the area or within a reasonable 
proximity to the area but in the same county. 
 
 
Enterprise Zone Property Tax Credit 
 
“Qualified property,” as it applies to the enterprise zone property tax credit, is defined as 
real property that is not used for residential purposes; is used in a trade or business by a 
business entity that meets specified program requirements; and is located in an enterprise 
zone. The State must reimburse local governments for 50% of the property tax credit as 
provided in the State budget. 
 
A local governing body must grant the credit against the property tax imposed on the 
eligible assessment (as defined) of the qualified property. In general, the credit is equal to 
the following percentage of the amount of property tax imposed on the eligible  
assessment:  80% in each of the first five taxable years following the calendar year in which 
the property initially becomes a qualified property; 70% in the sixth taxable year; 60% in 
the seventh taxable year; 50% in the eighth taxable year; 40% in the ninth taxable year; 
and 30% in the tenth taxable year. 
 
Chapters 449 and 450 of 2022 authorized enhanced enterprise zone property tax credits for 
newly constructed qualified property that provides both office and retail space and became 
eligible for the property tax credit on or after January 1, 2019, but before January 1, 2022. 
The enhanced credit is equal to the following percentage of the amount of property tax 
imposed on the eligible assessment:  80% in each of the first eight taxable years following 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 983/ Page 6 
the calendar year in which the property initially becomes a qualified property; 70% in the 
ninth taxable year; 60% in the tenth taxable year; 50% in the eleventh taxable year;  
40% in the twelfth taxable year; and 30% in the thirteenth taxable year. 
 
 
Enterprise Zone Income Tax Credit 
 
A business entity that is located in an enterprise zone and that satisfies certain requirements 
may claim a nonrefundable credit against the State income tax for up to $1,000 of the wages 
paid to each qualified employee filling a newly-created position ($1,500 in the case of a 
focus area employee, as defined). The credit increases to up to $6,000 of the wages paid to 
a qualified employee who is an economically disadvantaged individual (as defined) 
($9,000 in the case of a focus area employee), to be claimed over a period of three years. 
Any unused amount of credit may be carried forward for up to 5 tax years. Certain 
enhanced credits are available to QOZ businesses under the Opportunity Zone 
Enhancement Program. 
 
One Maryland Tax Credit 
 
The One Maryland Program offers tax credits against the income tax or the insurance 
premium tax to businesses that establish or expand a business facility in a Tier I county 
with eligible project costs of at least $500,000. To be eligible for the credit, the new or 
expanded business facility must be: 
 
 
located in a PFA, eligible for funding outside of a PFA, or located in a QOZ in 
Allegany, Garrett, Somerset, or Wicomico counties; 
 
primarily engaged in an eligible industry; and 
 
create a minimum of 10 qualified positions (as defined) during a 24-month period. 
 
The amount of the credit is equal to 100% of total eligible project costs, up to a maximum 
of $5.0 million (if the business entity creates at least 50 qualified positions), $2.5 million 
(if the business entity creates at least 25 qualified positions but fewer than 50 qualified 
positions), or $1.0 million (if the business entity creates at least 10 qualified positions but 
fewer than 25 qualified positions). A QOZ business that creates at least 50 qualified 
positions may be eligible for an enhanced One Maryland credit of up to $5.5 million under 
the Opportunity Zone Enhancement Program. 
 
The tax credit may be carried forward up to 10 tax years and is partially refundable 
beginning in the fifth tax year. The aggregate amount of credits that Commerce may award 
under the program is not subject to limitation. The program is not subject to termination. 
 
Dividends Paid Deduction for Real Estate Investment Trusts 
 
A corporation, trust, or association that operates as a vehicle for investment in real estate 
and meets various specified requirements may qualify for treatment as a REIT for federal 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 983/ Page 7 
income tax purposes. To qualify for REIT status, a corporation, trust, or association must, 
among other requirements, derive at least 95% of its gross income from specified passive 
income sources and at least 75% of its income from specified real estate sources. 
In general, for purposes of computing federal taxable income, a REIT that distributes at 
least 90% of its income to shareholders and otherwise meets all applicable requirements 
may deduct the amount of dividends paid during the taxable year. Thus, such dividends are 
subject to income tax only at the shareholder level. 
 
Maryland’s income tax generally conforms to the federal tax treatment of REITs, except 
in the case of “captive REITs,” which are more than 50% owned or controlled by a single 
entity. Chapters 583 and 584 of 2007 disallowed the dividends paid deduction for captive 
REITs for purposes of Maryland corporate income tax. The Acts defined a captive REIT 
as a corporation, trust, or association: 
 
 
that is considered a REIT for the tax year under § 856 of the Internal Revenue Code 
(IRC); 
 
that is not regularly traded on an established securities market; and 
 
where more than 50% of the voting power or value of the beneficial interests or 
shares, at any time during the last half of the taxable year, is owned or controlled, 
directly or indirectly, by a single entity that is subject to the provisions of 
Subchapter C of Chapter 1 of the IRC. 
 
Chapter 478 of 2023 modified the definition of a captive REIT to exclude a corporation, 
trust, or association that otherwise meets the ownership requirements for status as a captive 
REIT and is more than 50% owned or controlled by (1) an entity organized as a trust in 
which a listed Australian property trust owns or controls, directly or indirectly, 75% or 
more of the voting power or value of the beneficial interests or shares of the trust or (2) a 
qualified foreign entity, as defined by the Act. 
 
Employer Security Clearance Costs Tax Credit 
 
For tax years 2023 through 2027, an individual or corporation that employs up to 
500 employees may claim nonrefundable credits against the State income tax for (1) up to 
$200,000 of security clearance administrative expenses; (2) small businesses that perform 
security‑based contracting, up to $200,000 of first‑year rental payments for spaces leased 
in the State; and (3) up to $200,000 of construction and equipment costs incurred to 
construct or renovate a single sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF) (up to 
$500,000 in total for eligible costs to construct or renovate multiple SCIFs). Any excess 
credit may be carried forward until fully used. 
 
Commerce administers the tax credit application, approval, and certification process and 
may approve up to $2.0 million in credits annually. If the total amount of credits applied 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 983/ Page 8 
for exceeds this annual cap, the amount approved for each applicant is reduced by a 
proportional amount of the excess. 
 
Buy Maryland Cybersecurity Tax Credit 
 
Chapter 578 of 2018 established a nonrefundable credit against the State income tax for 
costs incurred by a qualified buyer (defined as any entity that has fewer than 50 employees 
in the State and is required to file a Maryland income tax return) to purchase cybersecurity 
technology or services from a qualified seller. The value of the credit is equal to 50% of 
the eligible costs incurred, not to exceed $50,000 per qualified buyer. The Secretary of 
Commerce may approve up to $4.0 million in tax credit certificates annually and must 
award 25% of the amount of authorized tax credits to qualified buyers that purchase 
cybersecurity services. On average, Commerce has awarded a little over $400,000 in  
tax credit certificates annually under the program. 
 
For purposes of the credit, “qualified seller” is defined as a cybersecurity business that 
(1) has its headquarters and base of operations in the State; (2) has less than  
$5.0 million in annual revenue, is a minority-owned, woman-owned, veteran-owned, or  
service-disabled veteran-owned business, or is located in a historically underutilized 
business zone designated by the U.S. Small Business Administration; and (3) owns or has 
properly licensed any proprietary cybersecurity technology or provides a cybersecurity 
service (among other specified requirements). Commerce may establish a panel composed 
of experts in the areas of cybersecurity technology and cybersecurity service to assist the 
department in determining if a cybersecurity business is a qualified seller. 
 
Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit 
 
The Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit (BIITC) Program offers refundable 
State income tax credits to qualified investors that invest at least $25,000 in a qualified 
Maryland biotechnology company. The credit is generally equal to 33% of the qualified 
investment, up to $250,000. Investments in qualified Maryland biotechnology companies 
located in Allegany, Dorchester, Garrett, or Somerset counties or in a Regional Institution 
Strategic Enterprise (better known as RISE) zone (subject to certain requirements) are 
eligible for an enhanced credit equal to 50% of the qualified investment, up to $500,000. 
Qualified opportunity funds that invest in qualified companies located in an opportunity 
zone are also eligible for certain enhanced credits. 
 
Commerce administers the tax credit application, approval, and certification process. Tax 
credit awards are subject to annual appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund; Commerce 
may not certify eligibility for tax credits for investments in a single qualified company that 
exceed 10% of the total appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund for the fiscal year. The 
Comptroller must transfer the amount of certified credits from the reserve fund to the 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 983/ Page 9 
general fund on a quarterly basis. Commerce may not issue any tax credit certificates under 
the BIITC program after fiscal 2028. 
 
Film Production Activity Tax Credit 
 
A qualified film production entity may apply for and claim a refundable credit against the 
State income tax for film production activities in the State in an amount equal to 28% of 
qualified total direct costs (30% for a television series) as stated on a final tax credit 
certificate approved by the Secretary of Commerce. Commerce may not approve credits 
totaling more than $10.0 million in aggregate for a single film production activity. 
 
Chapter 434 of 2023 temporarily increased the maximum amount of credits Commerce 
may award annually from $12.0 million to $15.0 million for fiscal 2024, $17.5 million for 
fiscal 2025, and $20.0 million for fiscal 2026. The Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act of 2025 (Chapter 604) reduced, from $20.0 million to $12.0 million, the aggregate 
amount of film production activity tax credit certificates that may be awarded in 
fiscal 2026, thereby accelerating by one year the phaseout of temporary enhancements to 
annual program funding. Any unused amount may be issued in a subsequent year. 
Commerce must reserve 10% of the total authorized amount each year for Maryland small 
or independent film entities. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) most recently evaluated the film production 
activity tax credit during the 2025 interim. In its December 2025 report, DLS recommended 
that the General Assembly consider terminating the film production activity tax credit and 
instead focus economic development efforts on incentives that generate lasting economic 
development. DLS also recommended that the General Assembly, should it choose to 
continue the program, define the objectives of the program in statute, reevaluate the  
$10.0 million per-project cap for non-small productions, and consider limiting the amount 
of unused funding that may be carried forward. DLS additionally recommended that 
Commerce develop a proposal to update, streamline, and improve the program statute and 
narrow eligible productions and costs to those that have the potential to generate the most 
economic impact. 
 
Tax Credit for Class F Vehicle Registration 
 
Chapter 502 of 2017 extended and modified the State income tax credit for the expense of 
registering a tractor-trailer (Class F vehicle); the Act applies to tax years 2017 through 
2019 only. The credit is equal to $400 per qualified vehicle registered by the taxpayer 
during the tax year, subject to a $10,000 annual per-taxpayer limit. Any unused amount of 
credit may not be carried over to any other tax year. The Motor Vehicle Administration 
administered the tax credit application, approval, and certification process and was 
authorized to approve up to $500,000 in tax credits per tax year. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 983/ Page 10 
Motor Fuel Tax Cost of Collection Allowances 
 
A licensed gasoline dealer or licensed special fuel seller must deduct the first 0.5% of the 
first 10 cents of the motor fuel tax on each gallon of motor fuel as a discount (to be allocated 
to subsequent purchasers as specified) in lieu of an allowance for evaporation, shrinkage, 
and handling and to reimburse the dealer or seller for the cost of collecting the tax. 
 
Tobacco Tax Exemptions for Cigarettes 
 
The tobacco tax does not apply to cigarettes that a consumer brings into the State if the 
quantity brought from another state or from a U.S. armed forces installation or reservation 
does not exceed five cartons. 
 
Businesses that Create New Jobs Tax Credit 
 
Businesses that establish or expand a business facility and create and/or retain a specified 
number of jobs may qualify for both (1) a local property tax credit and (2) a nonrefundable 
State tax credit that may be claimed against the income tax or insurance premium tax. Any 
unused amount of the State credit may be carried forward up to five years. Certain enhanced 
credits are available based on the scale of the expansion and jobs created or retained. 
Credits are claimed over a period of 6 years (24 years in the case of enhanced credits) and 
are based on a specified percentage of the property tax imposed on the assessment of the 
new or expanded premises and the personal property tax imposed on specified personal 
property. A county or municipality must enact legislation establishing the tax credit before 
credits may be granted. SDAT must annually certify the value of the State tax credit. There 
is no aggregate limitation on the amount of credits that may be awarded annually. 
 
DLS most recently evaluated the businesses that create new jobs tax credit during the  
2025 interim. In its December 2025 report, DLS recommended that the General Assembly 
consider terminating the tax credit program. DLS also provided several alternative 
recommendations should the General Assembly choose to continue the program – among 
others, that the General Assembly consider eliminating the State tax credit and creating 
certain program activity reporting requirements for local governments and SDAT. 
 
State Revenues:  Exhibit 2 displays the bill’s quantified effect on State revenues by 
provision and fund type. As shown in the exhibit, the bill’s quantified effect on State 
revenues totals $1.9 million in fiscal 2027, including $0.4 million in general fund revenues. 
Future years reflect the timing of tax credit sunset provisions and ongoing revenues. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 983/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 2 
Quantifiable State Revenue Effects 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 FY 2029 FY 2030 FY 2031 
By Provision 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeal Employer Security 
Clearance Costs Tax Credit 
$0.0  
$0.0  
$2.0  
$0.0  
$0.0  
Sunset Buy Maryland Cybersecurity 
Tax Credit 
0.0  
0.4  
0.4  
0.4  
0.4  
Repeal Motor Fuel Tax Cost of 
Collection Allowances 
1.5  
1.5  
1.5  
1.5  
1.5  
Repeal Certain SUT Exemptions 1 
0.4  
0.4  
0.4  
0.4  
0.4  
By Fund 2 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
$0.4  
$0.8  
$2.4  
$0.8  
$0.8  
HEIF 
0.0  
0.0  
0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
TTF 
1.5  
1.5  
1.7  
1.5  
1.5  
Total Quantified State Revenues 
$1.9  
$2.3  
$4.3  
$2.3  
$2.3  
 
HEIF:  Higher Education Investment Fund 
SUT:  sales and use tax 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
 
1 Amounts shown reflect the estimated effect of the bill’s repeal of specified sales and use tax exemptions 
relating to machinery and equipment used to produce bituminous concrete. 
2 The following revenues (not shown) total less than $0.1 million annually in fiscal 2027 through 2031:  
(1) quantified BMFF revenues attributable to the repeal of specified sales and use tax exemptions and  
(2) Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund and Waterway Improvement Fund revenues 
attributable to the repeal of the motor fuel tax cost of collection allowances. 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Actual revenues under the quantified provisions may differ from the amounts shown due 
to the timing and amount of precluded tax credit claims and carryforwards. 
 
General fund and BMFF revenues increase further in fiscal 2027 through 2031 due to the 
bill’s (1) repeal of sales and use tax exemptions for certain construction material and 
warehousing equipment for use in a target redevelopment area and (2) alterations to the 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 983/ Page 12 
tobacco tax exemption for cigarettes brought into the State by a consumer (not quantified 
above). 
 
Other provisions of the bill not quantified above (relating to the termination of the  
One Maryland tax credit; elimination of the State tax credit component of the businesses 
that create new jobs program; alteration of the film production activity tax credit; alteration 
and termination of the enterprise zone income tax credit; and addition modification for 
dividends paid for REITs) result in a potentially significant increase in general fund 
revenues annually beginning in fiscal 2027, as well as increases in Higher Education 
Investment Fund and TTF revenues. Strategic Energy Investment Fund revenues are 
potentially also affected to the extent the bill precludes tax credits that would be claimed 
by a corporation that operates a qualified data center. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants increase by 
at least $0.3 million in fiscal 2027; $0.2 million in fiscal 2028; $0.3 million in fiscal 2029; 
and $0.2 million in each of fiscal 2030 and 2031 due to (1) increased motor fuel tax 
collections due to the bill’s repeal of the cost of collection allowances and (2) quantified 
decreases in tax credits claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 
As discussed above, the bill accelerates the termination of the BIITC program by two years, 
to June 30, 2026. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a $12.0 million 
appropriation to the BIITC Reserve Fund, including $4.7 million in general funds and 
$7.3 million in special funds (reflecting the anticipated unused fund balance to be carried 
over from fiscal 2026). Thus, general and special fund expenditures for Commerce 
decrease by $4.7 million and $7.3 million, respectively, in fiscal 2027 and by a total of 
$12.0 million in fiscal 2028 (based on historic annual funding levels). 
 
SDAT general fund expenditures for local enterprise zone property tax credits potentially 
decrease within the five-year scope of this fiscal and policy note to the extent the bill’s 
alterations to the enterprise zone property tax credit result in a decrease in the amount of 
credits claimed. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local highway user revenues increase by at least $0.3 million in  
fiscal 2027; $0.2 million in fiscal 2028; $0.3 million in fiscal 2029; and $0.2 million in 
each of fiscal 2030 and 2031. Local property tax revenues potentially increase within the 
five-year scope of this fiscal and policy note to the extent the bill’s alterations to the 
enterprise zone property tax credit result in a decrease in the amount of credits claimed. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 983/ Page 13 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar bills have been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 919 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2026 
 
caw/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 13