START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 988 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 988 
(Delegate Hartman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Environment - Building Energy Performance Standards - Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals provisions adopted under the Climate Solutions Now Act (CSNA) 
(Chapter 38 of 2022) that require the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to 
develop building energy performance standards (BEPS) for covered buildings in the State 
that achieve (1) a 20% reduction in net direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by  
January 1, 2030, as compared with 2025 levels for average buildings of similar construction 
and (2) net-zero direct GHG emissions by January 1, 2040. The bill repeals all related 
provisions under Title 2, Subtitle 16 of the Environment Article, including requirements 
for MDE to certify a county BEPS program under specified circumstances; it also makes 
conforming changes under the Housing and Community Development Article. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for the Maryland Clean Air Fund decrease by 
$900,000 annually beginning in FY 2027 from foregone reporting fees and significantly 
further beginning as early as FY 2031 from foregone alternative compliance pathway 
(ACP) fees. There is no anticipated net effect on MDE special fund expenditures (with 
existing, ongoing staff costs no longer supported by the fee revenues likely instead 
supported by funding from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF), as discussed 
below). State expenditures (multiple funds) likely decrease, potentially significantly, in the 
near term, as discussed below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
($900,000) 
($900,000) 
($900,000) 
($900,000) 
(-) 
Exp. (Mult.) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 988/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures decrease, potentially significantly, for at least some 
jurisdictions, beginning in FY 2027. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Climate Solutions Now Act – In General 
 
CSNA made broad changes to the State’s approach to reducing statewide GHG emissions 
and addressing climate change. Among other things, CSNA accelerated previous statewide 
GHG emissions reductions targets originally established under the Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the State to develop plans, adopt regulations, and 
implement programs to (1) reduce GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and 
(2) achieve net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. 
 
Building Energy Performance Standards 
 
To accomplish these goals, among other things, CSNA requires MDE to develop BEPS for 
covered buildings that achieve (1) a 20% reduction in net direct GHG emissions by  
January 1, 2030, as compared with 2025 levels for average buildings of similar construction 
and (2) net-zero direct GHG emissions by January 1, 2040. To facilitate the development 
of these BEPS, MDE must require covered building owners to measure and report direct 
emissions data to the department each year beginning in 2025. The provision requiring 
MDE to set a standard that achieves net-zero direct GHG emissions for covered buildings 
terminates December 31, 2029. 
 
“Covered building” means a building that (1) is a commercial or multifamily residential 
building in the State or is owned by the State and (2) has a gross floor area of  
35,000 square feet or more (excluding the parking garage area). The term does not include 
(1) a building designated as a historic property under federal, State, or local law; (2) a 
public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school building; (3) a hospital; (4) a 
manufacturing building; or (5) an agricultural building. 
 
Implementing Regulations 
 
CSNA also required MDE to adopt regulations to implement BEPS by June 1, 2023. The 
regulations must meet several specified requirements. As altered by Chapter 844 of 2025, 
among other things, the regulations must (1) include energy use intensity targets by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 988/ Page 3 
building type, as specified; (2) include specified special provisions, exceptions, and 
exemptions from BEPS requirements; (3) include an ACP allowing an owner of a covered 
building to pay a fee for GHG emissions attributable to the building’s failure to meet direct 
GHG emissions reduction targets; (4) to the extent authorized by law, include financial 
incentives recommended by the Building Energy Transition Implementation Task Force; 
and (5) include an annual reporting fee of $100 per covered building, adjusted for inflation, 
to cover the administrative costs of the BEPS program. MDE adopted regulations that went 
into effect December 23, 2024, that establish BEPS and related benchmarking and 
reporting requirements. 
 
Owners of covered buildings began reporting benchmarking information in June 2025. 
Beginning in 2030, owners of covered buildings are required to meet the first level of 
interim standards, which includes reduced direct emissions based on building type.  
By 2035, owners covered buildings must meet the second level of interim standards, which 
includes additional reduced direct emissions based on building type. By 2040, owners of 
covered buildings will be required to meet the final net-zero direct GHG emissions 
standard. 
 
Certification of a County Building Energy Performance Standards Program 
 
Chapter 844 of 2025 required MDE to certify a BEPS program adopted by a county 
administering a BEPS program by March 1, 2025, and waive the requirement for covered 
buildings in the county to comply with the statewide program. A county administering an 
MDE-certified BEPS program is authorized to take appropriate actions to enforce the 
county standards, including establishing ACPs for compliance and imposing and collecting 
ACP fees and penalties up to the same amount and in the same manner allowed by MDE, 
as specified. 
 
A county that is administering an MDE-certified BEPS program is not precluded from 
adopting BEPS for buildings that are not covered buildings under the statewide program 
or modifying an adopted BEPS program. Montgomery County is currently implementing 
a county BEPS program under this statutory authorization.  
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment  
 
Decrease in Maryland Clean Air Fund Revenues:  Special fund revenues for the Maryland 
Clean Air Fund within MDE decrease by approximately $900,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027 from the repeal of the annual reporting fee for owners of covered buildings in 
the State. This fee, established in regulation, is $100, and there are approximately  
9,000 covered buildings in the State that must pay the fee each year by June 1. MDE notes 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 988/ Page 4 
that although the bill does not take effect until October 1, 2026, (which falls after the next 
round of annual fees are scheduled to be collected), its ability to effectively collect the 
annual fees in fiscal 2026 (due by June 1, 2026) may be hindered by the upcoming 
termination of the program. For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that MDE is still 
able to collect those fees. 
 
Additionally, as noted above, pursuant to CSNA and its implementing regulations, under 
BEPS, beginning in calendar 2030, owners of covered buildings may come into compliance 
with net direct emissions standards by paying an ACP fee for GHG emissions in excess of 
the standards. Thus, special fund revenues for the Maryland Clean Air Fund decrease 
further from foregone ACP fees. Any such impact occurs as early as fiscal 2031, when, 
under current law, ACP fee revenue is anticipated to begin accruing. Although a precise 
estimate of foregone ACP fee revenue cannot be made at this time, it is likely significant 
given the number of potentially affected covered buildings in the State.  
 
Administrative Impacts and Need for Additional Funding from the Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund:  Although the bill repeals BEPS, the statutory GHG emissions reduction 
goals, deadlines, and requirements under CSNA remain. MDE notes that in the State, the 
building sector is the second-largest source of GHG emissions after transportation. Thus, 
repealing BEPS requires MDE to conduct significant new work to identify, plan, and 
implement alternative methods of GHG emissions reductions for the State in order to meet 
the State’s climate goals. Thus, MDE plans to redirect existing staff assigned to the BEPS 
program to other duties within the department to handle those activities.  
 
In recent years, MDE’s Air and Radiation Administration (ARA), which implements the 
BEPS program, has been funded primarily with special funds from SEIF (which is 
administered by the Maryland Energy Administration) and the Maryland Clean Air Fund. 
In fact, the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025 (Chapter 604) altered the 
required uses of SEIF to include paying costs associated with ARA. Due to the loss of 
Maryland Clean Air Fund revenues from foregone fees under the bill, ARA likely needs 
additional SEIF funding to backfill for the loss of fee revenues in order to cover ongoing 
ARA staff costs. Accordingly, there is no net effect on MDE special fund expenditures, as 
the decrease in spending from the Maryland Clean Air Fund is offset by a corresponding 
increase in spending from SEIF. 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect as Owners of Covered Buildings 
 
The bill likely results in a significant decrease in costs for at least some owners of covered 
buildings in the near term that are no longer required to meet BEPS, pay the $100 annual 
reporting fee, or collect and report benchmarking information annually. Beginning in 
fiscal 2031, owners of covered buildings will also no longer be subject to any ACP fees for 
buildings that do not meet BEPS for direct building emissions. Affected owners of covered 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 988/ Page 5 
buildings could include State agencies, local governments, and small businesses. The  
near-term cost savings may be significant for some affected building owners, particularly 
with respect to covered buildings that would have otherwise required costly retrofits in 
order to meet BEPS beginning in calendar 2030. However, in the long term, affected 
entities will forego any cost savings that otherwise would have been realized from 
implementing energy efficiency measures under BEPS.  
 
With respect to covered buildings owned by the State, to the extent any costs that otherwise 
would have been incurred to implement BEPS would have been funded through the capital 
budget, there is no effect on total capital spending, which is established annually by the 
Governor and the General Assembly through the capital budget process. However, any 
decrease in costs for State capital projects due to the repeal of BEPS results in an increase 
in available funding for other State capital projects. 
 
Montgomery County 
 
Montgomery County notes that it does not anticipate an operational or fiscal impact as a 
result of the bill. The county plans to continue its county BEPS program even in the absence 
of the State program.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Legislative Services notes that owners of 
covered buildings, including State agencies, local governments, and small businesses, may 
have already begun to invest in upgrades in anticipation of the BEPS requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; City of Frederick; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Office of 
People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 988/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6