START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 925 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 925 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Health 
 
 
Sewage Sludge - Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances - Regulation 
 
 
This bill establishes prohibitions and restrictions related to the land application of sewage 
sludge (or a product containing sewage sludge) that has a total “concentration of regulated 
PFAS” equal to or greater than specified levels. The bill establishes related requirements 
for the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and sewage sludge generators. 
In addition, the bill establishes provisions related to the establishment of pretreatment 
standards or discharge permits for certain industrial users; related requirements are 
established for MDE and publicly owned treatment works (POTWs). A local jurisdiction 
or a pretreatment authority may set appropriate rates and fees for certain industrial users, 
as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDE increase by $248,100 in FY 2027; future 
years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. State expenditures (all/multiple 
funds) may increase beginning in FY 2028, as discussed below. Nonbudgeted expenditures 
may increase beginning in FY 2028; nonbudgeted revenues increase correspondingly. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
NonBud Rev. 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$248,100 
$290,900 
$304,400 
$318,100 
$331,800 
GF/SF Exp. 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
NonBud Exp. 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($248,100) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in local government expenditures for at least 
some local jurisdictions, as discussed below. Potential increase in local revenues for some 
local jurisdictions. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 925/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that all sewage sludge generators are encouraged to 
identify potential sources of “PFOA” and “PFOS” loading to their wastewater treatment 
systems and to take steps to reduce the total concentration of regulated PFAS in the sewage 
sludge produced by those systems. “PFOA” means perfluorooctanoic acid. “PFOS” means 
perfluorooctane sulfonic acid. “Concentration of regulated PFAS” means the total 
concentration, as measured in accordance with monitoring protocols established pursuant 
to the bill, of PFOA, PFOS, or a mixture of PFOA and PFOS. 
 
Prohibition/Restriction on Land Application of Sewage Sludge with Certain PFAS 
Concentrations 
 
Beginning October 1, 2027, a person may not apply sewage sludge (or a product containing 
sewage sludge) to agricultural or marginal land if the sewage sludge has a total 
concentration of regulated PFAS of 50 parts per billion (ppb) or more. 
 
Also beginning October 1, 2027, if sewage sludge or a product containing sewage sludge 
has a total concentration of regulated PFAS of at least 25 ppb but less than 50 ppb, a person 
may apply the sewage sludge (or product) to agricultural or marginal land only in 
accordance with the bill’s provisions that establish temporary alternative management 
measures and study and mitigation requirements (discussed in more detail below). 
 
Blending Sewage Sludge from Multiple Sources 
 
On or before September 30, 2029, subject to the bill’s requirements and in accordance with 
MDE regulations, a person may blend sewage sludge from multiple sources to reduce total 
concentrations of regulated PFAS to levels below 25 ppb. Sewage sludge or a product 
containing sewage sludge blended as such may not be subject to the temporary alternative 
management measures described below. 
 
A person that blends or otherwise comingles sewage sludge for the purpose of land 
application must monitor for the presence of PFOS and PFAS at least once per month, 
using a representative sample, in accordance with protocols established under the bill 
(discussed below). If the total concentration of regulated PFAS in the blended product is 
at least 25 ppb, the person must immediately notify MDE and may not apply the blended 
product to land until the person demonstrates, through additional monitoring, that the total 
concentration of regulated PFAS in the blended product has been reduced to levels below 
25 ppb. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 925/ Page 3 
Temporary Alternative Management Measures for the Land Application of Sewage  
Sludge with PFAS Concentrations of At Least 25 Parts Per Billion but Less Than  
50 Parts Per Billion 
 
For a period of up to 12 months, and pending the development and approval of a mitigation 
plan, a person may apply sewage sludge and other products to land (1) at a rate that does 
not exceed three dry metric tons per hectare and (2) subject to the same setback 
requirements established in regulation for Class B biosolids and additional setbacks for 
land application near public and private water supply wells developed by MDE after 
consulting with adjacent landowners and county and municipal officials from each local 
jurisdiction located within one mile of the property boundary. 
 
Sewage Sludge Generators – Source Tracking Study and Mitigation Plan Requirements 
 
With respect to a sewage sludge generator that produces sewage sludge intended for land 
application, if a sewage sludge generator determines (through monitoring protocols 
established under the bill and described below), that its sewage sludge has a total PFAS 
concentration of at least 25 ppb, the sewage sludge generator must (1) complete a source 
tracking study and (2) develop a mitigation plan. MDE must provide a sewage sludge 
generator with reasonable technical assistance in the development of a source tracking 
study and mitigation plan. 
 
Source Tracking Study Requirements:  A source tracking study conducted pursuant to the 
bill must be designed to determine the contributions of sources of PFOA and PFOS to the 
wastewater treatment system with sufficient specificity to allow the sewage sludge 
generator and MDE to reduce or prevent the release of PFOA and PFOS from controllable 
sources in accordance with applicable law. 
 
Mitigation Plan Development, Submission, Review, and Implementation:  A mitigation 
plan developed pursuant to the bill must (1) be developed in consultation with MDE;  
(2) identify significant sources of PFOA and PFOS loading to the wastewater treatment 
system; (3) include actions that the sewage sludge generator can implement, or require the 
sources of PFOA and PFOS loading to implement, to reduce the total concentration of 
regulated PFAS to levels below 25 ppb; (4) take into consideration innovative solutions 
and long-term mitigation approaches, consistent with applicable laws, regulations, and 
other requirements; and (5) include a reasonable timeline (not to exceed two years) for 
implementing the mitigation plan. 
 
The bill specifies elements and strategies that may be included in a mitigation plan and 
requires the mitigation plan to include additional testing requirements and timelines, 
developed in consultation with MDE, under specified circumstances. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 925/ Page 4 
In general, a sewage sludge generator must submit a mitigation plan to MDE within 
six months after completion of the required source tracking study; however, a sewage 
sludge generator may request, and MDE may grant, a single extension on the development 
and submission of a mitigation plan under specified circumstances. 
 
MDE must review each mitigation plan submitted and may approve, deny, or suggest 
changes to the mitigation plan. In reviewing a mitigation plan, MDE must consider the cost 
of implementing mitigation options. 
 
A sewage sludge generator must comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation 
plan and may not apply sewage sludge (or a product containing sewage sludge) to land if 
MDE has determined that the generator is out of compliance with the provisions of an 
approved mitigation plan. 
 
Monitoring Protocols to Determine Compliance 
 
For the purposes of assessing compliance with the bill’s provisions, the total concentration 
of regulated PFAS in sewage sludge (or a product containing sewage sludge) must be 
determined by taking the average of samples taken over the immediately preceding 
12 months. Each sample must be taken in accordance with specifications under the bill and 
at a frequency specified by MDE in regulation, but at least quarterly. Samples must be 
analyzed using an MDE-approved method and conducted by a qualified laboratory, as 
specified. MDE must assist sewage sludge generators in identifying qualified laboratories. 
 
MDE may establish additional monitoring requirements for blended materials. 
 
Pretreatment Program Standards, Discharge Permits, and Related Rates and Fees 
 
In accordance with the federal Clean Water Act (CWA), MDE and pretreatment authorities 
may establish pretreatment standards for industrial users that discharge per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances at levels that exceed action levels established by MDE or the 
pretreatment authority under an industrial pretreatment program. 
 
If a POTW does not have an industrial pretreatment program, and it is determined that 
sewage sludge produced for land application by the POTW has a total concentration of 
regulated PFAS of 25 ppb or greater, MDE must, in consultation with the POTW, develop 
discharge permits for industrial users in a manner calculated to establish local limits for 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances consistent with existing authorities under CWA. 
 
MDE must (1) issue guidance to support POTWs in the implementation of these 
pretreatment standards and (2) provide reasonable technical assistance as requested by 
local jurisdictions in the exercise of local limits authority under CWA. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 925/ Page 5 
A local jurisdiction or a pretreatment authority may set appropriate rates and fees for 
industrial users (individually or as a class) that are determined to discharge per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances into the wastewater treatment system at levels that necessitate 
the implementation of mitigation measures. 
 
These provisions may not be interpreted to limit the authority of a local jurisdiction or a 
pretreatment authority to set local limits that lead to reductions of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances that exceed the reductions required under the bill. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Sewage Sludge Utilization Permits and Recent Regulatory Action 
 
Sewage sludge (also known as biosolids) is one of the final products of the treatment of 
sewage at a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). MDE’s Land and Materials 
Administration issues sewage sludge utilization (SSU) permits, which are required prior to 
engaging in a number of SSU activities, including the application of Class B sewage sludge 
to agricultural or marginal land under certain conditions, marketing, and disposing of 
sewage sludge at a municipal landfill. 
 
MDE is required to adopt regulations to establish a mechanism for determining annual 
generator fees; the fee schedule must take into account certain considerations, including 
the anticipated costs to monitor and regulate SSU sites and the needs of the State’s sewage 
sludge regulation program. Current permit application fees vary depending on the type of 
SSU permit and range from $25 to $750. There are also fees for permit modifications and 
variances. In addition, sewage sludge generators pay an annual fee for each wet ton of 
sewage sludge generated during the previous calendar year; the fee varies depending on 
several factors, including how the sewage sludge is ultimately used or disposed of. Fees 
are deposited into the Maryland Clean Water Fund. 
 
On February 28, 2023, due to concerns about PFAS contamination, MDE issued a biosolids 
regulatory update and put a hold on the issuance of new sewage sludge land application 
permits. MDE followed this regulatory update with an addendum, issued in August 2024, 
that requires all WWTPs from which land-applied sewage sludge originates to sample for 
PFOS and PFOA prior to land application. The addendum establishes (1) beginning 
January 1, 2025, required testing for PFOS and PFOA at a frequency that depends on the 
amount of sewage sludge generated at a specific site and (2) recommended actions 
depending on the level of PFOS or PFOA found in the sewage sludge. Pursuant to the 
addendum, sewage sludge with PFOS and PFOA concentrations below 20 micrograms  
per kilogram (µg/kg) may be land applied with no additional requirements after submitting 
testing results. If PFOS or PFOA is at or above 20 µg/kg, but less than 50 µg/kg, the 
recommended application rate for land application of biosolids must be lowered to 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 925/ Page 6 
three dry tons per acre or less. If PFOS and PFOA concentrations are 100 µg/kg or above, 
land application of the sewage sludge is recommended to be stopped. (One µg/kg is 
equivalent to one ppb.) 
 
Among other requirements, an SSU permittee for the application of sewage sludge on 
agricultural land must prepare a nutrient management plan in accordance with regulations 
and the Maryland Nutrient Management Manual. 
 
Among other requirements, unless analytical results have been submitted to MDE in 
accordance with testing requirements for sewage sludge generators, an SSU permittee for 
the disposal of sewage sludge at a municipal landfill must submit recent results of a 
laboratory analysis of a representative composite sample of the sewage sludge that was 
obtained from the WWTP that generated the sewage sludge. 
 
National Pretreatment Program and State Implementation 
 
Under CWA, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) established the National 
Pretreatment Program to control pollutants discharged by industrial and commercial 
facilities into municipal WWTPs or POTWs. These discharges, if not properly managed, 
can interfere with treatment processes, contaminate biosolids, or pass through untreated 
into receiving waters. 
 
In Maryland, EPA delegates pretreatment authority to MDE. In turn, MDE requires certain 
local jurisdictions and/or POTWs to develop, implement, and enforce local pretreatment 
programs whenever they receive wastewater from Significant Industrial Users (SIUs). 
SIUs are industries that discharge large volumes of wastewater or release significant 
amounts of toxic pollutants into a municipal wastewater treatment system. These local 
programs issue permits to SIUs, set discharge limits, conduct inspections and sampling, 
and take enforcement action as necessary. 
 
The Protecting State Waters from PFAS Pollution Act (Chapters 557 and 556 of 2024) 
required MDE, in collaboration with POTWs and specified SIUs in the State, to (1) by 
October 1, 2024, identify SIUs that currently and intentionally use PFAS chemicals; (2) by 
June 1, 2025, develop PFAS action levels for addressing PFAS contamination from 
industrial discharge for pretreatment permits; and (3) by September 1, 2025, develop 
specified mitigation plans for addressing PFAS contamination from industrial discharge 
for pretreatment permits. In addition, MDE was required to develop PFAS monitoring and 
testing protocols for SIUs and update its PFAS Action Plan. The Acts also established 
measurement, reporting, implementation, and PFAS storage and disposal requirements for 
certain SIUs. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 925/ Page 7 
MDE published its Determination of PFAS Action Levels for SIUs in June 2025. That 
guidance document is available on MDE’s website. 
 
Federal Regulation and Recommendations Regarding PFAS Contamination and Land 
Application of Sewage Sludge 
 
As part of its comprehensive national strategy to combat PFAS pollution, called the 
“Strategic Roadmap,” EPA has taken steps to restrict, remediate, and research PFAS 
contamination and impacts. To that end, EPA has taken several actions under numerous 
federal laws designed to protect human health and the environment, including under CWA. 
CWA requires EPA to establish technology-based effluent (i.e., discharge) limits for 
industrial dischargers, known as effluent limitation guidelines. CWA also authorizes EPA 
to address contaminants through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(NPDES), a federal regulatory tool under CWA. Under NPDES, EPA is authorized to set 
pollutant limits and establish monitoring and reporting requirements for contaminants in 
biosolids if sufficient scientific evidence shows there is potential harm to human health or 
the environment. 
 
On January 14, 2025, EPA issued a draft risk assessment of the potential human health 
risks associated with the presence of PFAS chemicals in biosolids. Once finalized, EPA 
will use the risk assessment to help inform future risk management actions for PFOA and 
PFOS in sewage sludge. The preliminary findings of the draft risk assessment indicate that 
there can be human health risks exceeding EPA’s acceptable thresholds, sometimes by 
several orders of magnitude, for some scenarios where the farmer applied biosolids 
containing one ppb of PFOA or PFOS (which is near the current detection limit for these 
PFAS in biosolids). 
 
Additionally, pursuant to a December 2022 memo, EPA currently recommends 
pretreatment best practices to reduce PFAS from sources and quarterly monitoring of 
influent, effluent, and sewage sludge using EPA Method 1633, a CWA analytical method 
to test for PFAS compounds in wastewater and other environmental media. 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect: 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
General fund expenditures for MDE increase by $248,101 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
three employees (one regulatory and compliance engineer and two natural resource 
planners) to (1) draft regulations; (2) assist sewage sludge generators in identifying 
qualified laboratories, and receive, review, and take any necessary actions in response to 
PFAS testing and laboratory results; (3) provide technical assistance in the development of 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 925/ Page 8 
source tracking studies and mitigation plans; (4) issue guidance to support WWTPs in 
implementing the bill; (5) provide technical assistance to local jurisdictions in the exercise 
of local limits authority; (6) increase communication and oversight of POTWs that 
currently operate without delegated pretreatment program authority and develop discharge 
permits for industrial users as necessary; and (7) conduct ongoing research and stay 
informed about PFAS-related mitigation, technologies, testing, research, and legislation in 
order to effectively implement the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below: 
 
 
the bill expands MDE’s responsibilities regarding implementation and oversight of 
pretreatment standards for industrial users; currently, most of the workload related 
to implementing such standards is delegated to pretreatment authorities and applies 
to SIUs, not all industrial users; 
 
MDE must increase oversight of and collaboration with 235 POTWs that operate 
without delegated pretreatment programs; and 
 
50 POTWs land apply sewage sludge and have SSU permits, and most POTWs 
generate sewage sludge with concentrations of regulated PFAS at or below 25 ppb. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$217,934 
Operating Expenses 
    30,167 
Total FY 2027 MDE Expenditures 
$248,101 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This analysis assumes general funds are needed to cover MDE’s costs. However, as 
mentioned above, under current law, MDE is required to adopt regulations to establish a 
mechanism for determining annual generator fees for SSU permits, and the fee schedule 
must take certain considerations into account, including the anticipated costs to monitor 
and regulate SSU sites and the needs of the State’s sewage sludge regulation program. SSU 
permit fee revenues accrue to the Maryland Clean Water Fund. To the extent that MDE 
increases its generator fees to cover its increased costs to monitor and regulate SSU sites 
and implement the State’s sewage sludge regulation program as altered by the bill, 
special fund revenues increase (to cover some portion of MDE’s costs), and the need for 
general funds decreases. 
 
Impacts on the Regulated Community 
 
Impacts on Wastewater Treatment Plants that Land Apply Sewage Sludge:  According to 
MDE, all of the WWTPs that currently land apply sewage sludge in the State are publicly 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 925/ Page 9 
owned systems. Based on information gleaned from a limited survey of State agencies and 
local entities, most POTWs that land apply sewage sludge are generating sewage sludge 
that falls below the 25 ppb-threshold for concentrations of regulated PFAS under the bill. 
For these POTWs, the primary impact of the bill is the potential need to conduct additional 
PFAS testing. However, according to MDE, most affected systems already meet the 
quarterly testing frequency mandated under the bill, although some smaller systems only 
sample once each year. Thus, the bill’s impact on most POTWs in the State that land apply 
sewage sludge is likely minimal. 
 
According to MDE, of the 50 POTWs that land apply sewage sludge, only a few have total 
concentrations of regulated PFAS approaching or exceeding 25 ppb, and these are locally 
owned WWTPs. For these POTWs, costs increase, potentially significantly, beginning in 
fiscal 2028 to implement mitigation measures, install facility upgrades, or use alternative 
disposal methods for affected sewage sludge, such as landfilling or transporting 
out-of-state. Compliance costs for these facilities varies significantly, depending on  
(1) how an affected facility chooses to respond to the bill’s restrictions and prohibitions; 
(2) the concentration of regulated PFAS in the affected sewage sludge; and (3) a facility’s 
ability to address elevated PFAS levels in sewage sludge through pretreatment by industrial 
users. 
 
For example, the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC) is one of the 
WWTPs that currently land applies sewage sludge and generates sewage sludge with a total 
concentration of regulated PFAS that exceeds 25 ppb. WSSC estimates that annual costs 
to manage sewage sludge increase by between $4.1 and $8.2 million annually under the 
bill to blend and landfill additional sewage sludge. WSSC notes that if it needs to install 
equipment to destroy PFAS at its facility, capital costs are estimated to total $200.0 million. 
Any costs incurred by WSSC are ultimately borne by WSSC customers in Montgomery 
and Prince George’s counties through an increase in rates. 
 
The Maryland Environmental Service (MES) manages approximately 90 WWTPs on 
behalf of State and local entities throughout the State. MES advises that sewage sludge that 
is land applied from these WWTPs has consistently demonstrated PFAS concentrations at 
or below 25 ppb for the past two years (since MDE started tracking and MES started testing 
for PFAS). To that end, MES does not anticipate that the bill has a significant fiscal or 
operational impact; however, MES notes that the bill may result in an increase in required 
testing depending on the testing frequencies established in regulation by MDE under the 
bill. As MES is a fee-for-service entity, any costs incurred by MES resulting from the bill 
are ultimately borne by the entities that contract for MES services through an increase in 
fees. As a result, MES nonbudgeted expenditures and revenues may increase 
correspondingly beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 925/ Page 10 
None of the respondents to requests for information regarding the fiscal effect of the bill 
indicated that there are currently any WWTPs that land apply sewage sludge with 
concentrations of PFAS that exceed 50 ppb. Thus, the bill’s prohibition on the land 
application of sewage sludge that has total concentrations of regulated PFAS equal to or 
greater than 50 ppb is not anticipated to materially affect State or local finances, at least in 
the near term. 
 
Impacts on Industrial Users:  Industrial users (those that discharge to POTWs) could be 
State agencies, local governments, and small businesses. The bill expands existing 
pretreatment requirements for industrial users that discharge wastewater to a POTW that 
land applies sewage sludge that has a total concentration of regulated PFAS equal to or 
greater than 25 ppb by (1) authorizing the establishment of pretreatment standards for 
industrial users that discharge PFAS at levels that exceed specified action levels and  
(2) if a POTW does not have an industrial pretreatment program, requiring MDE to develop 
discharge permits for industrial users in consultation with the POTW. 
 
The bill also authorizes a local jurisdiction or a pretreatment authority to set appropriate 
rates and fees for industrial users (individually or as a class) that discharge PFAS into the 
WWTP at levels that necessitate the implementation of mitigation measures. Thus, 
expenditures for some industrial users may increase to implement measures to reduce 
PFAS discharges into WWTPs and to pay any new or increased rates and/or fees imposed 
under the bill. These increased costs, particularly to comply with new discharge permit 
requirements, could be significant depending on the amount of regulated PFAS that an 
industrial user discharges. 
 
Local Revenues for Local Jurisdictions and Pretreatment Authorities from Rates and Fees:  
As noted above, the bill authorizes a local jurisdiction or a pretreatment authority to set 
appropriate rates and fees for industrial users that discharge PFAS into the WWTP. Thus, 
local revenues may increase from any new or increased rates and/or fees established 
pursuant to this authority. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 719 (Senators Love and Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Calvert, Howard, and Prince 
George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Washington Suburban Sanitary 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 925/ Page 11 
Commission; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; City of Annapolis; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11