START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 931 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 931 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Care Facilities - Nursing Homes - Medical Director Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a physician designated to serve as “medical director” of a nursing home 
to meet specified requirements. A physician may not be a designated medical director at 
more than two licensed nursing homes. The bill removes the requirement for the 
Secretary of Health, in consultation with specified stakeholders, to establish qualifications 
for a nursing home medical director or anyone acting in their absence. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must establish and maintain a publicly accessible online 
directory of nursing home medical directors in the State. MDH must adopt specified 
regulations. A physician designated as a medical director on or before September 30, 2026, 
must obtain a “medical director certification” by September 30, 2028. MDH may grant a 
physician a time-limited extension for obtaining a medical director certification on a 
showing of good cause.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $85,600 in FY 2027 for staff, 
as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues are not 
affected.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
85,600 
100,500 
105,200 
110,000 
114,800 
Net Effect 
($85,600) 
($100,500) 
($105,200) 
($110,000) 
($114,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 931/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Medical Director Requirements  
 
“Medical director” means the physician designated by a nursing home to oversee medical 
care and clinical policies at the nursing home in accordance with federal and State laws 
and regulations. 
 
“Medical director certification” means:  (1) a Certified Medical Director (CMD) 
certification issued by the Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medical Association or (2) an 
equivalent credential approved by MDH.  
 
To qualify to be a designated as a medical director of a nursing home, a physician must 
hold a valid medical director certification or be making active progress toward obtaining 
such certification. A physician designated as a medical director must submit to MDH:  (1) a 
copy of their medical director certification or (2) satisfactory evidence of active progress 
toward obtaining a medical director certification.  
 
Online Directory 
 
MDH must establish and maintain a publicly accessible online directory of nursing home 
medical directors in the State that includes each medical director’s name, professional 
credentials, and certification status. Each licensed nursing home must submit the name of 
the designated medical director to MDH for inclusion in the directory. 
 
Required Regulations 
 
MDH must adopt regulations, including regulations that establish (1) the educational and 
experiential requirements for a medical director certification that is equivalent to a CMD 
certification and (2) the process for approving a medical director certification. 
 
Current Law:  “Nursing home” means a facility (other than a facility offering domiciliary 
or personal care) that offers nonacute inpatient care to patients suffering from a disease, 
chronic illness, condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease requiring 
maximal nursing care without continuous hospital services, and who require medical 
services and nursing services rendered by or under the supervision of a licensed nurse 
together with convalescent, restorative, or rehabilitative services. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 931/ Page 3 
Each nursing home must designate a physician to serve as medical director. The medical 
director is responsible for monitoring physician services and must report monthly to the 
quality assurance committee on the quality of medical care at the nursing home. Under 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.07.02.16), the medical director is also responsible for, 
among other things: 
 
 
overall coordination, execution, and monitoring of physician services; 
 
monitoring and evaluating health care services and outcomes;  
 
designating an alternate medical director; 
 
overseeing all physicians and other licensed or certified professional health care 
practitioners who provide health care to the facility's residents;  
 
recommending rules governing the performance of physicians and other licensed or 
certified professional health care practitioners who admit residents to the facility; 
 
recommending written policies and procedures; 
 
ensuring physician accountability;  
 
participating in the nursing home’s quality improvement process; and 
 
other essential duties related to clinical care and physician practices. 
 
The Secretary of Health, in consultation with the Medical and Chirurgical Faculty of 
Maryland, and representatives of the nursing home industry, must:  (1) establish 
qualifications for the medical director of a nursing home or anyone acting for the medical 
director in his or her absence; (2) define the duties of the medical director; and (3) adopt 
regulations for the attending physicians who treat residents of nursing homes that will 
provide for physician accountability.  
 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.07.02.15) require a medical director to have the 
following qualifications:  (1) a current license as a physician in the State; (2) a least 
two years of experience or specialized training in the medical care of geriatric or 
chronically ill and impaired residents; and (3) successful completion of a curriculum in 
physician management or administration from The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term 
Care Medicine or a curriculum approved by MDH. The nursing home must submit a copy 
of the medical director’s credentials to MDH upon a change in the medical director. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MDH to promulgate regulations, review nursing 
home medical director certifications and offer time-limited extensions (when necessary), 
ensure that each medical director does not oversee more than two licensed nursing homes, 
and establish an online directory of medical directors. MDH advises that there are 
220 licensed nursing homes in the State, and current staff cannot absorb the additional 
responsibilities of the bill.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 931/ Page 4 
Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $85,616 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one health policy analyst to oversee nursing home medical directors and maintain 
the directory of medical directors. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$76,475 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$85,616 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4