START OF PAGE 1
HB0972/973727/1

BY: Environment and Transportation Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 972
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, after “Miller,” insert “Buckel,”; in the same line,
after “Pippy,” insert “Jacobs,”; in the same line, strike “Fair,”; in the same line, strike
“Simpson,”; in the same line, strike “and Wivell” and substitute “Wivell, Adams,
Anderson, Arentz, Arikan, Baker, Beauchamp, Chisholm, Ghrist, Griffith,
Hartman, Hinebaugh, Howard, Hutchinson, Kipke, R. Long, Mangione,
McComas, Metzgar, M. Morgan, T. Morgan, Nkongolo, Reilly, Schmidt, Stonko,
Fair, Simpson, Allen, Behler, Boyce, Foley, Fraser–Hidalgo, Guyton, Healey,
Holmes, J. Long, Korman, Lewis, Odom, Stein, and Ziegler”; in line 3, strike
“Maryland Fair and” and substitute “Charles J. Otto”; and strike beginning with
“requiring” in line 7 down through the semicolon in line 10.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 2, strike in their entirety lines 11 through 25, inclusive.

On page 3, strike beginning with “REVENUE” in line 11 down through “(2)” in
line 13; in lines 14 and 15, strike “(3)” and “(4)”, respectively, and substitute “(2)” and
“(3)”, respectively; and after line 27, insert:

“(I) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $200,000 TO THE FUND.”.

On page 4, strike in their entirety lines 4 and 5; in lines 6 and 17, strike “(2)” and
“(4)”, respectively, and substitute “(1)” and “(2)”, respectively; in line 6, strike
“$75,000” and substitute “$100,000”; in line 8, after the semicolon insert “AND”; strike
in their entirety lines 9 through 16, inclusive; in line 17, strike “$50,000” and substitute
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0972/973727/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 972
Page 2 of 2

“$100,000”; in lines 22, 24, 26, and 29, in each instance, strike the bracket; and in lines
26 and 29, strike “(2)” and “(3)”, respectively.

On page 5, in lines 3, 7, 9, 11, and 24, in each instance, strike the bracket; and in
lines 3, 7, 9, and 11, strike “(4)”, “(5)”, “(6)”, and “(7)”, respectively, and substitute
“(5)”, “(6)”, “(7)”, and “(8)”, respectively.

On page 6, in line 1, strike the bracket; and in line 2, strike “(A)(7)” and
substitute “(A)(8)”.

On pages 6 and 7, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 20 on page
6 through line 16 on page 7, inclusive.
END OF PAGE 2