START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 947 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 947 
(Delegate Sample-Hughes, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Department of Natural Resources - Commercial Blue and Flathead Catfish 
Finfish Trotline License - Alterations 
 
 
This emergency bill modifies the “commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline 
license” to be the “commercial blue and flathead catfish license” and modifies the 
allowable gear that may be used to catch blue catfish under the license to include a  
gill net – as defined in Department of Natural Resources (DNR) regulations – with a mesh 
size of not more than seven inches, in addition to the currently authorized finfish trotline. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A commercial blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline license authorizes 
the holder to catch for sale blue and flathead catfish in the tidal waters of the State using a 
finfish trotline, as defined in DNR regulations. An applicant does not need to hold a tidal 
fish license (DNR’s primary commercial fishing license) to be eligible for the license. A 
licensee must fish in accordance with DNR regulations. The annual license fee is $15. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 947/ Page 2 
Under DNR regulations: 
 
 
“Finfish trotline” means a length of rope or line, buoyed at both ends with one or 
more anchors, which is baited with hooks set at intervals for the purpose of catching 
finfish; and 
 
“Gill net” means a net which (1) is maintained in a vertical position in the water 
with sinkers, floats, or stakes, or a combination of sinkers, floats, and stakes, and 
(2) captures fish by means of a mesh too small to permit passage of the body of the 
fish or withdrawal of the head once the posterior margin of the gill covers has passed 
through the mesh. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any current or future small business licensees harvesting 
blue catfish under the commercial blue and flathead catfish license (as renamed by the bill) 
may benefit from the ability to use a gill net (with a mesh size of up to seven inches) in 
addition to a finfish trotline under the license to increase the amount of blue catfish 
harvested. DNR indicates that gill nets are a very efficient gear type. 
 
DNR indicates that there are 309 blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline licensees (during 
the 2025-2026 license year) and that preliminary harvest data for 2025 (for blue and 
flathead catfish finfish trotline licensees and tidal fish licensees) includes  
2.0 million pounds of blue catfish harvested with a dockside value of $1.37 million. DNR 
indicates that the harvest of blue catfish in the Chesapeake Bay watershed has increased 
substantially over the past decade, in part due to increased access to the fishery by those 
harvesting under blue and flathead catfish finfish trotline licenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 610 (Senator Mautz) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2