START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 976 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 976 
(Delegate Rose, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Primary and Secondary Education - Funding Accuracy and Full-Time 
Equivalent Enrollment Count - Alterations and Report (Education Funding 
Accuracy Act) 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment that is used to 
calculate State education aid and local government education funding requirements to 
include the average number of students enrolled on September 30 and May 31 of the prior 
school year instead of only the September 30 count from the prior year used under current 
law. By December 31, 2026, and each subsequent December 31, the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) must publish to its website and submit to the Senate 
Budget and Taxation Committee and House Appropriations Committee a report on 
enrollment counts, including those used to determine funding, and per pupil education 
funding. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and is applicable to the calculation of 
education funding for fiscal 2028 and subsequent fiscal years.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures for education aid are affected beginning in FY 2028 by 
an indeterminate amount. The actual impact will vary by year. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues from direct State education aid are affected beginning in  
FY 2028. Required county appropriations to local school systems also change beginning 
in FY 2028. The results are indeterminate and vary by year and by county. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 976/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required MSDE annual report includes information on:   
 
 
the enrollment count used to calculate FTE enrollment, disaggregated by county; 
 
the number of students in each county in each enrollment category, including 
“whereabouts unknown;” 
 
the FTE enrollment number used to calculate funding for the upcoming school year; 
and 
 
each county’s allocation of per pupil State and local education funding.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Full-time Equivalent Enrollment and Major Education Aid 
 
FTE means the sum of:   
 
 
the number of students enrolled in kindergarten through grade 12 or their equivalent 
in regular day school programs on September 30 of the prior school year; 
 
the number of FTE students enrolled in evening high school programs during the 
prior school year; and 
 
the number of Pathways in Technology Early College High students. 
 
FTE enrollment counts by county influence the vast majority of State funding of  
public schools, because these counts determine the enrollment counts used under the 
foundation formula and because FTE enrollment is a key component of wealth-equalization 
within major education aid formula programs (including the foundation program). FTE 
enrollment also influences the local (county) share of major aid programs, including local 
share relief provisions; and the county per pupil maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement. 
For an overview of the State and local funding of public schools in Maryland, see 
Appendix – Public School Funding in Maryland. 
 
Annual Submission of Education Aid Data 
 
On December 1, each year the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must 
submit to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) the enrollment counts and other data necessary to calculate the 
funding formulas to implement the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future for the upcoming 
fiscal year.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 976/ Page 3 
School Year Calendars and Student Attendance 
 
Each county board must annually set the start and end dates of the school year for schools 
in the county. The county boards of Allegany, Anne Arundel, Calvert, Howard, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties, and the Board of School Commissioners of 
Baltimore City, may elect to operate one or more schools on a year-round basis. Public 
school years for student attendance tend to commence by late August or early September 
and end in June of the following calendar year. Thus, FTE student counts averaged under 
the bill for a given school year are counts for September 30 of one calendar year and for 
May 31 of the following calendar year.  
 
MSDE advises that “whereabouts unknown” is not a student category used in local school 
system student data collections, however, local school systems do report students “not 
accessing educational services.” 
 
State Expenditures:  The effect on general and special fund expenditures for education 
aid may be substantial beginning in fiscal 2028.  
 
According to MSDE data, comparing September 30, 2024, enrollment to the average daily 
membership for schools in the 2024-2025 school year yielded a statewide decrease of  
860 students, or about 0.1%, ranging from a 0.4% increase for Prince George’s County to 
a 1.8% decrease for Baltimore City. However, this data is not a precise match to what the 
bill specifies, because data is not collected in the manner specified by the bill and the 
estimates are based on total, not FTE, enrollment. Further, data provided by MSDE for 
similar past legislation indicates that both slight increases and decreases in statewide 
enrollment can occur in a given school year. 
 
Potentially, given the relatively slight upward and downward changes found using this 
data, the bill results in increased FTE enrollment counts and, therefore, in State aid in some 
years, and decreased FTE counts and State aid in others, as compared to results projected 
under the current law methodology for determining FTE enrollment.  
 
The calculation of FTE enrollment under the bill will prohibit MSDE from meeting the 
statutory deadline for providing enrollment data to DBM and DLS. This will present 
practical challenges for assuring that State education aid is properly accounted for in the 
annual State budget bill. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local school system revenues from direct State aid change by an 
indeterminate amount, beginning in fiscal 2028, as discussed above due to changes in FTE 
school enrollment counts used to determine State aid. Similarly, local government’s local 
share of major education aid and per pupil MOE requirements are changed in an 
indeterminate manner, beginning in fiscal 2028, thus altering projected county government 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 976/ Page 4 
appropriations to public schools. Based on the data discussed above, these changes may be 
relatively minor. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1403 of 2025, HB 1200 of 2024; and HB 739 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 712 (Senator Corderman) - Budget and Taxation and 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public 
Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 976/ Page 5 
Appendix – Public School Funding in Maryland 
 
 
State Aid for Public Schools 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future and Education Funding Formulas 
 
The majority of direct State aid to public schools (excluding teachers’ retirement) is 
determined by enrollment-based funding formulas generally found in Title 5, Subtitle 2 of 
the Education Article. This includes the foundation formula, which makes use of a  
per pupil foundation amount (PPFA) and an “enrollment count,” which is the greater of 
(1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment and (2) the three-year moving 
average of FTE enrollment. Collectively, the formulas account for a uniform base cost  
per pupil that is necessary to provide general education services to students in every local 
school system and address the additional costs associated with educating three student 
populations:  special education students; students eligible for free and reduced-price meals; 
and students who are English learners. Under Chapter 237 of 2025, beginning in 
fiscal 2026, the special education, compensatory education, and English learner formulas 
– structured similarly to the foundation program, but targeting the three student populations 
mentioned above – use statutory per-pupil dollar amounts (rather than percentage weights 
of PPFA), with amounts specified through fiscal 2033 and inflation adjustments thereafter. 
 
Most State education aid formulas also include wealth equalization across counties, 
compensating for differences in local wealth by providing less aid per pupil to the more 
wealthy counties and more aid per pupil to the less wealthy counties. Although on the 
whole most State aid formulas are designed to have the State pay roughly one-half of 
program costs, the State’s share for the less wealthy counties is higher than 50%, and the 
State’s share for more wealthy counties is lower than 50%. For purposes of determining 
State and local shares of funding, wealth equals the sum of 100% of assessed public utilities 
real property value, 40% of the assessed value of all other real property, 50% of the 
assessed value of personal property, and 100% of net taxable income. 
 
Major education aid programs include the foundation formula, comparable wage index 
(CWI), guaranteed tax base (GTB), compensatory education, concentration of poverty 
grants (CPG), English learner, special education, full-day prekindergarten, college and 
career ready (CCR), transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), career 
ladder, and transportation grant programs. 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint) legislation, including Chapter 771  
of 2019; Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021; and Chapter 33 of 2022 established new programs 
and updated education funding formulas, to among other provisions provide additional 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 976/ Page 6 
support for schools serving high concentrations of students living in poverty, including 
community schools and wraparound services, and increased support for students learning 
English and students with disabilities. Chapter 237, among other provisions, curtailed 
foundation program per pupil funding. 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) was created by Chapter 771 as the 
successor to the Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education Fund. The BMFF 
is intended to assist in providing adequate funding for early childhood education and 
primary and secondary education to provide a world-class education to students in 
Maryland. 
 
Comparable Wage Index 
 
CWI provides additional funds to local school systems with above-average personnel costs 
but does not decrease funding for local school systems with below-average costs. 
CWI adjustment values are fixed in statute and range from 0.047 in Frederick County to 
0.166 in Montgomery County. The formula multiplies the adjustment value by the 
foundation program for a given county, which is the PPFA multiplied by the enrollment 
count for the county. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The GTB program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions to maintain or 
increase local education tax effort, i.e., local education appropriation as a percentage of 
local tax base. The program provides additional State education aid to counties that 
(1) have less than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and (2) provide local 
education funding above the minimum local share required by the Foundation Program. 
The program uses local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for 
each eligible local school system. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grant Program 
 
Blueprint legislation provides additional support for schools serving high concentrations 
of students living in poverty through the CPG Program. CPG funding has two components, 
a personnel grant and a per-pupil grant. 
 
Personnel Grants are provided to employ a community school coordinator with specified 
qualifications and provide full-time coverage by at least one health care practitioner. A 
county that provides health coverage or community school services with funds other than 
the personnel grant must continue to provide those services through fiscal 2030. If the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 976/ Page 7 
personnel grant provided to an eligible school exceeds the costs to employ those positions 
and provide health coverage, the eligible school may use excess funds to provide 
wraparound services and complete the community school needs assessment. The personnel 
grant is a State-funded categorical amount that increases with inflation. 
 
Per-pupil Grants are provided for each qualifying school following the completion of a 
community school needs assessment, and each eligible school must use the per-pupil grant 
to provide wraparound services and other programs and services as identified in the school 
needs assessment. CPG funds must generally be distributed by the local board to each 
eligible school. However, if the local school system has at least 10 eligible schools or at 
least 35% of a local school system’s schools are eligible schools, the local board may 
expend up to 50% of CPG personnel and per-pupil grants on behalf of eligible schools on 
program costs that directly benefit the school, and in accordance with a plan developed in 
consultation with eligible schools that ensures that each eligible school receives the 
required positions/coverage and services. Per-pupil grants are only wealth equalized for 
districts that receive the minimum State funding (40%) under the compensatory education 
formula; for all other districts, the State pays the full amount. The local funding percentage 
is based on the compensatory education wealth equalization formula. 
 
The following table lays out the phase-in of the two components of the funding. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grants Phase-in 
School Poverty Percentage 
Year Personnel Phased-
in 
Year Per Pupil Phased-in 
> = 80% 
FY 2020 
FY 2022 
75%-80% 
FY 2021 
FY 2023 
70%-75% 
FY 2022 
FY 2024 
65%-70% 
FY 2023 
FY 2025 
60%-65% 
FY 2024 
FY 2026 
55%-60% 
FY 2025 
FY 2027 
 
School concentration percentages are based on a three-year average of compensatory 
education enrollment in each public school. 
 
For the per-pupil grant, schools receive funding along a sliding scale according to their 
CPG level, the three-year average percentage of compensatory education enrollment 
students at each school. Schools at or below 55% CPG level receive no funding per pupil. 
Schools above 55% and below 80% CPG level see the per-pupil amount increase until, for 
schools at or above 80% CPG level, per-pupil funding reaches the statutorily established 
per-pupil maximum amount. The per-pupil amount established by this sliding scale is then 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 976/ Page 8 
multiplied by a school’s compensatory education enrollment in the second prior fiscal year 
to get a calculated grant amount. A percentage increment of per-pupil funding is then 
applied for each of six years of eligibility, beginning with 16% in the first year of eligibility 
and culminating in 100% funding by the seventh year, is specified in statute as shown in 
the table below. 
 
Eligibility Year 
Share of CPG Per Pupil 
NOT ELIGIBLE 
0% 
Year 1 
16% 
Year 2 
32% 
Year 3 
37% 
Year 4 
55% 
Year 5 
66% 
Year 6 
75% 
Year 7 and Beyond 
100% 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2030, however, all schools receive 100% of the calculated per-pupil 
grant amount regardless of year of eligibility. 
 
College and Career Ready Funding 
 
It is the goal of the State that students enrolled in public school will meet the CCR standard 
adopted by the State Board of Education before the end of the 10th grade and no later than 
the time the student graduates from high school. In addition to funding for non-CCR and 
CCR students provided within the foundation formula, funding is provided for students in 
grades 9 through 12 who have met the CCR standard. Per-pupil funding, covered by both 
State and local shares, begins at $517 in fiscal 2022 and is inflation adjusted each 
subsequent year. These funds support various pathways and educational options available 
to students who meet the CCR standard. 
 
Career Ladder for Educators 
 
Under Chapter 36, as amended by Chapter 55, a four-level career ladder must be 
implemented by each local board of education by July 1, 2024. Level one is a  
State-certified teacher. Level two is a teacher pursuing a master’s degree, 30 credits of a  
State board-approved program of study, or National Board Certification (NBC). 
Level three is a teacher who has an NBC or, if NBC or a comparable assessment is not 
available in the teacher’s content area, a master’s degree in that area. Level three includes 
an assistant principal. Level four is a teacher on the teacher leadership track or 
administrative track of the career ladder, each of which is further divided into tiers. If a 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 976/ Page 9 
teacher achieves level three or four on the career ladder by being an NBC teacher, the 
teacher must retain NBC status in order to remain at that level. The State and county 
governments share the cost of required salary increases for educators reaching certain 
levels on the career ladder, including for attaining and retaining NBC status. 
 
Grow Your Own Educators 
 
Chapters 227 and 228 of 2024 established the Grow Your Own Educators Program to 
provide support to eligible provisional teachers and noncertified education support 
professionals interested in teaching who pledge to fulfill a service obligation. Administered 
by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), the program provides grants to 
local school systems in collaboratives for certain teacher candidates’ expenses and program 
administration costs. Chapter 237 made several alterations to the program, including 
clarifying that the program purpose is to support collaboratives that offer teacher licensure 
programs with on-the-job experiential learning for eligible individuals, not to directly 
support the individuals. 
 
Full-day Prekindergarten 
 
The full-day prekindergarten funding formula provides State and local funding for 
voluntary full-day prekindergarten for (1) children who are three or four years old from 
low-income families and homeless youths and whose family income is less than or equal 
to 300% of the federal poverty level (FPL) (Tier I children) and (2) four-year-olds from 
families whose income is – for fiscal 2026 funding – between 300% and 360% of FPL, and 
beginning fiscal 2027 between 300% and 600% of FPL (Tier II students). 
 
There is no family share for Tier I students. For Tier II students, a sliding scale developed 
by MSDE determines the family share. For four-year-olds from families with income above 
600% (Tier III), the family share covers the full cost of full-day prekindergarten. However, 
a local board may provide up to 100% of the family share on behalf of the family. Local 
governments are required to fund the local share of the full-day prekindergarten program. 
The funding formula for full-day prekindergarten is based in part on the per-pupil amount. 
The per-pupil amount is $14,473 for fiscal 2026, escalates to $19,950 in fiscal 2027 and 
2028, and increases annually by inflation beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 
Beginning in the 2024-2025 school year, prekindergarten slots provided by eligible private 
providers must account for at least 10% of the total prekindergarten slots provided by 
eligible prekindergarten providers in each county. The proportion of eligible private 
provider prekindergarten slots in each county increases by 10 percentage points every 
school year, until, in the 2028-2029 school year, and each subsequent school year, eligible 
private provider prekindergarten slots account for at least 50% of eligible prekindergarten 
provider prekindergarten slots in each county. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 976/ Page 10 
Priority in expanding full-day prekindergarten slots is given to three- and four-year-olds 
who are Tier I children, children with disabilities regardless of family income, and children 
living in homes where English is not the primary spoken language. The proportion of 
enrolled Tier I children who are three- and four-year-olds must increase annually until all 
such children are enrolled in a full-day prekindergarten program. 
 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program 
 
The Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program, administered by MSDE, is intended to 
broaden the availability of high-quality prekindergarten and school readiness services 
throughout the State for children and their families in coordination with the expansion of 
publicly funded full-day prekindergarten under the Blueprint. The program is a competitive 
grant program to provide grants to qualified providers, including (1) a local board of 
education or (2) if partnering with a local board under a memorandum of understanding, a 
State accredited or nationally accredited child care program or a nonpublic school approved 
by MSDE to provide prekindergarten services. 
 
Grants may be used to add available slots to expand prekindergarten services, including 
(1) establishing or expanding full-day prekindergarten for eligible young children and 
(2) expanding existing half-day prekindergarten programs into full-day prekindergarten for 
eligible young children. Grants may not be used (1) to supplant existing funding for 
prekindergarten services; (2) for capital improvements; or (3) to fund the same full-day 
prekindergarten slot that is funded under the full-day prekindergarten program established 
by Blueprint legislation. 
 
Through fiscal 2029, the Governor must annually appropriate to the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Fund (established to provide funds to the program) an amount that is at least 
equal to the total amount of all funds received by the program in the prior fiscal year. 
Beginning in fiscal 2030, funds appropriated to the Prekindergarten Expansion Fund must 
be consolidated into the publicly funded full-day prekindergarten program. 
 
Public School Transportation 
 
All school systems are required to arrange transportation to and from school for all public 
school students and are required to provide transportation to and from school for all 
disabled students. The State provides annual aid to public schools for the purpose of 
funding student transportation. The funding consists of two parts:  a base grant that is 
adjusted annually; and a per-pupil grant based on the number of students with special 
transportation needs. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 976/ Page 11 
Local Funding for Public Schools 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board equivalent to the greater of the per-pupil maintenance of 
effort (MOE) requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The 
per-pupil MOE amount is based upon the enrollment count as defined above. The local 
share of major education aid programs equals the local share of the foundation formula, 
compensatory 
education, 
English 
learner, 
special 
education, 
CWI, 
full-day 
prekindergarten, CCR, transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), and 
career ladder grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from the compensatory education 
State funding floor are required to fund the local share of CPG. However, for some 
counties, the combined local share across these several programs is subject to adjustments 
described below. Additionally, under Chapter 336 of 2024, the State and county 
governments must pay for Blueprint implementation coordinator salaries in the same 
proportion as the foundation program. 
 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several other funding formula programs. The law also includes a 
mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund each year. This 
involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by dividing the 
county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An “education effort 
index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average education effort” 
is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for each county, which is the 
county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid), is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or 
(3) at least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased up 
from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. State 
relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education effort 
adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per-pupil MOE is met each year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the GTB program, the 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 976/ Page 12 
local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except that for Baltimore City 
only the amount above $10.0 million may be reduced from the local share; (2) if a county 
receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% for the foundation and 
40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at least 0.13, the local 
share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, the local share may 
not be reduced to below the required per-pupil MOE amount. 
 
Minimum School Funding Requirement 
 
Each local board of education must distribute to its public schools at least 75% of the 
applicable per-pupil funding amounts generated under the foundation program and most 
major education aid formulas. In addition, local boards must distribute 100% of the 
per-pupil amounts provided under the concentration of poverty grant program and for 
eligible private provider prekindergarten slots. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12