START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 969 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 969 
(Delegate Allen) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Electric Vehicle Fuel Sold at Retail - Equipment Requirements, Units of 
Measure, Sales Price, and Fees 
 
 
This bill – under provisions governing the regulation of any instrument or device used for 
weighing or measuring (“weight and measure”) – requires the owner or possessor of a 
weight and measure used for the retail sale of electricity as vehicle fuel to clearly and 
conspicuously display information detailing the name, address, and phone number of a 
local person responsible for the weight and measure. The information may be displayed on 
or immediately adjacent to the weight and measure. All electricity possessed, offered, or 
exposed for sale and sold at retail as vehicle fuel must be measured and sold in units of 
kilowatt-hours. In addition to the price charged for the retail sale of electricity as a vehicle 
fuel, the owner or possessor may charge a fee for services related to the retail sale of 
electricity as a vehicle fuel, which may be a fixed fee or assessed based on length of time. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing requirements and authority. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Department of Agriculture’s Weights and Measures 
Program, on behalf of the Secretary of Agriculture and pursuant to Title 11 of the 
Agriculture Article, inspects and certifies the accuracy of weights and measures in the State 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 969/ Page 2 
to ensure the fairness and equity of all commercial transactions involving determination of 
quantity. 
 
Generally, unless registered with the Secretary, a weight and measure may not be used or 
possessed for current use for (1) buying or selling any commodity or object; (2) hire or 
award; (3) computing any charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight 
and measurement; or (4) determining any weight and measure for a charge. A registration 
must be renewed annually and registration/renewal fees (established by regulation, varying 
by type of weight and measure) must be paid. 
 
The Secretary must inspect and test every weight and measure commercially used in 
determining (1) the weight, measurement, or count of any commodity sold, or offered or 
exposed for sale, on the basis of weight, measure, or count; (2) any charge or payment for 
services rendered on the basis of weight, measure, or count; and (3) weight, measurement, 
or count when a charge is made for the determination. The specifications, tolerances, and 
other technical requirements for commercial weighing and measuring devices must be 
those adopted by the National Conference on Weights and Measures and included in the 
NIST Handbook 44, as amended. 
 
NIST Handbook 44, Section 3.40 (“Electric Vehicle Fueling Systems”), requires that:   
 
 
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) used to charge electric vehicles indicate 
the electrical energy, the unit price, and the total price of each transaction;  
 
EVSE units used to charge vehicles be indicated and recorded in kilowatt-hours and 
decimal subdivisions thereof;  
 
a receipt be available at the completion of all transactions that includes (1) the  
total quantity of the energy delivered with unit of measure; (2) the total computed 
price of the energy sale; (3) the unit price of the energy; (4) any additional separate 
charges included in the transaction (e.g., charges for parking time); and (5) the final 
total price of the completed transaction including all items; and  
 
an unattended EVSE have clearly and conspicuously displayed thereon, or 
immediately adjacent thereto, adequate information detailing the name, address, and 
phone number of the local responsible party for the device.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 969/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Comptroller’s Office; 
Department of General Services; Maryland Energy Administration; Public Service 
Commission; National Institute of Standards and Technology; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
me/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3