START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 938 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 938 
(Delegates Behler and D. Jones) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Anne Arundel County and the City of Annapolis - Crosswalk Monitoring 
Systems - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes the use of crosswalk monitoring systems in Anne Arundel County and 
the City of Annapolis to record and cite instances of motor vehicles, in violation of 
State law, failing to come to a stop at a crosswalk when a pedestrian is using the crosswalk. 
By December 1, 2027, the Anne Arundel County Council and Annapolis City Council must 
jointly report to the Governor and General Assembly on specified information about its 
crosswalk monitoring system program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates  
June 30, 2031. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary are not anticipated to be 
materially affected, as discussed below. General fund revenues from contested cases in the 
District Court may increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. The bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State Highway Administration (SHA) operations or 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County and City of Annapolis expenditures and revenues 
increase beginning as early as FY 2027 to the extent that either local jurisdiction chooses 
to implement a crosswalk monitoring system program under the bill’s authority, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 938/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Crosswalk Monitoring Systems 
 
The bill authorizes the use of crosswalk monitoring systems in Anne Arundel County and 
the City of Annapolis (1) on highways maintained by a local jurisdiction, if authorized by 
the governing body of the local jurisdiction or (2) on State highways, if authorized by SHA. 
The systems may be used to record and cite violations when the driver of a vehicle fails to 
come to a stop at a crosswalk that is being used by a pedestrian. 
 
The bill specifies that a crosswalk monitoring system (1) may not be used in a local 
jurisdiction unless its use is authorized by the governing body of the local jurisdiction by 
local law enacted after reasonable notice and a public hearing and (2) may only be used at 
a location approved by the governing body of the local jurisdiction. Anne Arundel County 
must prioritize the placement of the systems within municipalities that have high violation 
rates. 
 
Citations and Penalties 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty of up to 
$40 if the motor vehicle is recorded by a crosswalk monitoring system during the 
commission of a violation. The District Court must prescribe a uniform citation form and 
civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by a person who chooses 
to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. A person who receives a 
citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Citation revenue from crosswalk monitoring systems must be paid (1) to the administering 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Similar to other local automated enforcement programs in the State, citation revenues may 
be used to recover the costs of implementing and administering the crosswalk monitoring 
system program and any remaining balance must be used solely for public safety purposes, 
including pedestrian or highway safety programs. For any fiscal year in which the balance 
remaining after the costs of implementing and administering the systems is greater than 
10% of the total revenues of the local jurisdiction for the fiscal year, the local jurisdiction 
must remit any funds that exceed 10% of the total revenues to the Comptroller. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 938/ Page 3 
Additional Specifications and Requirements 
 
The bill includes additional specifications and requirements that apply for crosswalk 
monitoring systems, which are similar or identical to the specifications and requirements 
that apply to most other automated enforcement systems, including those related to: 
 
 
public notice that must be given before a crosswalk monitoring system is fully 
implemented; 
 
signage that must be placed to alert drivers that a system is in use; 
 
the mailing of warning notices, instead of citations; 
 
processes for determining liability under extenuating circumstances (e.g., for rental 
vehicles, for stolen vehicles, when registration plates are stolen, etc.); 
 
processes for adjudication and administration of violations and citations by the 
District Court; and 
 
the payment of contractors who administer or process citations. 
 
Required Report 
 
By December 1, 2027, Anne Arundel County and the City of Annapolis must jointly report 
to the Governor and General Assembly on: 
 
 
through October 1, 2027, the time period during which crosswalk monitoring 
systems were in use and the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of 
violations recorded by the systems, by location and date; 
 
the costs associated with implementing and operating the systems and the revenue 
collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations recorded by the systems; 
 
appropriate locations for the deployment of the systems; 
 
the performance and reliability of the systems; and 
 
the effectiveness of the systems in reducing violations, crashes, and pedestrian 
injuries generally and in areas where the systems were implemented and used. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Automated Enforcement Systems  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed systems. Generally, 
pursuant to §21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives a citation, 
may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 938/ Page 4 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
In general, citation revenues from automated enforcement systems used by a local 
jurisdiction (subject to limited exception) may be used to recover the costs of implementing 
and administering the program and any remaining balance may be used solely for public 
safety purposes, including pedestrian or highway safety programs. However, for any 
fiscal year in which the balance remaining after the costs of implementing and 
administering the systems is greater than 10% of the total revenues of the county for the 
fiscal year, the county must remit any funds that exceed 10% of the total revenues to the 
Comptroller. 
 
Crosswalks 
 
The Maryland Vehicle Law requires the driver of a vehicle to come to a stop when a 
pedestrian crossing the roadway in a crosswalk is (1) on the half of the roadway on which 
the vehicle is traveling or (2) approaching from an adjacent lane on the other half of the 
roadway. This requirement does not apply where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian 
crossing is provided or a traffic control signal is in operation. 
 
Additionally, a pedestrian may not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk 
or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to 
yield. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As crosswalk monitoring systems are installed and used in the county 
and citations are subsequently issued, some of the individuals cited are likely to opt for a 
trial in District Court. Accordingly, general fund revenues increase, likely minimally, as 
fine revenues paid by individuals convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. 
Because the bill terminates at the end of fiscal 2031, revenues are not anticipated beyond 
fiscal 2032, as cases from violations cited at the end of fiscal 2031 are fully adjudicated. 
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the 
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 938/ Page 5 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an information technology upgrade to 
automate the process at approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be 
incurred. 
 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that Anne Arundel County or the City of Annapolis 
implement a crosswalk monitoring system program under the authority provided by the 
bill: 
 
 
expenditures increase to install the cameras and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the camera 
program (e.g., mailing or contractual costs); 
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the local 
jurisdiction; and 
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
Because the bill terminates at the end of fiscal 2031, expenditures and revenues are not 
anticipated beyond fiscal 2032, as citations issued at the end of fiscal 2031 are fully paid 
and administered. The county and city can complete the required report using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Anne Arundel County; City of Annapolis; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 938/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6