START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 907 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 907 
(Delegates Moon and Cardin) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Third-Degree Assault 
 
 
This bill (1) establishes the offense of misdemeanor assault in the third degree; (2) specifies 
that the District Court has exclusive original jurisdiction over third-degree assault cases; 
(3) specifies that a person convicted of assault in the third degree is subject to imprisonment 
for up to 90 days and/or a maximum fine of $500; and (4) authorizes the expungement of 
a conviction for assault in the third degree. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal decrease in general fund revenues from fines imposed in the 
District Court, as discussed below. Minimal decrease in general fund expenditures as a 
result of the bill’s incarceration penalty. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the 
finances or operations of the Judiciary and the Office of the Public Defender (OPD). 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal decrease in local revenues from fines imposed in the circuit courts. 
Minimal decrease in local incarceration expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, a person may not intentionally cause “offensive contact,” 
engage in conduct intending to put another in fear of offensive contact, or attempt to cause 
offensive contact. “Offensive contact” is nonconsensual physical contact that a reasonable 
person would find to be offensive. Offensive contact does not include contact that results 
in physical injury; contact that causes a risk of serious physical injury; a domestically 
related crime, as defined in § 6-233 of the Criminal Procedure Article; or a sexual crime 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 907/ Page 2 
under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article. Violators are guilty of assault in the 
third degree, a misdemeanor that is punishable by imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a  
$500 maximum fine. A physical injury of a victim resulting from a violation of the 
prohibition on assault in the third degree is not a defense to a charge of third-degree assault. 
 
Unless specifically charged by the State, assault in the third degree is not a lesser included 
crime of any other crime. The bill specifies requirements for a charging document or 
warrant for assault in the third degree. 
 
The District Court has exclusive original jurisdiction over third-degree assault cases. A 
circuit court does not have jurisdiction to try a case charging a violation of the prohibition 
on third-degree assault unless the defendant (1) properly demands a jury trial; (2) appeals 
by law from a final judgment entered in the District Court; or (3) is charged with another 
offense arising out of the same circumstances that is within a circuit court’s jurisdiction. 
 
Under the bill, a person who has been convicted of misdemeanor assault in the third degree 
may petition for expungement of a police record, court record, or other record maintained 
by the State or a political subdivision of the State, in accordance with requirements 
under existing statute, including the five-year waiting period for general misdemeanor 
convictions, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  A person may not commit an assault. However, the consequences of an 
assault vary depending on the circumstances involved. 
 
First-degree Assault 
 
A person commits a first-degree assault if the person (1) intentionally causes or attempts 
to cause serious physical injury to another person; (2) commits an assault with a firearm, 
as specified; or (3) intentionally strangles another. A violator is guilty of a felony and 
subject to imprisonment for up to 25 years. 
 
“Serious physical injury” means physical injury that (1) creates a substantial risk of death 
or (2) causes permanent or protracted serious disfigurement, loss of the function of any 
bodily member or organ, or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
“Strangling” is defined as impeding the normal breathing or blood circulation of another 
person by applying pressure to the other person’s throat or neck. 
 
Felony Second-degree Assault 
 
A person commits a felony second-degree assault if they intentionally cause “physical 
injury” to another if they know or have reason to know that the other person is a 
(1) law enforcement officer or parole or probation agent engaged in the performance of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 907/ Page 3 
officer/agent’s official duties or (2) a firefighter, an emergency medical technician, a rescue 
squad member, or any other first responder engaged in providing emergency medical care 
or rescue services. “Physical injury” means any impairment of physical condition, 
excluding minor injuries. A violator is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a 
maximum fine of $5,000. 
 
The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit courts over felony 
second-degree assault cases. 
 
Misdemeanor Second-degree Assault 
 
The misdemeanor second-degree assault statute applies to assaults that are not considered 
to be felony assaults in the first or second degree. Under this statute, a person is prohibited 
from committing an assault. A violator is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or 
a maximum fine of $2,500. Assault means the crimes of assault, battery, and assault and 
battery, which are defined through case law. 
 
Expungement 
 
Other than specified court-initiated expungements under § 10-105.1 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article, to begin the process of expungement, a petitioner must file a petition for 
expungement with the court under § 10-105 or § 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article, 
which establishes eligibility for the expungement of records pertaining to a criminal charge 
or conviction. With some exceptions, § 10-105 applies to dispositions other than a 
conviction, and § 10-110 applies to expungements of convictions. 
 
Expungement of a court or police record means removal from public inspection: 
 
 
by obliteration; 
 
by removal to a separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate 
reason for access are denied access; or 
 
if access to a court record or police record can be obtained only by reference to 
another such record, by the expungement of that record, or the part of it that provides 
access. 
 
Section 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article authorizes an individual convicted of any 
of a list of approximately 100 specified offenses or an attempt, a conspiracy, or a 
solicitation of any of these offenses, to file a petition for expungement of the conviction, 
subject to specified procedures and requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 907/ Page 4 
Petitions for expungements under § 10-110 are subject to the waiting periods listed below. 
These waiting periods begin after the sentence has expired, including parole, probation, or 
mandatory supervision: 
 
 
Misdemeanor (general):  5 years; 
 
Felony (general), Second-degree Assault, or Common Law Battery:  7 years; 
 
Domestically Related Crime (§ 6-233 of the Criminal Procedure Article):  15 years; 
 
Possession with Intent to Distribute Cannabis:  3 years; and 
 
Burglary in the First Degree (Breaking and Entering – Theft), Burglary in the 
Second Degree, or Felony General Theft:  10 years. 
 
If the person is convicted of a new crime during the applicable waiting period, the original 
conviction or convictions are not eligible for expungement unless the new conviction 
becomes eligible for expungement. 
 
A person is not eligible for expungement if the person is a defendant in a pending criminal 
proceeding. 
 
Unless the State’s Attorney or a victim files an objection to the petition for expungement 
within 30 days after the petition is served, the court must pass an order requiring the 
expungement of all police records and court records about the charge. 
 
If the State’s Attorney or a victim files a timely objection to the petition, the court must hold 
a hearing. The court must order the expungement of all police records and court records 
about the charge after a hearing, if the court finds and states on the record: 
 
 
that the conviction is eligible for expungement under specified provisions of 
§ 10-110; 
 
that giving due regard to the nature of the crime, the history and character of the 
person, and the person’s success at probation, parole, or mandatory supervision, the 
person is not a risk to public safety; 
 
that the person has paid any monetary restitution ordered by the court in the original 
proceeding or does not have the ability to pay the restitution; and 
 
that an expungement would be in the interest of justice. 
 
If at a hearing the court finds that a person is not entitled to expungement, the court must 
deny the petition. 
 
Unless an order is stayed pending appeal, within 60 days after entry of the order, every 
custodian of the police records and court records that are subject to the order of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 907/ Page 5 
expungement must advise in writing the court and the person who is seeking expungement 
of compliance with the order. 
 
Pursuant to § 10-107 of the Criminal Procedure Article, if two or more charges, other than 
one for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal 
Law Article, arise from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts, they are considered 
to be a unit. A charge for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under  
§ 5-601 of the Criminal Law Article that arises from the same incident, transaction, or set 
of facts as a charge in the unit is not a part of the unit. If a person is not entitled to 
expungement of one charge or conviction in a unit, the person is not entitled to 
expungement of any other charge or conviction in the unit. This “unit rule” applies to 
expungements under Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the Criminal Procedure Article (to which the 
bill is drafted). 
 
Charge by Citation 
 
State law requires a police officer to charge by citation (1) any misdemeanor or local 
ordinance violation that does not carry a term of imprisonment or (2) any misdemeanor or 
local ordinance violation not involving serious injury or an immediate health risk for which 
the maximum penalty is 90 days imprisonment or less, unless otherwise specified. 
However, the defendant must meet certain criteria set forth in State law to be charged by 
citation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues decrease minimally as a result of the bill’s 
monetary penalty for third-degree assault. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
general fund revenues from expungement filing fees ($30 for a petition to expunge a 
conviction). General fund expenditures for the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS) decrease minimally, as discussed below. The bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of the Judiciary or OPD. This 
estimate assumes that the potential for increased cases and convictions for assault (and 
corresponding fines and incarceration) due to the reduced penalty for third-degree assault 
and the ability to charge by citation does not have a significant effect on the overall impact 
of the bill on revenues and expenditures. 
 
Relevant Offense Data 
 
The Judiciary previously advised that, in fiscal 2024, there were 35,072 violations 
(charges) and 1,809 guilty dispositions (convictions) for second-degree assault  
in the District Court. In the State’s circuit courts, there were 9,903 violations and 
2,776 guilty dispositions for this offense in fiscal 2024. Data is not readily available on 
how many of these violations and guilty dispositions were specifically attributable to 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 907/ Page 6 
misdemeanor second-degree assault cases. However, it is assumed that most second-degree 
assault cases are charged as misdemeanors, rather than felonies. 
 
According to DPSCS, during fiscal 2025, the department conducted intake at 
State correctional facilities on 377 individuals who were sentenced on a total of 400 counts 
of second-degree assault; the average sentence length imposed for these counts was 
39.1 months. The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy advises that 
1,773 individuals were sentenced to 1,959 total counts for second-degree assault in the 
State’s circuit courts during fiscal 2025. 
 
Fine Revenues in the District Court 
 
While the bill shifts some cases from the circuit courts to the District Court, this estimate 
assumes that overall, the bill decreases general fund revenues from fines imposed in the 
District Court for third-degree assault ($500 maximum fine) instead of misdemeanor 
second-degree assault ($2,500 maximum fine). Any decrease in general fund revenues is 
anticipated to be minimal. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures for DPSCS decrease minimally due to fewer people being 
committed to State correctional facilities and decreased payments to counties for 
reimbursement of costs for incarcerated individuals. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,838 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 907/ Page 7 
Local Revenues:  Local fine revenues decrease minimally from fines imposed in 
circuit court cases that shift to the District Court or are subject to a lower fine in the 
circuit court under the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local incarceration expenditures decrease minimally due to the 
bill’s penalty provisions and reduced pretrial detention costs for individuals charged by 
citation instead of arrest under the bill. Circuit courts and local police departments may 
experience operational efficiencies from reduced caseloads and increased use of citations 
instead of arrests. 
 
Counties pay the full cost of incarceration for people in their facilities for the 
first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have 
ranged from approximately $140 to $350 per incarcerated individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 544 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 514 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7