START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 945 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 945 
(Delegate Sample-Hughes) 
Health 
 
 
Nursing Homes - Complaints - Notification and Consultation 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), when investigating a nursing 
home complaint alleging actual harm or immediate jeopardy to a resident, to immediately 
notify the local health department for the county in which the nursing home is located. To 
the extent practicable within the time frames specified for investigating the complaint, 
MDH must consult and coordinate with the local health officer on the complaint 
investigation and response. The bill also makes a technical change to a reporting 
requirement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local health officers can consult and coordinate with MDH using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Nursing home” means a facility (other than a facility offering domiciliary 
or personal care) that offers nonacute inpatient care to patients suffering from a disease, 
chronic illness, condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease requiring 
maximal nursing care without continuous hospital services and who require medical 
services and nursing services rendered by or under the supervision of a licensed nurse 
together with convalescent, restorative, or rehabilitative services. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 945/ Page 2 
The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) within MDH generally makes an unannounced 
site visit and conducts a full survey of each licensed nursing home at least once per year. 
After a nursing home complaint alleging actual harm, OHCQ must initiate an investigation 
within 10 business days. If OHCQ receives a complaint alleging immediate jeopardy to a 
resident, it must make every effort to investigate the complaint within 24 hours, and  
no later than 48 hours, after receiving the complaint.  
 
According to OHCQ’s quarterly nursing home inspections report submitted in 
January 2026, OHCQ completed a total of 122 complaint surveys statewide between 
August 1, 2025, and October 31, 2025. The report does not specify how many complaints 
were for actual harm or immediate jeopardy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2