START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 980 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 980 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law and State Government - Child Protection and the Office of the Child 
Welfare Ombudsman (Kanaiyah's Law) 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Social Services Administration (SSA) within the Department of 
Human Services (DHS), in the administration of its out‐of‐home placement program, from 
allowing the placement of a child in an unlicensed setting. In addition, the bill makes 
numerous alterations to statutory provisions related to guardianships, including (1) the 
establishment of procedures requiring adults in the home of an individual whom the 
juvenile court has appointed as guardian to obtain a criminal history records check (CHRC) 
and (2) requiring a local department of social services to file a petition for the review of a 
guardianship with the juvenile court if the local department deems it to be in the child’s 
best interests based on a review of information received in a CHRC. The bill also 
establishes the Office of the Child Welfare Ombudsman in the Office of the Attorney 
General (OAG) to investigate and determine whether (1) the needs of children and families 
under the jurisdiction of DHS or a local department are being met in compliance with State 
law; (2) the rights of children and families are being upheld; and (3) the children are not 
being abused or neglected. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $4.1 million in FY 2027 for 
staff, CHRC fee reimbursements, one‐time programming costs, and higher placement 
costs. Future year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation, as well as additional 
staff beginning in FY 2028. The penalty provisions do not have a material impact on State 
finances or operations. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
4.1 
5.5 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
Net Effect 
($4.1) 
($5.5) 
($5.7) 
($5.8) 
($5.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 980/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.   
 
Small Business Effect:  None.   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Out‐of‐home Placements – Prohibition on Unlicensed Settings  
 
SSA may not allow a child to be placed in an unlicensed setting. “Unlicensed setting” 
means a setting for an out-of-home placement that is not licensed, and includes (1) a hotel, 
motel, or short-term rental; (2) a shelter designated to meet the needs of a child who has 
run away or is homeless; and (3) an office building or other nonresidential environment. 
Unlicensed setting does not include the voluntary placement of a former child in need of 
assistance (CINA) or the placement of a child with an individual who currently is (or is 
applying to be) a kinship caregiver or foster parent, or a parent, including in a family-based 
residential treatment setting.  
 
Criminal History Records Checks, Guardianship Orders, and Review Hearings 
 
The bill requires an adult in the home of an individual with whom the juvenile court 
appoints as guardian to obtain a CHRC. To facilitate this requirement, an individual who 
is appointed guardian by the juvenile court must periodically provide the local department 
of social services, in a form and manner required by the local department, the name of each 
adult residing in the guardian’s home. If a local department receives information indicating 
that an adult is residing in the guardian’s home, and that adult has not obtained a CHRC, 
the local department must immediately refer the adult for completion of a CHRC. On 
completion, if the local department determines that it is in the best interests of the child, 
the local department must file a petition with the juvenile court to review the guardianship, 
as specified. DHS must adopt regulations to implement these provisions.  
 
The juvenile court must schedule a hearing to occur within 30 days after the filing of the 
petition. If the juvenile court determines that it is in the best interests of the child, the 
juvenile court must (1) set aside the guardianship order; (2) schedule a prompt trial on the 
merits of the guardianship petition; and (3) reopen the CINA case for review. 
 
The bill makes related changes to facilitate review of CHRCs required under the bill. As 
discussed below, under current law, an order granting custody and guardianship to an 
individual has several effects, including the termination of the local department’s legal 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 980/ Page 3 
obligations and responsibilities to the child. The bill creates an exception by referencing 
the local department’s ongoing responsibilities with respect to CHRCs, as established by 
the bill. The bill makes a similar change in provisions under § 5‐326 of the Family Law 
Article, which governs designation of a guardian at specified guardianship review hearings. 
 
Additionally, the bill establishes that, in a separate order accompanying an order granting 
guardianship of a child (as required under current law), a juvenile court, for a child placed 
with a specific individual, must direct the individual to immediately notify a local 
department if an adult begins residing in the home of the individual and the adult has not 
completed a CHRC. 
 
Office of the Child Welfare Ombudsman  
 
Establishment and Funding:  The bill establishes the Office of the Child Welfare 
Ombudsman within OAG. The budget of the ombudsman and the office must be a part of 
the budget of OAG, and the Governor must provide in the State budget sufficient money 
for the office to hire necessary staff. If the budget is insufficient to allow the office to 
perform its duties, the ombudsman may apply to the Board of Public Works (BPW) for 
additional money, as specified. Personnel of the office are generally subject to the 
provisions of the State Personnel and Pensions Article. By January 31, 2028, and annually 
thereafter, the ombudsman must report to the Secretary of Budget and Management and 
the General Assembly all personnel positions, classifications, and salaries in the office as 
of the end of the immediately preceding calendar year. 
 
The ombudsman must be appointed by the Attorney General, with the advice and consent 
of the Senate and input from current or former foster children. The ombudsman must meet 
specified requirements, serves a five‐year term, and may be removed by the 
Attorney General for good cause shown after notice and an opportunity to be heard.  
 
Duties of the Office:  The office must: 
 
 
identify, receive, investigate, and seek the resolution or referral of complaints made 
by or on behalf of a child involved in CINA cases concerning any act, omission, 
practice, policy, or procedure of a State or local agency or any person working on 
behalf of the agency that may adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of the 
child;  
 
inspect and review the operation, policies, and procedures of foster care homes, 
group homes, kinship care homes, residential treatment facilities, shelters for the 
care of abused or neglected children, and independent living arrangements operated, 
licensed, or approved for payment by DHS or a local department or used by DHS 
or a local department for the care of children in its custody;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 980/ Page 4 
 
review, evaluate, report, and make recommendations to a State or local agency 
concerning procedures established by the agency to provide services to children and 
families that are at risk of abuse or neglect, children in State or institutional custody, 
or children and families who receive child protective kinship care or foster care 
services;  
 
receive, investigate, and make referrals to other State or local agencies, or take other 
appropriate actions with respect to a complaint received by the office regarding the 
actions of DHS, a local department, or a State-funded private entity that provides 
services to children and families who are at risk of abuse or neglect, children in State 
or institutional custody, or children and families who receive child protective, 
kinship care, or foster care services;  
 
establish and maintain a 24‐hour helpline and website to receive and respond to calls 
from individuals regarding the welfare of children under the jurisdiction of DHS or 
a local department;  
 
conduct unannounced site visits at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to 
any institution or facility to which children are committed or placed, as specified;  
 
consult with any appropriate State or county agency or State-funded private entity 
providing child welfare services to children, and may request from such entity, and 
the entity is authorized and directed to provide, such cooperation and assistance as 
will enable the child advocate to properly perform its responsibilities; and  
 
establish and implement procedures for receiving, processing, responding to, and 
resolving complaints made by or on behalf of children who are recipients of the 
services of the local departments.   
 
Duties of the Ombudsman:  The ombudsman may (1) review and copy relevant laws, 
policies, procedures, and specified records and reports, including those relating to an 
individual child; (2) conduct interviews with staff, children, and others; (3) issue subpoenas 
to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of books, papers, 
and other documents (and apply to the appropriate circuit court for relief in instances of 
noncompliance); (4) administer oaths to witnesses; and (5) if the ombudsman considers 
that legislation would affect the interests of persons under its jurisdiction, recommend such 
legislation to the General Assembly. 
 
Complaints:  A child who is the recipient of services from DHS or a local department or is 
a CINA may file a complaint with the ombudsman, as specified. The complaint process 
must be confidential, expedient, and responsive to the child’s perception of safety issues 
and the child’s emotional needs. The ombudsman must establish and implement 
appropriate response times and safety measures for different types of complaints. Local 
departments of social services must include, in developmentally appropriate language, 
specified information in each child’s record about the complaint procedure. A child must 
be given the information at the initial court hearing, before any subsequent court hearings, 
and before every new placement. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 980/ Page 5 
The office must provide training on complaint policies and procedures to specified workers 
as well as other professionals working with children through CINA cases. The training 
must be provided as part of the professionals’ employment orientation and continuing 
professional development. 
 
The office must inform the child, in a developmentally appropriate way, of the outcome of 
any investigation. If the outcome of the investigation entails site visits with the child for a 
specified period of time, the child must be informed of the scope and intent of the follow‑up 
process. The ombudsman must treat all complaints received as confidential, including the 
identities of complainants and individuals from whom information is acquired. However, 
the ombudsman may disclose information as necessary to enable the performance of the 
duties of the ombudsman and to support any recommendations resulting from an 
investigation. Records relating to complaints received by the office and the investigation 
of complaints are exempt from disclosure under the Public Information Act. 
 
Reporting Requirements:  The office must report in a timely manner to the Secretary of 
Human Services and the General Assembly knowledge of any systemic or life-threatening 
problems and any findings, actions, and recommendations relating to investigations 
regarding the care, supervision, and treatment of (1) children and families who are at risk 
of abuse or neglect; (2) children in DHS or local department custody; or (3) children and 
families who receive protective kinship or foster care services. All other findings, actions, 
and recommendations related to the office’s activities must also be reported. The bill also 
requires quarterly reports to the Secretary of Human Services of specified items, including 
all activities of the office and details regarding the complaints made to the office. A copy 
of the report must be provided to specified entities. 
 
By November 30 of each year, beginning in 2028, the office must report to the Secretary, 
the Citizens Review Board for Children, the State Council on Child Abuse and Neglect, 
the Governor, and the General Assembly on all the office’s activities and the actions taken 
by DHS in response to findings and recommendations of the office. The office must remove 
any identifying information as necessary to protect the privacy of the child and the child’s 
family. 
 
Penalties:  A person may not discriminate or retaliate in any manner against a person for 
filing a complaint, providing information to an advocate of a child in good faith, or willfully 
interfering with an advocate of a child in the performance of the advocate’s official duties. 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum penalties of a $5,000 fine 
and/or imprisonment for five years. 
 
Current Law:  DHS, through SSA, has the primary responsibility for child welfare 
services throughout the State, which are provided primarily by the local departments of 
social services. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 980/ Page 6 
Child in Need of Assistance Proceedings – In General 
 
Child in Need of Assistance:  A CINA is a child who requires court intervention because 
(1) the child has been abused or neglected, has a developmental disability, or has a mental 
disorder, and (2) the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian is unable or unwilling to give 
proper care and attention to the child and the child’s needs.  
 
Statutory provisions outline numerous requirements for CINA and related proceedings, 
some of which are described in further detail below, and circumstances under which a child 
may be placed in out‐of‐home care prior to or after being adjudicated as a CINA.  
 
Family Law Article § 5-326 – Review Hearings 
 
A court must hold an initial guardianship review hearing to establish a permanency plan 
for the child; at least once each year after the initial guardianship review hearing (and until 
the juvenile court’s jurisdiction terminates), the court must hold a guardianship review 
hearing. At each guardianship review hearing, a juvenile court must determine whether 
(1) the child’s current circumstances and placement are in the child’s best interests; (2) the 
permanency plan that is in effect is in the child’s best interests; and (3) reasonable efforts 
have been made to finalize the permanency plan that is in effect. Statute specifies different 
time periods for the court and local department to provide notice to specified individuals. 
 
A child’s permanency plan may be, in order of priority, (1) adoption of the child; 
(2) custody and guardianship of the child by an individual; or (3) for a child at least age 16, 
another planned permanent living arrangement that addresses the individualized needs of 
the child, including the child’s educational plan, emotional stability, physical placement, 
and socialization needs and includes goals that promote the continuity of relations with 
individuals who will fill a lasting and significant role in the child’s life.  
 
At each guardianship review hearing for a child, the juvenile court must take specified 
actions, including evaluating the child’s safety and projecting a reasonable date by which 
the permanency plan will be finalized. 
 
At a guardianship review hearing held at least one year after the juvenile court enters an 
order for guardianship of a child, the court may designate an individual guardian of the 
child if (1) the local department certifies the child’s successful placement with the 
individual under the supervision of the local department or its agent for at least 180 days 
or a shorter period allowed by the juvenile court on recommendation of the local 
department; (2) the local department files a report by a child placement agency, completed 
in accordance with department regulations, as to the suitability of the individual to be the 
child’s guardian; and (3) the juvenile court makes a specific finding that for a compelling 
reason, adoption is not in the child’s best interests and custody and guardianship by the 
individual is in the child’s best interests and is the least restrictive alternative available. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 980/ Page 7 
Designation of a guardian under these circumstances terminates the local department’s 
legal obligations and responsibilities to the child; however, after designation of a guardian, 
a juvenile court may order any further review that the juvenile court finds to be in the 
child’s best interests.  
 
Family Law Article § 5-324 – Contents of Additional Order  
 
In a separate order accompanying an order granting guardianship of a child, a juvenile court 
must include a directive terminating the child’s CINA case. Consistent with the child’s best 
interests, the court may place the child in a specific type of facility or with a specific 
individual and must direct the provision of any other service or taking of any other action 
as to the child’s education, health, and welfare; the court may also take numerous other 
actions relating to placements, services, and visitation, as further specified in statute.  
 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article § 3-819.2 – Custody and Guardianship to an 
Individual  
 
As part of a CINA proceeding, the court may grant custody and guardianship to a relative 
or nonrelative. An order granting the custody and guardianship to an individual (1) rescinds 
the child’s commitment to the local department; (2) achieves the child’s permanency plan; 
(3) terminates the local department’s legal obligations and responsibilities to the child; and 
(4) terminates the child’s case, unless the court finds good cause not to terminate the child’s 
case. A guardian has legal custody of the child unless the court that appoints the guardian 
gives legal custody to another person.  
 
Before granting custody and guardianship, the court must consider (1) any assurance by 
the local department that it will provide funds for necessary support and maintenance for 
the child; (2) all factors necessary to determine the best interests of the child; and (3) a 
report by a local department or a licensed child placement agency, completed in 
compliance with regulations adopted by DHS, on the suitability of the individual to be the 
guardian of the child. The report must include a home study, child protective services 
history, CHRC, and review of the proposed guardian’s physical and mental health history. 
A court may not enter an order granting custody and guardianship until the report is 
submitted to and considered by the court.  
 
Criminal History Records Checks  
 
The Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository (CJIS-CR) is established by 
the Criminal Procedure Article, §§ 10-213 et seq., within the Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services to collect, manage, and disseminate Maryland criminal history 
records checks for criminal justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and 
licensing) purposes. For national records’ checks, CJIS-CR collects the fee and submits the 
requests for national information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation electronically. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 980/ Page 8 
Pursuant to provisions in the Family Law Article, certain employees and individuals 
involved in the oversight and care of children must obtain a CHRC, including (1) an 
individual who is seeking to adopt a child through a child placement agency; (2) an 
individual who is seeking to become a guardian through a local department; and (3) an 
individual whom the juvenile court appoints as guardian of the child. Further, upon the 
request of a local department of social services, a CHRC must be obtained by (1) a parent 
or guardian of a child who is committed to the local department and is or has been placed 
in an out-of-home placement within the past year and (2) any adult known by the local 
department to be residing in the home of the parent or guardian. The local department must 
reimburse an adult residing in a foster care home and an individual the local department 
requested to obtain a CHRC for fees incurred. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Department of Human Services 
 
Unlicensed Settings:  According to DHS, existing practices are generally in compliance 
with the prohibition against youth being placed in unlicensed settings; specifically, based 
on the most recent information readily available at the time of publication of this fiscal and 
policy note, fewer than 10 youth at most are thought to be in an unlicensed setting (with 
reported plans for re‐placement). However, while this number is assumed to reflect 
placements at unlicensed settings specifically mentioned in the bill (e.g., hotel, office 
building, etc.), DHS advises there are currently 108 youth in semi-independent living 
arrangements (SILAs); these are typically individuals who are still in the legal care and 
custody of DHS/a local department but are living on a college campus or in their own 
residences, fully independent with minimal supervision. DHS advises that under the bill, 
these SILAs may not qualify as a licensed setting. Accordingly, State expenditures increase 
by an estimated $270,100 per month (approximately $3.2 million on an annual basis) to 
relocate youth currently placed in a SILA into a licensed setting. This reflects State funding 
assumed to be needed to cover higher monthly care costs for these youth who need to be 
re‐placed in other settings under the bill. 
 
Criminal History Records Checks and Coordination with the Child Welfare Ombudsman:  
General fund expenditures for DHS further increase to implement the provisions related to 
CHRCs required by the bill and to coordinate with the Child Welfare Ombudsman. DHS 
anticipates the need for at least 42 personnel (12 background screening analysts, 24 social 
workers, 3 quality assistance analysts, 2 assistant Attorneys General, and 1 human services 
specialist). These positions are purported in part to be needed to request and evaluate the 
CHRCs on an annual basis, and to provide legal services and coordination (including 
records requests) associated with the ombudsman’s office. 
 
Under current practice, DHS advises that local departments of social services only request 
a CHRC at the time of evaluation for granting guardianship of a CINA or when the initial 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 980/ Page 9 
CINA proceeding occurs due to the neglect or abuse of a parent or guardian. After a youth 
has been placed with a family or guardian, DHS is not permitted to perform CHRCs and 
generally ceases all contact with the family, since permanency for the child is considered 
achieved.  
 
In reaching its staffing estimate, DHS advises data is not readily available on the total 
number of guardianship homes in the State. For context, DHS is aware of approximately 
2,600 households that receive Guardianship Assistance Payments; however, DHS cautions 
that many households do not receive these payments. Reliable information on the 
composition of each household is also unavailable (e.g., whether there are two partnered 
or married guardians or other children in the home that are at least age 18, etc.).  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS), while generally acknowledging that the 
legislation may result in increased levels of effort in many cases, advises that without 
experience under the bill, it is unable to independently verify the extent to which additional 
staff at the magnitude of that estimated by DHS are required. For example, the estimate 
from DHS assumes the need for 24 social workers to – among other tasks – provide 
supportive services to households when a CHRC reveals information warranting further 
action (including a subsequent court hearing). Absent experience under the bill, however, 
DLS cannot reliably predict the frequency with which such information will be included in 
an individual’s CHRC. For purposes of this analysis, however, it is assumed that a 
minimum of six administrative CHRC specialists, one assistant Attorney General, 
one coordinator, and two quality assurance specialists are needed. Accordingly,  
general fund expenditures increase by at least $883,149 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by at least $851,614 annually thereafter; the 
estimate also includes $150,000 in programming costs in fiscal 2027 only.  
 
Positions 
10.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$641,741 
Programming Costs 
150,000 
Operating Expenses 
    91,408 
Minimum FY 2027 DHS Staff/Programming Expenditures 
$883,149 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating costs. DHS may request additional 
resources as needed through the annual budget process.  
 
In addition, DHS anticipates conducting at least 4,000 CHRCs in the first 12 months of 
implementation and incurring costs of approximately $250,000 annually to reimburse 
individuals for CHRC‐related fees. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 980/ Page 10 
Office of the Child Welfare Ombudsman within the Office of the Attorney General 
 
General fund expenditures for OAG increase by $622,180 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
six personnel (one ombudsman, one deputy ombudsman, two investigators, one data and 
technology manager, and one administrative specialist) to initially staff the Office of the 
Child Welfare Ombudsman within OAG. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
6.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$567,335 
Operating Expenses 
    54,845 
Minimum FY 2027 OAG 
Expenditures 
$622,180 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Further, it is assumed that as the office begins receiving additional complaints and 
performing more inspections, reviews, and investigations, additional staffing support is 
required. Accordingly, this estimate assumes that beginning October 1, 2027, one attorney, 
three investigators, and one paralegal also join the office to further support an anticipated 
increase in workloads. In fiscal 2028 and annually thereafter, general fund expenditures of 
approximately $1.4 million are anticipated for staff.   
 
In addition, the estimate above does not include expenditures relating to the establishment 
of a 24-hour helpline, or any expenditures relating to contracting with experts in the field 
of child welfare, both of which have the potential to significantly increase expenditures 
further. DLS notes that the above estimates are preliminary only, as a precise determination 
of the expenditures associated with creating the office cannot be reliably determined before 
the function commences, particularly when expenditures depend in large part on the scope 
of the activities undertaken by the office, as well as the number of complaints that are 
received. However, DLS also advises that the number of children subject to the purview of 
the new office is assumed to be significant. To the extent additional staff are needed in 
future years, the office may request additional resources through the annual budget process 
(and/or apply for additional money through BPW, as specified in the bill).  
 
Other Impacts  
 
It is assumed that the bill does not otherwise impact State finances or operations, including 
the workload of the Judiciary.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 980/ Page 11 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s 
counties; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Office of the Public Defender; Department of Human Services; Board of Public Works; 
Department of State Police; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11