START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 989 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 989 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health and Ways and Means 
 
 
State Assistance for the Elderly - Calculation of Income 
 
   
This bill prohibits income received from renting a portion of an individual’s primary 
residence from being included in an applicant’s income when determining eligibility for 
certain State tax credits and programs. The prohibition applies to any State tax credit, 
housing assistance program, or medical assistance program that (1) is designed to assist 
elderly individuals and (2) limits eligibility to individuals with less than a certain amount 
of income. The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) must review each State tax credit, 
housing assistance program, and medical assistance program and determine whether the 
prohibition applies. If MDOA determines that the prohibition applies, it must notify the 
unit of State government responsible for administrating the credit or program of the 
limitation on the calculation of income. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $289,400 in FY 2027 to reflect 
programming changes for the Department of Human Services (DHS) and consultant 
services for MDOA. Future years reflect DHS maintenance costs. Medicaid expenditures 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
FY 2027 to provide an income disregard for certain Medicaid applicants. Federal fund 
revenues increase accordingly.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$289,400 
$12,200 
$12,200 
$12,200 
$12,200 
GF/FF Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($289,400) 
($12,200) 
($12,200) 
($12,200) 
($12,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 989/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDOA functions as the State Unit on Aging as federally designated 
through the Older Americans Act of 1965 and receives federal and State funding to serve 
older adults and their families and caregivers. MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the 
delivery of services for, and advocates on behalf of, older adults at all levels of government.  
 
MDOA distributes funding and provides fiscal and programmatic oversight to the aging 
services network across the State, including to 19 local area agencies on aging. Services 
funded through MDOA and administered by the aging services network include 
information and referral services, nutrition services, community-based supportive services, 
and assisted living subsidies.  
 
Medicaid 
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) administers Medicaid, which provides 
comprehensive health care coverage to eligible low-income individuals. In general, 
recipients of Temporary Cash Assistance or federal Supplemental Security Income benefits 
automatically qualify for Medicaid. Other individuals qualify for Medicaid based on their 
income or due to an inability to pay extraordinary medical bills resulting from a 
catastrophic illness or extended nursing home or hospital stay. Certain elderly individuals 
may also be eligible for assistance under Medicare.  
 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.09.24.07) currently specify that profit from rental 
property income and other income-producing property is deducted (at a rate of 50%) from 
the countable gross income of an aged (65 or older) assistance unit when determining 
eligibility for Medicaid.  
 
Housing Assistance 
 
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) works to finance 
housing opportunities and revitalize great places for Maryland citizens to live, work, and 
prosper. Several DHCD programs assist families to find, maintain and keep affordable and 
livable housing in communities throughout the State. DHCD advises that it does not offer 
any programs that are designed exclusively to assist elderly individuals in the State. 
 
State Tax Credits 
 
Senior Tax Credit:  Chapter 4 of 2022 established a nonrefundable credit against the State 
income tax for a resident (1) who is at least age 65 and (2) whose federal adjusted gross 
income does not exceed $100,000 ($150,000 if married filing jointly). The amount of the 
tax credit is equal to (1) $1,000 for an individual or if only one of the individuals filing a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 989/ Page 3 
joint return is an eligible individual and (2) $1,750 if married filing jointly and both 
individuals are at least age 65. The value of the tax credit is reduced for certain taxpayers 
if specified Board of Revenue Estimates are below a certain amount.  
 
Homeowner’s Property Tax Credit:  The homeowners’ property tax credit program is a 
State-funded program that provides credits against State and local real property taxation 
for homeowners who qualify based on a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. 
To be eligible for the property tax credit, a recipient’s net worth may not exceed $200,000 
and the combined gross household income may not exceed $60,000. However, this 
program is not specifically designed to assist elderly individuals and has no age 
requirements. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of Aging 
 
Under the bill, MDOA must review each State tax credit, housing assistance program, and 
medical assistance program to determine whether the bill’s prohibition applies and notify 
units of State government responsible for a credit or program to which the prohibition 
applies. MDOA advises that implementation of the bill requires contractual assistance for 
initial review of each State tax credit, housing assistance program, and medical assistance 
program. Thus, MDOA general fund expenditures increase by $45,000 in fiscal 2027. 
 
Medicaid 
 
The bill would require a disregard of 100% of the income from renting a portion of an 
individual’s residence from the income calculation for a determination of Medicaid 
eligibility. MDH advises that such a provision is unlikely to be approved by the federal 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Because the provision singles out the elderly 
within the larger Aged, Blind and Disabled (ABD) coverage group, this revision to the 
State Plan would likely not meet the federal requirement that all services be comparable in 
nature. Thus, Maryland would need to apply the new disregard to all ABD recipients 
subject to the Supplemental Security Income-based non-Modified Adjusted Gross Income 
methodology. 
 
Thus, Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) increase beginning 
in fiscal 2027 to provide an additional income disregard to all ABD applicants and 
recipients noted above for income from renting a portion of an individual’s residence. At 
this time, Medicaid is unable to accurately estimate the number of individuals who would 
be impacted and thus the cost to the program.  
 
MDH additionally notes that it will be difficult to distinguish income generated from 
renting a portion of an individual’s home from other sources of rental income. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 989/ Page 4 
Department of Human Services 
 
DHS performs eligibility determinations for Medicaid applicants. To exempt rental income 
received from renting a portion of an individual’s home for purposes of Medicaid eligibility 
determination for individuals in the ABD eligibility category, DHS advises that it must 
update its Eligibility and Enrollment System (E&E). Oversight of (and all funds associated 
with E&E) is handled by the Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIt). 
 
Thus, this analysis assumes that DoIT general fund expenditures increase by an estimated 
$244,440 in fiscal 2027 for initial modifications to the system; maintenance costs of 
approximately $12,222 are incurred annually beginning in fiscal 2028. Federal matching 
funds of up to 90% may be available for these costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Aging; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of Human Services; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4