START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 975 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 975 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Massage Therapy - Advertising 
 
 
This bill prohibits a licensed massage therapist, registered massage practitioner, or a 
third party from advertising for massage therapy services (1) by stating that prostitution, 
escort, or sexual services are available; (2) on a website known for advertising prostitution, 
escort, or sexual services; or (3) by indicating or implying that sexual activity is part of the 
massage therapy service. Uncodified language in the bill requires removal of any physical 
signs or billboards that violate these provisions and are visible to the public by 
May 1, 2027. If an advertisement for massage therapy services lists the name of a licensed 
massage therapist or registered massage practitioner, the name on the advertisement must 
match the name on the individual’s license or registration issued by the State Board of 
Massage Therapy Examiners. Regulations adopted by the board must define specific 
prohibited language and content for advertising and establish procedures for reporting 
violations by a licensed massage therapist, registered massage practitioner, or member of 
the public. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners can adopt regulations using 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For an online advertisement, each day on which an advertisement that 
violates the bill’s restrictions is visible to the public constitutes a separate violation. Failure 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 975/ Page 2 
to remove a physical sign or billboard placed in public view that violates the bill’s 
restrictions constitutes a violation as well. Violations are subject to existing penalty 
provisions. 
 
Current Law:  The board must adopt regulations to establish standards for advertising and 
soliciting by licensed massage therapists or registered massage practitioners. Mailing 
notices to patients to inform them of appointment times is not considered advertising or 
soliciting. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.65.04.03), an advertisement must state, at a 
minimum, (1) the licensee or registrant’s practice or business name; (2) the licensee or 
registrant’s name; (3) the licensee or registrant’s status as a licensee or registrant; and 
(4) the practice or business address and phone number. An advertisement may not include 
statements that misrepresent facts, professional qualifications, education, experience, or 
affiliation, or make representations or implications that the licensee or registrant is willing 
to provide services that are illegal. A violation of these regulations may result in 
disciplinary action against the licensee or registrant. 
 
Subject to hearing provisions, the board may deny a license or registration to an applicant, 
reprimand a licensee or registration holder, place a licensee or registration holder on 
probation, or suspend or revoke a license or registration if the licensee or registration holder 
violates any provision of the Maryland Massage Therapy Act (Title 6 of the Health 
Occupations Article). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 492 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2