START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 929 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 929 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Economic Matters and Ways and Means 
 
 
Carroll County - Office of Permits and Inspections - Denial of Commercial 
Permit or License for Unpaid Personal Property Taxes 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Carroll County Office of Permits and Inspections to deny the 
issuance or renewal of a commercial license or permit if the applicant has unpaid personal 
property taxes, as specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Carroll County operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Carroll County Office of Permits and Inspections may not deny the 
issuance or renewal of a commercial license or permit for unpaid personal property taxes 
if the applicant submits evidence that the applicant has disputed the amount of unpaid taxes. 
The office may issue or renew a commercial license or permit, previously denied, if the 
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the office that they have paid any previously unpaid 
personal property taxes. 
 
Current Law:  Local governments (counties, municipalities, and special taxing districts) 
are authorized to tax personal property and to establish local tax rates. Prior to July 1, 2013, 
State law required the county personal property tax rate to be set at 2.5 times the  
county real property tax rate. Beginning July 1, 2013, the county personal property tax rate 
was decoupled from the county real property tax rate by authorizing county governments 
to set a personal property tax rate at up to 2.5 times the county real property tax rate. 
Municipalities are not subject to this limitation. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 929/ Page 2 
Under Section 14-804 of the Tax-Property Article, all unpaid tax on personal property is a 
lien on the personal property and on the real property of the owner of the personal property 
in the same manner in which taxes on real property are now liens on the real property with 
respect to which they are imposed in all subdivisions of the State. Any lien attaches to the 
real property only after the notice has been recorded and indexed among the judgment 
records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in the county where the land lies or is 
recorded and indexed on the tax rolls of the subdivision. As a result, a county or 
municipality can collect unpaid personal property taxes by bringing real property of the 
taxpayer to tax sale or by suing the taxpayer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 415 and HB 851 of 2025 and SB 963 and HB 1080 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 450 (Carroll County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2