START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 987 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 987 
(Delegate Ivey, et al.) 
Judiciary and Appropriations 
 
 
Public Safety - Maryland Violence Intervention and Prevention Program Fund - 
Alterations (Community Safety and Intervention Funding Act) 
 
 
This bill increases the mandated appropriation for the Maryland Violence Intervention and 
Prevention Program Fund – from at least $3.0 million annually in general funds to at least 
$10.0 million annually in general funds – beginning in fiscal 2028; it likewise repeals a 
provision that authorizes the Governor to annually appropriate up to $10.0 million to the 
fund. In addition, the bill requires, of the total amount available for grants through the fund 
in each fiscal year, an allocation of (1) up to 40% to programs serving the Baltimore region 
(Baltimore City and Baltimore County); (2) up to 40% to programs serving the Capital 
region (Montgomery and Prince George’s counties); and (3) any remaining funds to other 
jurisdictions disproportionately affected by violence, as determined by 
the 
Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP). 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $7.0 million 
annually beginning in FY 2028 due to the increase in the mandated appropriation; special 
fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. This bill increases a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2028.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
$7,000,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($7,000,000) 
($7,000,000) 
($7,000,000) 
($7,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local grant revenues and expenditures increase significantly beginning in 
FY 2028 due to the increase in the mandated appropriation, as discussed below.   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 987/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Violence Intervention and Prevention Program Fund, a 
special, nonlapsing fund, is administered by the Executive Director of GOCPP, in 
consultation with the Maryland Violence Intervention and Prevention Advisory Council, 
to (1) support effective violence reduction strategies by providing competitive grants to 
local governments and nonprofit organizations to fund evidence-based health programs or 
evidence-informed health programs and (2) evaluate the efficacy of the programs funded 
as a result. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund;  
(2) investment earnings; and (3) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund.  
 
The fund must be used in the following manner:  (1) to support effective violence reduction 
strategies by providing competitive grants to local governments and nonprofit 
organizations to fund evidence-based health programs or evidence-informed health 
programs; (2) for the evaluation of the efficacy of evidence-based health programs or 
evidence-informed health programs awarded grants through the fund, in an amount not less 
than 5% but not greater than 10% of the fund; and (3) for specified administrative costs in 
an amount not greater than 4% of the fund. 
 
Preference for awarding funds must be given to local governments or nonprofit 
organizations (1) that serve an area disproportionately affected by violence, as specified; 
(2) whose grant proposals demonstrate the greatest likelihood of reducing gun violence in 
their communities; and (3) that serve a population identified as having the highest risk of 
perpetrating or being victimized by violence in the near future. 
 
Funding awards must be commensurate with the levels of gun violence in the jurisdiction 
served by the local government or nonprofit organization and the strength of the local 
government or nonprofit organization’s application. 
 
The Governor may annually appropriate up to $10.0 million to the fund; however, the 
Governor must annually include in the annual budget bill an appropriation composed of at 
least $3.0 million in general funds to the fund. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced 
includes $3.0 million for the fund. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 987/ Page 3 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:     
 
Increase in Mandated Funding for the Violent Intervention and Prevention Program Fund 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $7.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2028 due 
to the increase in the mandated appropriation from at least $3.0 million annually to at least 
$10.0 million annually. As noted above, the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes  
$3.0 million for the fund. 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly beginning in fiscal 2028, 
reflecting receipt of the additional general funds and spending of the additional funds for 
authorized purposes (grants, evaluations of grant awards, and administrative costs). This 
analysis assumes that the entire increase in the mandated appropriation is spent each year. 
  
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy – Administrative Expenses  
 
GOCPP currently staffs the council and administers the fund and needs to hire additional 
staff to handle the significant increase in workload resulting from administering the 
additional funding provided under the bill. Therefore, special fund expenditures for 
GOCPP increase by $195,329 in fiscal 2028. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
two grant specialists to administer the increased funding; it assumes that staff are hired on  
July 1, 2027, when the additional funding from the increased mandated appropriation 
becomes available. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$175,604 
Operating Expenses 
    19,725 
Increased FY 2028 Admin. Expenditures 
$195,329 
 
Future year administrative expenditures, which range from $189,726 in fiscal 2029 to 
$207,002 in fiscal 2031, reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
As noted above, the fund may be used, in an amount not greater than 4% of the fund, for 
administrative costs related to oversight of the fund, public outreach and education about 
the fund, and technical assistance and best practice education for grantees. Based on the 
$10.0 million annual mandated appropriation, GOCPP is authorized to use up to 
$400,000 annually from the fund for administrative costs beginning in fiscal 2028. Because 
GOCPP is currently limited to using no more than $120,000 annually from the fund for 
administrative costs, the increased administrative costs resulting from the bill can be 
covered using the special fund. Thus, those administrative costs are encompassed within 
the increase in the mandated appropriation each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 987/ Page 4 
Grants and Evaluations of Grant Awards 
 
After administrative costs (as estimated above), of the $7.0 million annually in additional 
funding provided under the bill, approximately $6.8 million annually is available to provide 
grants to local governments and nonprofit organizations and evaluate the efficacy of 
evidence-based health programs or evidence-informed health programs awarded grants 
through the fund, in accordance with current law. Accordingly, the bill significantly 
increases the total grant awards provided to local governments, resulting in a corresponding 
increase in local grant revenues and expenditures. 
 
The bill further specifies that of the total amount available for grant awards from the fund, 
up to 40% must be allocated to programs serving Baltimore City and Baltimore County, 
and up to 40% must be allocated to programs serving Montgomery and Prince George’s 
counties; remaining funds are allocated to other jurisdictions, as specified. 
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department 
of Budget and Management; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4