START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 954 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 954 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Finance and Procurement - Retention Proceeds 
 
 
This bill requires that undisputed retention proceeds on State construction contracts that 
are retained by a State agency or a contractor be paid within 90 days after the substantial 
completion of a project, as defined by the applicable contract or subcontract.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase due to double payment for some 
components of State construction projects, as discussed below. No effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Payment security” means security to guarantee payment for labor and 
materials, including leased equipment, under a contract for construction. “Performance 
security” means security to guarantee the performance of a contract for construction. 
Before a public body, including the State, awards a construction contract exceeding 
$100,000, the contractor must provide payment and performance security. For construction 
contracts awarded by the Department of General Services (DGS) and the Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT), this requirement applies for contracts exceeding 
$200,000. Performance security must be in an amount the public body considers adequate, 
and payment security must be at least 50% of the total amount payable under the contract. 
Security must be (1) a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 954/ Page 2 
State; (2) cash in the amount equivalent to a bond; or (3) other security that the public body 
considers satisfactory.  
 
In general, retainage is a portion of the final payment due to the contractor that is withheld 
pending final completion of a project. If a contractor has furnished 100% payment security 
and 100% performance security, the percentage specified in the contract for retainage may 
not exceed 5% of the total amount. A contractor may not retain a percentage of payments 
due to a subcontractor that exceeds the percentage retained by the State.  
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires payment of retainage within 90 days after 
substantial, rather than final, completion of a project. This generally means that payment 
is made prior to the completion of the “punch list,” a construction industry term that refers 
to a list of items that, toward the end of a project, the contractor and project sponsor agree 
must be addressed by a contractor once the site is operational but before a project is 
considered complete. Often the items on the punch list are minor, such as scratches or 
markings on a wall, but the punch list may also include items that require rework.  
 
DGS and MDOT advise that retainage provides an incentive for contractors to quickly and 
completely perform the items on the punch list to bring a project to completion so they can 
receive their final payment. Payment of retainage prior to completion of the punch list 
means that contractors have little incentive to complete the items (or to do so on a timely 
basis), which may require agencies to contract with a third party to finish the work, 
resulting in double payment for the work. DGS also advises that it has discretion to reduce 
retainage and regularly uses this discretion. Nevertheless, to the extent that contractors do 
not complete punch list items following payment of retainage, State expenditures (all 
funds) for construction projects may increase, but a reliable estimate of the overall effect 
is not feasible.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small construction companies that work on State construction 
projects likely are paid their retainage payments sooner than they are paid under current 
law.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 835 and HB 1166 of 2025; SB 921 and HB 994 of 2024; and HB 949 
of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 609 (Senator Mautz) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 954/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Comptroller’s Office; 
University System of Maryland; Department of General Services; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3