START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 912 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 912 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Local Government - Trap-Neuter-Return Policies for Community Cats - 
Requirements and Restrictions (Ash's Law) 
 
 
This bill establishes statewide trap-neuter-return (TNR) policies for community cats that 
apply to all counties and municipalities. The bill supersedes and preempts any law, 
ordinance, policy, or regulation of any local government body and any policy or rule of 
any person or corporation that may otherwise prohibit or restrict the practice of TNR. The 
bill also establishes that the prohibition against dropping or leaving a domestic animal on 
a road, in a public place, or on private property with the intent to abandon the animal, does 
not apply to a person providing care to a community cat under a TNR policy. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase to the extent local governments have 
current TNR policies that do not meet the requirements set forth in the bill, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potentially meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “community cat” means a free roaming cat that may be cared for by one or more residents 
of the immediate area within which the cat is located. A community cat includes a feral 
cat. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 912/ Page 2 
A “community cat caregiver” means a person who provides care to a community cat, 
including food, shelter, or medical care, under a TNR policy in accordance with the bill. 
Community cat caregiver does not include a person who is considered the owner, harborer, 
controller, or keeper of a community cat. 
 
“Eartip” means a procedure performed using anesthesia under the supervision of a licensed 
veterinarian that removes the distal one-quarter of the left ear of a community cat and is 
designed to identify a community cat as being sterilized and vaccinated for rabies. 
 
TNR means to humanely trap, sterilize, vaccinate against rabies, eartip, and return a 
community cat to the location where the cat was originally trapped. TNR includes 
providing care to a community cat. 
 
A TNR policy adopted by a local government must: 
 
 
authorize the trapping of a community cat to sterilize, vaccinate for rabies, and eartip 
in accordance with federal or state law; 
 
authorize a community cat caregiver to reclaim an impounded community cat 
without proof of ownership for the purpose of (1) carrying out a TNR policy, or 
(2) returning an eartipped cat to the location where the cat was originally trapped; 
 
require, unless veterinary care is needed, that (1) an eartipped cat that is received 
by a local shelter be returned to the location where the cat was originally trapped, 
and (2) an eartipped cat that is trapped be returned on-site; and 
 
establish TNR as the preferred disposition of an impounded community cat. 
 
A TNR policy adopted by a local government may not require any registration or 
certification process for a community cat caregiver. 
 
Current Law:  A person who owns, possesses, or has custody of a domestic animal may 
not drop or leave the animal on a road, in a public place, or on private property with the 
intent to abandon the animal. A person who violates these provisions is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to a fine up to $100. 
 
Spay/Neuter Fund and Spay and Neuter Grant Programs 
 
Chapters 561 and 562 of 2013 established and Chapter 92 of 2022 subsequently extended 
the Spay/Neuter Fund through September 30, 2032. The purpose of the fund is to reduce 
animal shelter overpopulation and cat and dog euthanasia rates by financing grants to local 
governments and animal welfare organizations for programs that most efficiently facilitate 
and promote the provision of spay and neuter services for cats and dogs in the State. The 
fund receives revenue from a fee imposed on each registered brand name or product name 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 912/ Page 3 
of dog or cat food. The current fee, which will remain in effect until the fund’s termination 
date, is $100. Fees are paid by the person registering the pet food, in accordance with 
Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) guidelines. 
 
MDA must solicit and evaluate grant proposals from local governments and animal welfare 
organizations for efforts to facilitate and promote the provision of spay and neuter services 
for cats and dogs. A competitive grant proposal (1) must target low-income communities 
and populations to the maximum extent possible and detail how that will be accomplished; 
(2) may target feral cat populations if MDA determines that it does not violate local law; 
(3) must facilitate and promote the provision of spay and neuter services for cats and dogs; 
and (4) may include public education and outreach components. Chapters 561 and 562 
of 2013 require MDA to evaluate a grant proposal in accordance with these standards and 
any additional standards it adopts via regulation.  
 
Local Regulation of Community Cats 
 
Regulation of community cats is a highly localized process, with many local governments 
having their own rules and regulations governing the capture, care, and release of 
community cats. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local expenditures may increase to the extent local governments 
have current TNR policies that do not meet the requirements set forth in the bill. For 
example, Montgomery County advises that annual expenditures would increase by 
approximately $151,000, beginning in fiscal 2027. This estimate assumes the hiring of 
one full-time position at an annual salary of $91,000 and annual operating costs of $60,000 
to process 800-1,200 cat eartipping procedures at a cost of $50-$75 per cat per year. 
Montgomery County also noted the bill could lead to long-term cost savings for the county 
by reducing the number of cats and kittens entering the county’s animal shelters which 
would serve to lower the annual costs associated with intake, daily care, and euthanasia of 
these cats. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent a veterinary clinic is a small business, clinics could 
receive increased revenues from local governments or private citizens to administer various 
provisions of a TNR policy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 912/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 750 (Senator Lewis Young, et al.) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Kent. 
Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4