START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 951 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 951 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Recordation and Land Records - Revisions 
 
 
This bill (1) repeals a requirement that a printed deed or other instrument offered for 
recordation include certain margins and (2) requires a clerk of the circuit court to date each 
change or correction made to information in the general alphabetical index on the 
horizontal line on which the change or correction was made.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Clerks of the circuit courts are generally responsible for the recording of 
land records. Any printed deed or other instrument submitted for recordation must satisfy 
certain formatting requirements before being recorded, including a requirement for the 
instrument to include a three-inch margin at the top of the first page and one-inch margins 
on the left and right sides of each page of the instrument for official use. 
 
Each clerk of the circuit court must create and maintain a complete alphabetical index of 
every recorded deed and other instrument, as further specified in statute. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 951/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 760 (Senators Watson and West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2