START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 993 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 993 
(Delegate Valderrama, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Short-Term Rentals 
 
 
This bill prohibits a governing body of a county or municipality from enacting a local law 
or ordinance that prohibits an operator from offering a property as a short-term rental solely 
because the operator is a lessee or sublessee of the property. However, the bill authorizes 
local governments to enact a local law or ordinance prohibiting an operator from operating 
more than one property in the jurisdiction as a short-term rental if the operator is a lessee 
or sublessee of the property. “Short-term rental” means a residential dwelling unit, or a 
portion thereof (including an accessory dwelling), used to provide housing for less than 
31 consecutive days. It does not include a hotel, motel, boarding house, student group 
residential facility, fraternity or sorority house, or similar housing. Nothing in the bill may 
be interpreted as prohibiting a property owner from prohibiting or restricting the use of the 
property by a lessee or sublessee as a short-term rental. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State statute does not expressly regulate the operation of “short-term 
rental” units. However, several local government jurisdictions, including Anne Arundel, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties, and Baltimore City have enacted laws and 
ordinances regulating the operation and administration of such units. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 993/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 705 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 666 (Senator Harris) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Washington, and Worcester counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2