START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 939 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 939 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Certificates of Birth - Filing - Time Period 
 
 
This bill authorizes a certificate of birth to be filed within 10 days after the birth occurred 
if a parent of the child notifies the Division of Vital Records in the Maryland Department 
of Health in a manner required by the Secretary of Health, as soon as practicable, but not 
later than 5 days after the birth occurs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect local 
governmental finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Within five calendar days after a birth occurs in an institution, or en route 
to the institution, or outside an institution with an attending clinician, the administrative 
head of the institution or the attending clinician (or their designee) must (1) prepare a birth 
certificate on a form provided by the Secretary of Health; (2) secure required signatures on 
the certificate; (3) file the certificate; and (4) if applicable, attach a copy of the order of the 
court establishing parentage. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 939/ Page 2 
The attending physician, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, nurse midwife, or 
attending clinician must provide the date of birth and medical information required on the 
certificate within five calendar days after the birth. 
 
Within five calendar days after a birth occurs outside an institution without an attending 
clinician, the birth must be verified by the Secretary and a certificate of birth must be 
prepared on the provided form and filed by one of the following, in the indicated order of 
priority:  (1) the attending individual; (2) in the absence of an attending individual, either 
parent of the child; (3) in the absence or inability of either parent, the individual in charge 
of the premises where the birth occurred. 
 
When birth occurs on a common carrier within the United States and the child is 
first removed from the carrier in the State, the birth must be registered in the State, and the 
place where the child is first removed must be considered the place of birth. When a birth 
occurs on a common carrier while in international waters, air space, or in a foreign country 
and the child is first removed from the carrier in the State, the birth must be registered in 
the State, but the certificate must show the actual place of birth insofar as can be 
determined. The certificate must be filed within five calendar days after the child is 
removed from the carrier. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2