START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 998 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 998 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – 46th Alcoholic Beverages District 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to approve the 
transfer of a Class B-D-7 license from the 700 block of Washington Boulevard in the 
40th alcoholic beverages district to the 200 block of South High Street in the 46th alcoholic 
beverages district. The bill authorizes a licensed establishment on the south side of 
West Pratt Street to keep and allow individuals to consume, on the licensed premises, 
alcoholic beverages donated by a manufacturer or wholesaler, as specified. The bill also 
specifies that a Class B-D-7 beer, wine, and liquor license issued for a premises in the 
1600 block of Eastern Avenue must be considered unexpired until July 1, 2027, for the 
purpose of being renewed to the current license year and transferred to another owner at a 
premises in the 700 block of Aliceanna Street. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and 
provisions related to the licensed premises on West Pratt Street terminate  
May 31, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Baltimore City finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A licensed establishment on the south side of the unit block of  
West Pratt Street may keep and allow individuals to consume on the licensed premises 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 998/ Page 2 
alcoholic beverages donated by a manufacturer or wholesaler if:  (1) the alcoholic 
beverages are donated and served at an event for which a nonprofit entity has rented the 
licensed premises; (2) the licensee has provided to the board evidence of the nonprofit 
status of the entity renting the licensed premises; (3) the licensee serves the alcohol donated 
for the event; (4) any related taxes have been remitted; and (5) the licensee only keeps and 
serves alcoholic beverages in conjunction with a single rental contract. 
 
Current Law:  In Baltimore City, a transfer of an alcoholic beverages license must be 
completed on or before 180 days after the board approves the transfer unless the board 
grants a hardship extension. A written request to extend the time authorized to complete 
the transfer due to hardship must be made in writing by a license holder or another 
appropriate interested party within 180 days after the board approves the transfer of a 
license. The board may grant the extension if it finds after a hearing that an existing 
hardship caused the delay in transferring the license. However, an extension may not 
prolong the period authorized to complete the transfer beyond 270 days after the board 
approves the transfer.  
 
Generally, the board may issue a Class B-D-7 license if it determines, upon consideration 
of the number of beer, wine, and liquor outlets in the affected area and the outlets’ days of 
sale, that the license is reasonably necessary for public convenience. A Class B-D-7 license 
authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail at the place described in the 
license, for on- and off-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $2,336. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 642 (Senator Ferguson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2