START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1093 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1093 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Provider Panels - Requirements 
 
 
This bill alters the process though which health care providers apply to participate on a 
carrier’s provider panel. The bill (1) repeals authorization for a carrier to charge an 
application fee; (2) alters requirements relating to updating information in a provider 
directory; (3) expands the types of providers a carrier is prohibited from limiting on a 
provider panel; and (4) alters requirements for a multi-carrier common online provider 
directory information system. The bill also establishes civil penalties for carriers that fail 
to provide specified notice. The Insurance Commissioner must collect and remit to 
providers specified civil penalties, adopt regulations related to the online credentialing 
system, and submit a specified annual report on the findings of a stakeholder workgroup. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) 
increase by $608,000 in FY 2027 for personnel and one-time contractual services. 
Future years reflect annualization, elimination of one-time costs, and ongoing costs. As 
any civil penalties must be remitted to providers, special fund revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
608,000 
311,800 
324,600 
337,500 
350,500 
Net Effect 
($608,000) 
($311,800) 
($324,600) 
($337,500) 
($350,500) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1093/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Provider Panel Procedures  
 
Notice After Receipt of Completed Application:  Under current law, a provider seeking to 
participate on a carrier’s provider panel must submit an application to the carrier. Within 
30 days after receipt of a completed application, a carrier must send the provider a written 
notice of the carrier’s intent to continue to process the provider’s application or the carrier’s 
rejection of the provider for participation on the carrier’s provider panel. A carrier that fails 
to provide this required notice is subject to suspension or revocation of a certificate of 
authority and/or a penalty of at least $100 and as much as $125,000 per violation. 
 
The bill reduces the timeframe by which this notice must be sent from 30 days to 5 days 
and specifies that notice must be sent to the provider at the email address listed in the 
application or, if an email address is not listed, the mailing address listed. The bill further 
specifies that, in addition to existing penalties, a carrier that fails to provide this written 
notice is subject to a civil penalty of $500 per day for each day the notice was not sent. The 
penalty must be collected by the Insurance Commissioner and paid to the provider. 
 
Notice of Acceptance or Rejection of Provider:  Under current law, if a carrier provides 
notice to the provider of its intent to continue to process the provider’s application, the 
carrier must, within 120 days after the date the notice is provided, accept or reject the 
provider for participation and send written notice of the acceptance or rejection. A carrier 
that fails to send this notice is subject to suspension or revocation of a certificate of 
authority and/or a penalty of at least $100 and as much as $125,000 per violation as well 
as being issued a cease-and-desist order. 
 
The bill reduces the timeframe by which this notice must be sent from 120 days to 30 days 
and specifies that notice must be sent to the provider at the email address listed in the 
application or, if an email address is not listed, the mailing address listed. 
 
Acceptance or Rejection of Certain Community-based Health Services Providers:  Under 
current law, for certain providers of community-based health services for an accredited 
program, if a carrier provides notice of its intent to continue to process the provider’s 
application to obtain necessary credentialing information, the carrier must, within 60 days 
after the date the carrier receives a completed application, send written notice of the 
acceptance or rejection to the provider. 
 
The bill reduces the timeframe by which this notice must be sent from 60 days to 15 days 
and specifies that notice must be sent to the provider at the email address listed in the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1093/ Page 3 
application or, if an email address is not listed, the mailing address listed. In addition to 
existing penalties, a carrier that fails to provide this written notice is subject to a civil 
penalty of $500 per day for each day notice was not sent. The penalty must be collected by 
the Insurance Commissioner and paid to the provider. 
 
Notice When Application Is Complete:  Under current law, a carrier must notify the 
provider when an application is complete either through the online credentialing system or 
by mail within 10 days after a complete application is received. A carrier must return an 
incomplete application to the provider by mail within 10 days of receipt and notify the 
provider what information is needed to complete the application. 
 
The bill specifies that a carrier must send written correspondence that the application is 
complete to the provider at the email address listed in the application or, if an email address 
is not listed, the mailing address listed. 
 
Online Credentialing System 
 
Under current law, “online credentialing system” means the system through which a 
provider may access an online provider credentialing application that the Insurance 
Commissioner has designated as the uniform credentialing form. A carrier may charge a 
reasonable fee for an application submitted to a carrier to serve on a provider panel. 
 
The bill clarifies that “online credentialing system” means the system through which a 
provider may access and submit an online credentialing application and repeals the 
authority of a carrier to charge a fee. 
 
Uniform Credentialing Form 
 
The bill requires a carrier to (1) allow a provider to submit the uniform credentialing form 
using the online credentialing system; (2) establish a direct telephone number for inquiries 
on the form that is monitored by the carrier and is not the general customer service line; 
(3) establish a direct email address for inquiries on the form that is monitored by the carrier 
and is not the general customer service email address; and (4) respond to voice messages 
and emails within two business days after receipt. 
 
The Commissioner must adopt regulations governing the use by a carrier of the online 
credentialing system to create and update the carrier’s provider directory, including the 
required frequency of updates. A carrier must use the online credentialing system as the 
primary source of information to create and update the carrier’s provider directory in 
accordance with the regulations. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1093/ Page 4 
Updating Information in Provider Directories 
 
Under current law, a carrier must demonstrate the accuracy of the information in a provider 
directory on request of the Commissioner. Before imposing a penalty against a carrier for 
inaccurate network directory information, the Commissioner must consider certain factors. 
 
The bill removes from this list of factors whether the carrier can demonstrate the efforts 
made, in writing, electronically, or by telephone, to obtain updated network directory 
information from a provider or other person and adds an additional factor of whether a 
carrier has implemented a process to inform providers that the online credentialing system 
is the primary source of information to create and update the carrier’s provider directory. 
 
The bill also repeals the requirement that a dental carrier update specified information 
within 15 working days after receipt of notification. 
 
Limits on the Number of Carriers on a Provider Panel 
 
Under current law, a carrier may not impose a limit on the number of behavioral health 
providers at a health care facility that may be credentialed to participate on a provider panel. 
 
The bill expands the list of providers for whom a carrier may not impose a limit on the 
number that may be credentialed to participate on a provider panel to include (in addition 
to behavioral health providers) providers at a federally qualified health center, a local 
health department, or a school-based health center, or other essential community providers. 
 
Multi-carrier Common Online Provider Directory 
 
Under current law, the Commissioner may designate a multi-carrier common online 
provider directory information system developed by a nonprofit alliance of health plans 
and trade associations if the system is available to providers nationally, is available at no 
charge, and allows providers to attest online to the accuracy of their information and correct 
(and attest to the correction of) any inaccurate information. The nonprofit alliance must 
have a well-established mechanism for outreach to providers. 
 
The bill specifies that the system must also allow providers to (1) update the provider’s 
information every 120 days or at a frequency established by the Commissioner; (2) grant 
access to a designated person managing the credentialing process for the provider; and 
(3) access the system directly without the assistance of a third party. The nonprofit alliance 
must also (1) establish and maintain a stakeholder workgroup to identify and address 
operational issues to ensure efficiency of the online credentialing system consisting of 
specified representatives; (2) submit an annual report to the Commissioner on the findings 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1093/ Page 5 
of the workgroup and improvements implemented because of the workgroup’s findings; 
and (3) meet all other requirements established by the Commissioner. 
 
By December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, the Commissioner must report to the 
General Assembly on the findings of the workgroup, improvements implemented because 
of the workgroup’s findings, any legislative recommendations, and any other relevant 
information. 
 
State Expenditures:  MIA advises that it can adopt regulations and submit the required 
annual report to the General Assembly using existing budgeted resources. However, 
development of a system to collect civil penalties and remit them to providers, as well as 
oversight of provider compliance require significant additional resources. 
 
Thus, MIA special fund expenditures increase by $608,021 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one market conduct examiner to monitor and collect civil penalties from carriers and remit 
them to providers and conduct market conduct inquiries as well as two insurance analysts 
to enforce the bill’s network adequacy requirements and ensure that any credentialling 
system complies with regulations adopted by MIA. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and $375,000 in one-time-only 
contractual costs ($200,000 for information technology (IT) and data monitoring 
enhancements, $100,000 for IT consultation, and $75,000 for legal and actuarial 
consultants). 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$205,599 
One-time IT and Data Monitoring Enhancements 
200,000 
One-time Legal, Actuarial, and IT Consulting Costs 
175,000 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$608,021 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and $40,000 in annual 
IT maintenance costs. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1093/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 808 (Senator King) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6