START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1018 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1018 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Correctional Services - Immigration Detention Facilities - Minimum Mandatory 
Standards 
 
 
This emergency bill (1) expands the requirement for the Secretary of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services to adopt regulations establishing certain minimum mandatory 
standards applicable to the care, custody, and conditions of incarcerated individuals to 
apply to civil detainees in immigration detention facilities; (2) alters and expands the duties 
of the Maryland Commission on Correctional Standards (MCCS) relating to correctional 
facilities to incorporate immigration detention facilities; (3) requires specified health care 
practitioners and security guards to report specified violations and security breaches to the 
commission and requires specified regulating bodies to take appropriate disciplinary action 
if the health care practitioner or a security guard fails to report violations; (4) applies 
specified existing compliance, audit, and enforcement provisions to immigration detention 
facilities; (5) authorizes the Attorney General to bring an action against a private entity that 
owns, manages, or operates a correctional facility or an immigration detention facility for 
specified violations; (6) authorizes the commission to cease operation of an immigration 
detention facility under specified circumstances; and (7) requires the commission and the 
Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services to adopt emergency regulations 
relating to the bill’s provisions by June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in general fund expenditures, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1018/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Annual Report:  The bill expands the required annual report by the commission to include 
a detailed analysis of compliance issues at correctional facilities and immigration detention 
facilities and recommendations to address compliance issues identified. The report 
provided may not disclose personal identifying information of an incarcerated individual 
or a civil detainee. The commission must provide the governing body of each county and 
municipal corporation that has an immigration detention facility with a copy of its 
annual report. 
 
Reports of Violations:  The bill authorizes any person to report a violation of the minimum 
mandatory standards by a correctional facility or an immigration detention facility to the 
commission. The commission must establish a standardized process for the reporting, 
receipt, and timely review of reported violations and the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS) must provide and maintain a link on the commission’s 
website for the public to report a violation anonymously. The commission and DPSCS 
must maintain the confidentiality of any personal identifying information of an incarcerated 
individual or a civil detainee that is provided in a report. 
 
After completing review of a violation reported under the bill’s provisions, the commission 
may: 
 
 
inspect the correctional facility or the immigration detention facility, as specified; 
 
send a compliance plan to the correctional facility or the immigration detention 
facility, as specified; 
 
determine that the facility is life-threatening or health-endangering and order the 
immediate cessation of operation of the correctional facility or the immigration 
detention facility, as specified; or 
 
take any other action necessary to protect the health and safety of incarcerated 
individuals or civil detainees. 
 
An individual who provides services to a correctional facility or an immigration detention 
facility in the individual’s capacity as a licensed health care practitioner or a certified 
security guard must report to the commission (1) a violation of the minimum mandatory 
standards that the individual has reason to believe has been committed by a correctional 
facility or an immigration detention facility and (2) a known breach of the security of a 
system of a correctional facility or an immigration detention facility. If the regulating body 
for a licensed health care practitioner or a certified security guard determines that an 
individual has failed to submit a report in violation of these provisions, the licensing body 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1018/ Page 3 
must take appropriate disciplinary action. A correctional facility or an immigration 
detention facility may not retaliate against an employee for submitting, in good faith, a 
report of a violation. 
 
Facility Certification:  By July 1, 2026, and each July 1 thereafter, each correctional facility 
and immigration detention facility in the State must submit a certification to the 
commission that the facility: 
 
 
has adequate and reliable utilities that comply with State and local laws and 
regulations, as specified; 
 
has functional heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; 
 
maintains an emergency power system to ensure the safe operation of the facility in 
the event of a disruption in electrical power; and 
 
maintains an emergency operations plan to respond to utility disruptions, a breach 
of the security of a system, fires, and medical emergencies. 
 
A facility must submit a copy of the required emergency operations plan with the 
certification and review and update the plan at least annually. In addition, the facility must 
include sufficient documentation to support the basis for the certification and promptly 
respond to requests for additional information from the commission. 
 
If a correctional facility or an immigration detention facility has a material change in 
operations or a material increase in occupancy, the facility must submit an updated 
certification to the commission within 30 days of the change. If a correctional facility or 
an immigration detention facility fails to submit the required certification or supporting 
documentation, the commission must (1) determine that the facility is life-threatening or 
health-endangering and order the immediate cessation of operation of the correctional 
facility or the immigration detention facility, as specified or (2) take any other action 
necessary to protect the health and safety of incarcerated individuals or civil detainees. 
 
Facility Inspection:  The commission may conduct an inspection in conjunction with an 
appropriate unit of State or local government, such as the State Fire Marshal or the 
Maryland Department of Health. The managing official or employees of a correctional 
facility or the owner, operator, manager, or employees of an immigration detention facility 
may not restrict, prevent, or otherwise impede an inspection from being conducted in 
accordance with the bill’s provisions. If any individual violates these provisions, the 
commission must order the immediate cessation of operation of the applicable correctional 
facility or immigration detention facility. 
 
If the commission or an authorized inspector finds a condition in an immigration detention 
facility that is life threatening or health endangering, the commission or inspector may 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1018/ Page 4 
order the immediate cessation of operation. If an immigration detention facility is ordered 
closed by the commission or authorized inspector, all civil detainees in the facility must be 
transferred to and accepted into a suitable place of detention, as specified, at the expense 
of the State, local governing body, or federal entity responsible for the cost of the closed 
facility. 
 
Action Against a Private Entity:  In addition to any other action specifically authorized, the 
Attorney General may bring an action against a private entity that owns, manages, or 
operates, in whole or in part, a correctional facility or an immigration detention facility for:  
(1) retaliating against an employee for submitting a report of a violation, as specified; 
(2) failing to comply with certification requirements, as specified; (3) impeding a 
commission inspection, as specified; or (4) failing to comply with the audit findings of the 
commission, as specified. Each day that a private entity fails to correct a violation 
constitutes a separate violation. In an action brought under these provisions, the 
Attorney General may seek:  (1) injunctive relief; (2) a maximum civil penalty of $10,000 
for each violation payable into the general fund of the State; (3) reasonable attorney’s fees 
and costs; and (4) any other appropriate relief. 
 
Definitions:  “Breach of the security of a system” means the unauthorized acquisition of 
computerized data that compromises the security, confidentiality, or integrity of personal 
identifying information maintained in the system. 
 
“Civil detainee” means an individual who is actually or constructively detained or confined 
in an immigration detention facility. 
 
“Licensed health care practitioner” means an individual licensed, certified, or otherwise 
authorized to practice a health occupation under the health occupations article. 
 
Current Law:  MCCS is an existing entity within DPSCS that includes the Attorney 
General, the Secretary of General Services, and the Secretary of Budget and Management. 
With the advice of the commission, the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services has set, by regulation, minimum mandatory standards applicable to security and 
inmate control, inmate safety, inmate food services, inmate housing and sanitation, inmate 
rights, classification, hearings, and administrative record keeping. Such standards apply to 
all State and local correctional facilities. 
 
In addition, the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, with the advice of 
the commission, has adopted regulations that establish approved standards applicable to 
personnel, training, administration, management, planning and coordination, research and 
evaluation, physical plant, special management inmates, rules and discipline, mail and 
visiting, reception and orientation, property control, work programs, educational and 
vocational training, library services, religious services, recreational activities, counseling, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1018/ Page 5 
release preparation, and volunteers. These standards apply to all State facilities and may be 
adopted, in whole or in part, by a local correctional facility. All mandatory minimum 
standards and approved standards adopted must be consistent with State and federal law. 
 
The commission is required to:  (1) establish and implement a process to inspect State and 
local correctional facilities to determine and certify compliance with applicable standards; 
and (2) determine deadlines for remedial action and reinspection whenever inspection 
reports indicate noncompliance with applicable standards. The commission may review 
and act on appeals from staff inspection reports. 
 
If the commission determines that a correctional facility is in violation of minimum, 
mandatory standards for State and local correctional facilities, the commission must send 
a compliance plan containing specified information to the facility with a copy to the 
appropriate executive and legislative body. If, after sending a compliance plan and 
reinspecting a facility, the commission determines that the facility is still in violation of the 
minimum, mandatory standards, the commission must send a letter of reprimand containing 
specified information to the correctional facility, with a copy to the appropriate executive 
and legislative body. 
 
If, after the commission has sent a letter of reprimand and reinspected the facility, the 
facility continues to be in violation of the minimum, mandatory standards, the commission 
must (1) conduct a full standards and performance audit of the facility addressing specified 
items or (2) periodically inspect the facility until compliance is attained and send a report 
of each inspection to specified entities. As part of a full standards and performance audit, 
the commission must examine (1) the physical condition of the correctional facility; (2) the 
safety and treatment of inmates at the correctional facility; (3) whether the correctional 
facility has policies and procedures in place as required; and (4) whether the correctional 
facility is following the required policies and procedures. If the commission lacks the 
expertise necessary to perform a part of the full standards and performance audit, the 
commission may obtain assistance from sources with expertise in the specific standard. If 
the commission needs to obtain assistance, the correctional facility that is being audited 
must reimburse the commission for any cost incurred. 
 
After completing an audit, the commission must send a letter to the correctional facility, 
with a copy to the appropriate executive and legislative bodies, containing a copy of the 
audit findings, a date specified for compliance with the audit findings, and other specified 
information. Within a reasonable time after the date specified for compliance, the 
commission must conduct an unannounced inspection to verify that the correctional facility 
has complied with the audit findings. 
 
If, after performing an audit and unannounced inspection and holding a hearing on the 
issue, the commission determines that a correctional facility has not complied with the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1018/ Page 6 
audit findings, the commission must:  (1) petition a circuit court for a court order requiring 
the correctional facility to comply with the audit findings; or (2) issue an order to cease 
operation of the correctional facility or any of its components. The commission must 
provide to a correctional facility reasonable notice of a hearing and may subpoena 
witnesses. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill may result in a significant increase in general fund 
expenditures for DPSCS. 
 
The commission currently inspects State and local correctional facilities to determine 
compliance with applicable standards. The bill alters and expands the duties to immigration 
detention facilities located in the State. As of January 2026, the Department of Homeland 
Security has not opened its own detention facility in the State nor has it contracted with a 
private entity to operate one. However, the Trump administration has significantly ramped 
up immigration enforcement over the last year and news reports suggest that proposals for 
immigration detention facilities are under consideration within the State. Currently, some 
individuals are temporarily detained in the Immigration and Customs Enforcement field 
office at the Fallon Federal Building in Baltimore while awaiting transfer to facilities 
outside of the State. To the extent that immigration detention facilities begin to operate 
within the State, the commission likely needs additional staff to complete the required 
inspections and certifications. Although the total number of staff needed to implement the 
bill cannot be reliably estimated at this time, costs are anticipated to be potentially 
significant. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Dorchester and Garrett counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Office of Administrative Hearings; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6