START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1072 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1072 
(Delegate R. Long) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Preferences - Francis Scott Key Bridge Reconstruction 
 
 
This bill requires a State procurement unit to award a percentage price preference of 10% 
to vendors from the 6th legislative district for the procurement of supplies or services related 
to the reconstruction of the Francis Scott Key Bridge. The price preference must be applied 
to procurements using either the competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposal 
procurement methods. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill likely has no effect on State finances, as a design-build contract has 
already been awarded for the Francis Scott Key Bridge reconstruction project, as discussed 
below. To the extent additional procurements for supplies or services are awarded by State 
agencies for the reconstruction of the bridge, costs for those contracts may increase by as 
much as 10%. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Small Business Preference Program 
 
The heads of procurement units or their designees must screen all procurements potentially 
eligible for a small business preference and determine which procurements will be awarded 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1072/ Page 2 
with a small business preference and the percentage preference to be applied. The 
determination must be based on availability of qualified, certified small businesses and 
other appropriate factors. A published solicitation for a procurement designated for a small 
business preference must include a statement the procurement has been so designated and 
indicate the price preference percentage to be applied to the bids of eligible bidders. The 
price preference may not exceed a base percentage preference of 5% of the total contract 
value for small businesses, plus an additional 2% or 3% for veteran-owned small business 
enterprises (VSBEs) and disabled VSBEs, respectively. When soliciting bids for a 
procurement designated for a small business preference, the procuring unit must send a 
solicitation or notice of the solicitation to all certified small businesses for the subject of 
the contract contained on the Certified Small Business List maintained by the Office of 
Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs. 
 
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Reevaluation 
 
The federal disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) program is designed to assist small 
business formation and growth by removing barriers to the participation of DBEs in U.S. 
Department of Transportation (USDOT)-assisted contracts, promoting the use of DBEs in 
all types of federally assisted contracts and procurement activities, and assisting the 
development of firms that can compete successfully in the marketplace outside the 
program. USDOT regulations place primary responsibility for the certification of DBE and 
Airport Concessions DBEs (ACDBEs) on states, and each state has a Unified Certification 
Program to provide assistance for applicant firms seeking certification. In Maryland, this 
certification is done by the Office of Minority Business Enterprise (OMBE). Prior to 
October 1, 2025, OMBE was located in the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT), which was designated in regulations as the DBE certification agency. However, 
Chapter 605 of 2025 created the Department of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) 
and transferred OMBE from MDOT to DoSEM. 
 
In October 2025, USDOT issued an interim final rule (IFR) requiring immediate changes 
to the DBE and ACDBE program regulations. The rule prohibits reliance on race- or 
gender-based presumptions of social and economic disadvantage for certification. 
Accordingly, all firms seeking or maintaining DBE or ACDBE certification must undergo 
recertification without relying on race- or gender-based presumptions. This involves 
submitting a personal narrative demonstrating their social and economic disadvantage. The 
IFR specifies that recertification of all eligible DBEs must be completed before the State 
can establish DBE subcontracting goals on federally funded transportation projects. 
 
Additional Comments:  In August 2024, a progressive design build contract for the 
reconstruction of the Francis Scott Key Bridge was awarded to Kiewet Corporation. As the 
general contractor, Kiewet (not the State or a unit of the State) is responsible for hiring any 
subcontractors to provide supplies and services needed for the reconstruction project. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1072/ Page 3 
Furthermore, it is not clear how a percentage price preference program can be applied to 
procurements that use competitive sealed proposals (as required by the bill). Unlike 
competitive sealed bidding, which is based on the lowest price, competitive sealed proposal 
procurements can involve additional consideration of other factors beyond price, such as 
evaluation of technical abilities.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Baltimore County; Department of General 
Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3