START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1037 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1037 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Public Service Commission - Broadband and Voice Over Internet Protocol 
Service - Oversight (Broadband Accountability and Affordability Act) 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Public Service Commission (PSC) to exercise oversight of 
broadband service and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) service (and repeals provisions 
of law that expressly prohibit PSC from regulating VoIP service). It further requires PSC 
to adopt regulations to implement effective oversight of the quality, reliability, and 
resilience of broadband service and VoIP service, as specified. The bill establishes related 
responsibilities for PSC. By January 1, 2028, and each January 1 thereafter, PSC must 
report to the General Assembly on progress made toward improving service quality, public 
safety, and network resilience.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC and the Office of People’s Counsel (OPC) 
increase by at least $940,200 in FY 2027; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and 
ongoing costs. Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed 
on public service companies. The Office of Statewide Broadband (OSB) can coordinate 
with PSC using existing budgeted resources. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0.94 
$1.07 
$1.01 
$1.06 
$1.10 
SF Expenditure 
$0.94 
$1.07 
$1.01 
$1.06 
$1.10 
Net Effect 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The operations and finances of locally owned broadband networks may be 
affected depending on the regulations adopted by PSC, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1037/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Broadband service” means a mass-market retail service that provides the 
capability to transmit data to and receive data from all or substantially all Internet 
endpoints, including capabilities that are incidental to and enable the operation of 
communications services provided by a wireline, fixed wireless, mobile wireless 
broadband, or satellite service provider; it does not include dial-up Internet service. 
 
The regulations PSC must adopt to implement effective oversight of the quality, reliability, 
and resilience of broadband service and VoIP service must:   
 
 
establish standards to ensure the resilience and reliability of broadband 
infrastructure; 
 
require each Internet service provider (ISP) to (1) submit information relating to 
network reliability, including reporting outages; (2) maintain networks sufficiently 
in order to ensure reliable, safe, and adequate services; (3) report data on the 
availability, deployment, pricing, and adoption of broadband services and VoIP 
services; and (4) submit to PSC the provider’s plans for emergency preparedness 
and postemergency network restoration; 
 
establish a system for assessing the adequacy of ISPs’ plans for emergency 
preparedness and postemergency network restoration; and 
 
establish minimum requirements for backup power generation. 
 
PSC must assess the adequacy of each ISP’s plan for emergency preparedness and  
post-emergency network restoration. 
 
On receipt of a complaint from a customer or based on data collected from providers, PSC 
may conduct an evaluation or audit of an ISP’s facilities and infrastructure to assess service 
quality, public safety concerns, or network resilience; PSC may hold a hearing as part of 
this process. If PSC determines that the practices, facilities, or services of an ISP are unjust, 
unreasonable, unsafe, improper, or inadequate to ensure network reliability, resilience, and 
public safety in accordance with the standards established in regulation, PSC may require 
the provider to take remedial actions. 
 
PSC may coordinate with OSB when collecting data to implement the bill, but the bill may 
not be construed to limit any right or authority granted to OSB. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Service Commission  
 
PSC regulates public service companies and exercises jurisdiction over electric distribution 
companies and electricity suppliers, gas distribution companies and gas suppliers, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1037/ Page 3 
combination gas and electric distribution companies, telecommunications companies, 
water companies, sewage disposal companies, combined water and sewage disposal 
companies, common carriers (passenger-for-hire motor vehicle companies, vehicles, and 
drivers, including transportation network companies and operators; railroad companies; 
and certain taxicab companies and driver permits), and intrastate pipelines. PSC’s 
jurisdiction over railroad companies is secondary to federal jurisdiction. 
 
PSC’s jurisdiction is limited to services that are provided within Maryland. Services 
between Maryland and one or more other states fall under the jurisdiction of federal 
entities, including the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which regulates the 
interstate and wholesale activities of gas and electric utilities; the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), which regulates interstate telephone service; and the U.S. Department 
of Transportation, which retains limited jurisdiction over interstate commercial carriers and 
related services. 
 
Voice Over Internet Protocol Service 
“VoIP service” is defined in the Public Utilities Article to mean any service that enables 
real-time two-way voice communications that originate from or terminate to the subscriber 
end user’s location requiring Internet protocol or any successor protocol to Internet 
protocol and requires a broadband connection from the user’s location. It includes any such 
service that permits users generally to receive calls that originate on the public switched 
telephone network and to terminate calls to the public switched telephone network. 
 
Section 8-602 of the Public Utilities Article expressly states that PSC does not have 
jurisdiction over the regulation of VoIP services, including the imposition of regulatory 
fees, certification requirements, and the filing or approval of tariffs. As noted above, 
interstate telephone service is regulated by FCC. 
 
Broadband Service Regulation and the Office of Statewide Broadband  
 
There are no State laws that directly prohibit or authorize the regulation of broadband 
service in the State; similar to VoIP, broadband service is regulated by FCC. Most 
references to broadband service in State law are related to the fair and equitable deployment 
of broadband service throughout the State and, most notably, OSB. 
 
Specifically, Chapter 74 of 2021 established OSB within the Department of Housing and 
Community Development as the successor to the Office of Rural Broadband and charged 
OSB with expanded responsibilities relating to planning, data collection, outreach, and 
intergovernmental coordination. Notably, the Act required OSB to prepare a statewide plan 
ensuring universal, affordable, reliable broadband Internet connectivity exceeding 
specified federal standards by December 31, 2026. OSB must report annually to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on the progress of the State’s efforts to develop and 
implement the statewide plan, among other things. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1037/ Page 4 
Chapter 74 also established (1) the Digital Inclusion Fund, to provide a competitive grant 
program to support capacity building for local governments and nonprofit organizations 
seeking to further access to high-speed Internet and implement programs to expand digital 
literacy and (2) the Digital Connectivity Fund, to assist in the establishment and expansion 
of affordable broadband communication services in disconnected areas and communities 
in the State. In addition, the Act transferred the existing Rural Broadband Assistance Fund 
from the Department of Commerce to OSB. The purpose of the Rural Broadband 
Assistance Fund is to assist in the establishment of broadband communication services in 
rural and underserved areas of the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Public Service Commission 
 
Because PSC does not currently regulate broadband or VoIP services, PSC requires 
additional staff and ongoing technical assistance from consultants to oversee the quality, 
reliability, and resilience of these services in the State. Accordingly, special fund 
expenditures for PSC increase by $835,123 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost to establish a new unit within 
PSC to regulate VoIP and broadband services, investigate consumer complaints, and 
complete the annual reports required by the bill, including two public service engineers, 
two staff attorneys, one administrative specialist, one regulatory economist, and one public 
utility law judge. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing 
operating expenses, and consultant costs. 
 
Positions 
7.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$571,138 
Consultant Costs 
200,000 
Operating Expenses 
    63,985 
Total FY 2027 PSC Expenditures 
$835,123 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover, 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and ongoing consultant costs. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. Accordingly, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. However, PSC advises that, because 
the bill does not alter the definition of “public service company” in State law to include 
broadband and VoIP providers, it is not able to impose the assessment on those providers 
(meaning other public service companies must cover PSC’s costs under the bill). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1037/ Page 5 
Office of People’s Counsel 
 
OPC advises that the expanded responsibilities the bill places on PSC are likely to result in 
a commensurate increase in OPC’s workload, given that it is required to review all matters 
in front of PSC for potential ratepayer impacts. OPC anticipates that at least  
one additional attorney is needed to handle the potential increase in workload, although 
more may be necessary depending on how PSC implements the bill and the number of 
consumer complaints over time.  
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for OPC increase by at least $105,121 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one assistant People’s Counsel. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$95,980 
Operating Expenses 
      9,141 
Minimum FY 2027 OPC Expenditures 
$105,121 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that one additional 
attorney is not sufficient for OPC to handle the increased workload resulting from the bill, 
special fund expenditures increase further to hire additional staff. 
 
Similar to PSC, OPC is funded through assessments on public service companies; thus, any 
additional special fund expenditures are funded through a corresponding increase in  
special fund revenues from assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Under the bill, locally owned and operated broadband networks, 
such as the Easton Utilities network and Westminster Fiber Network, are also subject to 
oversight by PSC. Depending on the regulations that are ultimately adopted by PSC, the 
operations and finances of these networks may be affected; however, any such impact 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1037/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 605 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of Information 
Technology; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Office of People’s Counsel; Maryland 
Municipal League; City of Westminster; Town of Easton; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6