START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1087 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1087 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Health 
 
 
Health Care Facilities - Surgical Smoke - Smoke Evacuation Systems 
 
 
This bill requires each health care facility that performs surgical procedures to adopt and 
implement policies, by January 1, 2028, that require the use of a “smoke evacuation 
system” during a surgical procedure that may generate “surgical smoke.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) can ensure compliance with the 
bill’s provisions within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Smoke evacuation system” means equipment that effectively captures 
and filters surgical smoke at the site of origin before the surgical smoke makes contact with 
the eyes or respiratory tract of occupants in the room. 
 
“Surgical smoke” means the gaseous by-product produced by energy-generating devices, 
including surgical plume, smoke plume, bio-aerosols, laser-generated airborne 
contaminants, or lung-damaging dust. 
 
Current Law:  The Secretary of Health must adopt reasonable rules and regulations that 
set standards of services for related institutions, hospitals, and residential treatment centers 
in the following areas:  (1) the care of patients; (2) the medical supervision of patients; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1087/ Page 2 
(3) the physical environment; (4) disease control; (5) sanitation; (6) safety; and (7) dietary 
matters. To ensure compliance with these rules and regulations, OHCQ inspects each 
related institution, hospital, and residential treatment center. In general, OHCQ inspects 
facilities for which a license is sought and periodically after a license has been issued. The 
Maryland Department of Health submits an annual report to the General Assembly 
regarding the inspections conducted during the immediately preceding year. 
 
Generally, surgical smoke is not directly regulated in the State. However, OHCQ regulates 
specified health care facilities where smoke evacuation systems may be required under the 
bill including freestanding ambulatory surgical centers, hospitals, or cosmetic surgery 
facilities. 
 
Although not federally regulated, the federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration recognizes hazards and specified controls and work practices associated 
with surgical smoke. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses, 
20 states regulate surgical smoke and/or surgical smoke evacuation. The cost of surgical 
smoke evacuation systems vary depending on the use of portable local smoke evacuators 
or whole surgical room suction evacuators. OSHA estimates that 500,000 workers in the 
United States, including surgeons, nurses, anesthesiologists, and surgical technologists, are 
exposed to laser or electrosurgical smoke. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Occupational Safety and Health Administration; Association of 
periOperative Registered Nurses; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2