START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1084 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1084 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County - County Board of Education - School Operation 
Requirements  
MC 14-26 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes the Montgomery County Board of Education to require all 
public schools in the county to be open for pupil attendance for at least 180 actual school 
days or, if specified conditions are met, the minimum number of attendance hours required 
by the State. If a public school in the county is open for fewer than 180 actual school days 
or the minimal hours of attendance, the Board must provide school employees who receive 
pay at an hourly rate with an opportunity to make up the lost wages through other duties 
before the beginning of the next school year. Finally, the bill requires the Board to report 
to the State Board of Education and General Assembly on the operation of schools during 
the preceding year if schools were open for less than the required number of days or hours. 
The bill terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects Montgomery County Public Schools (MCPS) 
operations. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent that MCPS meets the minimum hours requirement for an 
academic year but cannot meet the minimum days requirement without adding instructional 
days to the calendar, the county may realize cost savings of up to $1.9 million per 
instructional day avoided, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1084/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Montgomery County Board of Education may opt to require schools 
to meet only the minimum hours requirement if:   
 
 
the school calendar was initially adopted to meet both the days and hours 
requirements for public schools; 
 
normal school attendance at public schools in the county was prevented due to a 
natural disaster, civil disaster, or severe weather conditions, necessitating additional 
time to meet the number of required school days or minimum hours of attendance 
(1) after the scheduled end of the school year or (2) during a day that schools are 
scheduled for closure; 
 
the local school system has used at least two school days incorporated into its 
calendar for school closures due to severe weather; 
 
the Board has applied for an adjustment to the school year as required by State law; 
and 
 
public schools remain open for at least 175 actual school days during the school 
year. 
 
If the county meets all the conditions, the bill cannot be construed to require the Board to 
receive an approval or denial of a request to adjust the school year before electing to require 
only the minimum number of hours or the minimum number of days, as authorized by the 
bill. 
 
The report that the Board must submit if schools in the county are open for less than the 
minimum required number of days or hours must include (1) the days the schools were 
open and (2) the number of hours per day that the schools were open with students in 
attendance. 
 
Current Law:  Public schools must be open for at least 180 days and 1,080 school hours 
at elementary and middle schools or 1,170 hours at high schools during a 10-month period. 
However, a local board of education may apply to the State Board of Education (SBE) for 
a waiver from these provisions of State law; the waiver application must describe a 
demonstrated effort by the local board to comply with State law, that the school system 
calendar included from 3 to 10 days to be used to make up days lost, and that the modified 
calendar makes use of these make-up days and extends the school year by 3 days beyond 
the previously scheduled closing date. In response, the State board may permit:   
 
 
increases or decreases in the length of the school year; 
 
exceptions from the 10-month period requirement;  
 
adjustments in the length of the school day; and  
 
schools to be open on holidays. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1084/ Page 3 
These adjustments may be granted only if normal school attendance is prevented because 
of natural disaster, civil disaster, or severe weather conditions. After any school system 
closure, the local school system must notify SBE within 10 days of reopening of its plan to 
make up the missed school days, including the dates of the make-up days. Education 
funding from the State or local sources may not be reduced if there are fewer than 
180 school days in any year because of an approved application to SBE for a decrease in 
the length of the school year. 
 
SBE must explore the use of innovative school scheduling models, including extended 
year, year-round schooling, or other school scheduling models that do not allow for 
prolonged lapses in instructional time, in low-performing or at-risk public schools. The 
local school boards of Baltimore City and Allegany, Anne Arundel, Calvert, Howard, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties, may operate one or more schools on a 
year‑round basis, provided that the 180‑day and the minimum hour requirements are met. 
 
Local Expenditures:  MCPS is expected to spend approximately $1.9 million for each 
school day added to the academic calendar in fiscal 2027. These costs include salaries and 
benefits for hourly wage staff, costs for substitute teachers, and operational costs for fuel 
for buses. During years in which severe weather requires extended school closures, MCPS 
may meet the hours requirement for its schools, but fail to meet the minimum 180 day 
requirement. Accordingly, in this scenario, MCPS may save $1.9 million  
per school day not required to be added to the calendar to meet the 180 day requirement. 
The amount the county may save in both fiscal 2026 and 2027 under this bill is dependent 
on the number of days that school closures are required each year. 
 
MCPS indicates that employees paid on an hourly basis continue to receive pay for days 
not worked due to emergency school closures. As a result, these employees do not lose 
wages if the school system does not meet the required number of school days as a result of 
emergency closures, and the bill’s requirement that MCPS provide hourly employees with 
an opportunity to make up lost wages is not expected to affect county expenditures. 
 
Additional Comments:  While the section of regulations the bill refers to for the definition 
of “minimal hours of attendance” only specifies hours for high school, this analysis 
assumes that “minimal hours of attendance” means 1,080 hours for elementary and middle 
schools, and 1,170 hours for high schools. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1084/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Montgomery County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4