START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1076 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1076 
(Delegate Smith) 
Appropriations and Health 
 
 
Higher Education Institutions - Over-the-Counter Contraception - Access and 
Reporting 
 
   
This bill requires each public senior (four-year) higher education institution and each 
community college to submit an annual report on campus over-the-counter (OTC) 
contraception access to the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) beginning 
on September 1, 2026. The report must include (1) how access is provided; (2) whether 
institutions have provided access to all methods of OTC contraception; (3) the amount of 
OTC contraception provided; and (4) a description of how the institution or community 
college has consulted with students and student organizations about providing OTC 
contraception on campus. By October 1, 2026, annually thereafter, MHEC must submit a 
report of this information to the General Assembly. The bill also specifies that  
community colleges must provide students with access to all methods of OTC 
contraception and consolidate existing reporting requirements into the new requirements. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) higher education expenditures 
and revenues likely increase, at least minimally, to expand the OTC contraception options 
available to students, as discussed below. Most public four-year institutions of higher 
education, MHEC, and BCCC can report on OTC contraception access as specified using 
existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  Local community college higher education expenditures and revenues likely 
increase, at least minimally, to expand the OTC contraception options available to students, 
as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1076/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:     
 
Public Senior Higher Education Institutions 
 
“Public senior higher education institution” means (1) the constituent institutions of the 
University System of Maryland; (2) Morgan State University; and (3) St. Mary’s College 
of Maryland. “Public senior higher education institution” does not include the University 
of Maryland Center for Environmental Science or the University of Maryland Global 
Campus.  
 
Current Law:  “Over-the-counter contraception” is defined as a contraceptive drug or 
device approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that can be obtained 
use without a prescription.  
 
Community Colleges  
 
By August 1, 2025, and each community college, in consultation with students and student 
organizations was required to develop and implement a plan to provide students with access 
to OTC contraception. This access must be provided through (1) the student health center; 
(2) retail establishments on campus; (3) vending machines; or (4) any other method that 
provides access for all students while on campus. 
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) is authorized to assist a community college 
in (1) developing a plan and (2) consulting and collaborating with organizations with 
expertise in providing access to OTC contraception through vending machines. 
 
By September 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, each community college must submit a 
report to MHEC about the implementation of its plan using a form provided by MHEC. 
This report must include how access is provided, the amount of contraception provided on 
campus, and a description of how the community college has consulted with students and 
student organizations. 
 
By October 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, MHEC must report the information collected 
from these institutions to the General Assembly.  
 
Public Senior Higher Education Institutions 
 
Each public senior higher education institution (excluding the University of Maryland 
Center for Environmental Science and the University of Maryland Global Campus) must, 
in consultation with students, develop and implement a reproductive health service plan, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1076/ Page 3 
as specified. Plans had to be developed by August 1, 2024, and must be updated annually. 
MDH, on request, must provide assistance to a public senior higher education institution 
in developing a reproductive health services plan. In lieu of developing and implementing 
a plan, the University of Baltimore must provide students with access to OTC contraception 
through on-campus retail establishments or vending machines. 
 
Each plan must include the provision of or referral to off-campus services for obtaining 
(1) all methods of federal FDA-approved contraception, including prescription emergency 
contraception; (2) prevention and treatment services for sexually transmitted infections, 
including HIV prevention; and (3) abortion care services.  
 
Each plan must also include:  
 
 
24-hour access to OTC contraception through the student health center, retail 
establishments on campus, or vending machines;  
 
the availability of evidence-based reproductive health education services provided 
by the student health center, peer educators, or other health education programs; and  
 
development of a referral network of off-campus reproductive health services 
providers, including pharmacies, located within a reasonable proximity to the 
campus. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  As the requirement for community colleges to provide access 
to all methods of OTC contraception applies immediately and cannot be met by referring 
students to off-campus sites, this analysis assumes that BCCC and local community college 
higher education expenditures increase, at least minimally, for colleges to ensure that all 
methods of OTC contraception are available on campus. According to the first Access to 
Contraception and Reproductive Health Care for Students in Higher Education Annual 
Report submitted by MHEC on October 1, 2025, institutions have provided a variety of 
contraceptive options, ranging from barrier methods to emergency contraception and daily 
OTC contraception pills. However, no college reports providing all methods of OTC 
contraception. Accordingly, if there is no retail establishment on campus, additional costs 
are likely incurred to purchase OTC contraception, install vending machines, and/or 
provide necessary staffing. To the extent that BCCC or local community college 
expenditures increase, it is assumed that higher education revenues from student fees 
increase accordingly. Any such increase may be minimal for those institutions that already 
provide most OTC contraception methods as they may incur only incremental costs to 
ensure provision of all methods. 
 
Most public four-year institutions of higher education and BCCC can report on OTC 
contraception access as specified using existing resources. However, the University of 
Baltimore has advised that, while emergency contraception is available through vending 
machines on campus, the institution does not have a health center. Furthermore, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1076/ Page 4 
institution lacks an administrative infrastructure to track the specified information required 
by this bill. Other institutions may be similarly challenged. 
 
MHEC advises that the bill adds to the agency’s administrative responsibilities and, when 
combined with other recently enacted legislation, may require additional personnel. 
However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the reporting requirements 
under this bill are limited in scope for MHEC, primarily consolidate and replace an existing 
report, and can be accommodated using existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 532 (Senators Kagan and Feldman) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4