START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1083 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1083 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Montgomery County Board of Elections - Membership  
MC 6-26 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Montgomery County Board of Elections by requiring 
the local board to consist of seven regular members (four of the major party and three of 
the principal minority party) rather than five regular members and two substitute members. 
If a vacancy occurs, the Governor must appoint an eligible person from the same political 
party as the predecessor member to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term 
and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Each substitute member serving on the 
effective date of the bill must become a regular member on the effective date, for the 
remainder of the member’s term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. The bill 
also requires an affirmative vote of at least four (rather than three) duly confirmed regular 
members of the local board, at least one of whom must be of the principal minority party, 
to appoint an election director. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect Montgomery County finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A local board of elections exists in each county of the State, and each local 
board and its staff are subject to the direction and authority of the State Board of Elections. 
Each local board of elections appoints an election director to manage the operations and 
supervise the staff of the local board.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1083/ Page 2 
In Montgomery County, the local board of elections consists of five regular members and 
two substitute members. Three regular members and one substitute member must be of the 
majority party, and two regular members and one substitute member must be of the 
principal minority party. The local board must require an affirmative vote of not fewer than 
three duly confirmed regular members of the local board, at least one of whom must be a 
member of the principal minority party, to appoint an election director. 
 
“Principal minority party” means the principal political party whose candidate for 
Governor received the second highest number of votes of any party candidate at the last 
preceding general election. 
 
Each regular member of the board and each substitute member must (1) be appointed by 
the Governor in accordance with a specified appointment process; (2) be a registered voter 
in the county for which the individual is appointed for the five years immediately preceding 
the appointment; and (3) be eligible for reappointment.  
 
In the event of the absence of a regular member or a vacancy in the office of a regular 
member, the substitute member of the same political party must exercise the powers and 
duties of a regular member until the regular member returns or the vacancy is filled. If a 
member dies, resigns, is removed, or becomes ineligible, (1) the substitute member 
belonging to the same political party must become a regular member of the local board and 
(2) the Governor must appoint an eligible person from the same political party to be the 
new substitute member. 
 
The term of a member is four years and begins on the first Monday in June of each year 
following a gubernatorial election. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
me/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2