START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1005 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1005 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child Abuse and Neglect - Reporting (Survivor Reporting Reform Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Human Services (DHS), by May 1, 2028, to develop 
a form for submitting a written report of suspected child abuse or neglect for cases in which 
the individual is believed to have been subjected to abuse or neglect as a child and is 
currently at least age 18. DHS must consult with health practitioners, survivors of child 
abuse, local departments of social services, law enforcement agencies, and the 
State’s Attorney in the process of developing the form. DHS must make the form available 
to individuals who are mandatory reporters under § 5‐704 of the Family Law Article; 
additional requirements for the form are also specified in the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHS can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The form must: 
 
 
include a document to be given to the individual who is the subject of the report 
regarding how the information in the report may be used; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1005/ Page 2 
 
require the individual making the report to document whether the individual who is 
the subject of the report prefers the suspected abuse or neglect to be investigated; 
and 
 
require the individual making the report to include, insofar as reasonable possible, 
(1) the name, age, home address, and preferred method of contact of the individual 
who is the subject of the report; (2) the name and home address of the individual’s 
parent or other person who was responsible for the individual’s care at the time of 
the suspected abuse or neglect; (3) the nature and extent of the abuse or neglect of 
the individual, including any evidence or information available to the reporter 
concerning possible previous instances of abuse or neglect; and (4) any other 
information that would help to determine the identity of any individual responsible 
for the abuse or neglect. 
 
The bill’s provisions are applicable to reports required under § 5‐704 of the Family Law 
Article, which addresses mandatory reporting based on an individual’s professional 
capacity. 
 
Current Law:  Health care practitioners, police officers, educators, and human service 
workers who are acting in a professional capacity, and who have reason to believe that a 
child has been subjected to abuse or neglect, must notify the local department of social 
services or the appropriate law enforcement agency. An “educator or human service 
worker” includes any teacher, counselor, social worker, caseworker, and parole or 
probation officer. If the worker is acting as a staff member of a hospital, public health 
agency, child care institution, juvenile detention center, school, or similar institution, then 
the individual must notify the head of the institution or the designee. 
 
A worker who notifies the appropriate authorities must make an oral report by telephone 
or direct communication as soon as possible to the local department or the appropriate law 
enforcement agency if the worker has reason to believe the child has been subjected to 
abuse or neglect. A written report to the local department is required not later than 48 hours 
after the contact, examination, or treatment that caused the worker to believe that the child 
had been subjected to abuse or neglect. A copy of the written report must be provided to 
the local State’s Attorney. An agency that receives an oral report of suspected abuse or 
neglect must immediately notify the other agency. Statute specifies the information that 
must be included in a report, to the extent inclusion is reasonably possible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1005/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3