START OF PAGE 1
HB1018/203920/1

BY: Government, Labor, and Elections Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1018
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate” and substitute “Delegates”; in
the same line, after “Stewart” insert “, Crutchfield, Fair, Lehman, Ruth,
Schindler, Solomon, Terrasa, and Wu”; in line 2, before “Immigration” insert
“Correctional Facilities and”; in line 11, after “utilities” insert “, occupancy
standards,”; in lines 12 and 13, strike “health care practitioners and security guards”
and substitute “persons”; in line 14, after “Commission” insert “or the Office of the
Inspector General”; in lines 14 and 15, strike “a health care practitioner or a security
guard fails” and substitute “certain persons fail”; in line 19, strike “authorizing” and
substitute “requiring”; and in line 20, after “of” insert “a correctional facility or”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 4, in line 19, strike “State and local”.

On page 6, in line 19, strike “OR”; in line 20, after “(IV)” insert “REFER THE
VIOLATION TO THE OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR FURTHER
INVESTIGATION; OR

(V)”;

in line 25, strike “OR”; and in line 27, after “ARTICLE” insert “;

(III) AN EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN LICENSED
UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 5 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE; OR

(IV) A PRIVATE CUSTODIAL TRANSPORTATION SERVICE”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1018/203920/01 Government, Labor, and Elections Committee
Amendments to HB 1018
Page 2 of 3

AMENDMENT NO. 3
On page 7, in line 7, strike “OR” and substitute a comma; in the same line, after
“GUARD” insert “, AN EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN, OR A PRIVATE
CUSTODIAL TRANSPORTATION SERVICE”; strike beginning with “HAS” in line 22
down through “CONDITIONING;” in line 23 and substitute “MAINTAINS UTILITY
COORDINATION FOR POTABLE WATER, SEWER, AND ELECTRICITY SERVICES;”;

in line 26, strike “AND”; in line 29, after “EMERGENCIES” insert “;

(V) HAS COORDINATION PROTOCOLS WITH LOCAL FIRE
DEPARTMENTS AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES, EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT, AND LOCAL HOSPITALS;

(VI) OPERATES WITHIN THE OCCUPANCY STANDARD
ESTABLISHED UNDER THE MINIMUM MANDATORY STANDARDS; AND

(VII) OPERATES WITHIN THE CAPACITY OF AVAILABLE
UTILITIES AND EMERGENCY SYSTEMS”;

in line 30, strike “A” and substitute “SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A”; and in the same line, strike “A” and substitute “AN UNREDACTED”.

On page 8, in line 1, after “(II)” insert “A FACILITY MAY REDACT SENSITIVE
SECURITY AND INTELLIGENCE INFORMATION TO MAINTAIN INTERNAL SECURITY
PROCEDURES AND INVESTIGATIONS.

(III) A FACILITY MAY PROVIDE A REDACTED COPY OF THE
EMERGENCY OPERATION PLAN TO THE PUBLIC.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB1018/203920/01 Government, Labor, and Elections Committee
Amendments to HB 1018
Page 3 of 3

(IV)”;

in line 22, strike “STATE AND LOCAL”; in line 25, strike “State and local”; and in line
28, strike the brackets.

AMENDMENT NO. 4
On page 9, in lines 1, 5, and 12, in each instance, strike “State and local”; and in
line 2, strike the brackets.

On page 13, in line 20, strike “may” and substitute “SHALL”.
END OF PAGE 3