START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1016 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1016 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Labor and Employment - Noncompete and Conflict of Interest Clauses - 
Employer Relocation 
 
 
This bill establishes that a noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment 
contract is null and void if it involves an employee of an employer that employs more than 
30 employees and subsequently relocates, reorganizes, or otherwise ceases to have the 
majority of its employees or its principal place of business in the State. The bill applies 
only to employment contracts executed after the bill’s effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment contract 
that restricts the ability of an employee to enter into employment with a new employer or 
to become self-employed in the same or similar business is null and void as being against 
public policy of the State if it applies to (1) any employee who earns 150% or less of the 
State minimum wage; (2) a licensed health care provider who provides direct patient care 
and earns $350,000 or less in total annual compensation; or (3) a licensed veterinary 
practitioner or technician. This provision does not apply to an employment contract or a 
similar document or agreement with respect to the taking or use of a client or patient list or 
other proprietary client-related or patient-related information. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1016/ Page 2 
For licensed health care professionals providing direct patient care and earning more than 
$350,000 annually, a noncompete provision may not exceed one year from the last day of 
employment. In addition, the geographical restriction in a noncompete or conflict of 
interest provision in an applicable employment contract may not exceed 10 miles from the 
primary place of employment. Upon request of a patient, an employer must provide the 
new location where a former employee is practicing. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses with at least 30 employees but fewer than 50 are 
impacted if they choose to relocate their principal place of business or the majority of their 
operations outside the State, as they are prohibited from enforcing existing noncompete 
provisions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 900 (Senator Ready) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2