START OF PAGE 1
HB1067/263222/1

BY: Environment and Transportation Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1067
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “and Allen” and substitute “, Allen, and
Healey”; in line 5, after “circumstances;” insert “establishing a certain penalty for a
first violation of this Act, subject to a certain termination date;”; and after line 11, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article - Natural Resources
Section 10-408(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 3, in line 18, strike “2029” and substitute “2030”; in line 24, after “(3)”
insert “A PERSON WHO VIOLATES REGULATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT
REQUIRING THE USE OF NONLEAD AMMUNITION FOR HUNTING FOR A FIRST
OFFENSE IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL FINE NOT EXCEEDING $750.

(4)”;

and after line 25, insert:

“SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland
read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–408.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1067/263222/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 1067
Page 2 of 2

(e) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, on or before
July 1, 2030, the Department shall require the use of nonlead ammunition for the
hunting of all game species.

(2) The Department shall authorize the use of lead ammunition for
muzzleloaders, handguns, rifles, and shotguns if nonlead ammunition is not
commercially available for the specific firearm.

(3) [A person who violates regulations of the Department requiring the
use of nonlead ammunition for hunting for a first offense is subject to a civil fine not
exceeding $750.

(4)] The Department shall adopt regulations to carry out this
subsection.”.

AMENDMENT NO. 3
On pages 3 and 4, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 26 on page
3 through line 7 on page 4, inclusive.

AMENDMENT NO. 4
On page 4, after line 7, insert:

“SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall
take effect January 1, 2031.”;

in line 8, strike “3.” and substitute “4.”; and in the same line, after “That” insert “, except
as provided in Section 3 of this Act,”.
END OF PAGE 2