START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1000 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1000 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools - School Mapping Data - Radius of School Grounds 
 
 
This bill requires that school mapping data produced with funding from the  
School Mapping Data Program contain site-specific labeling that matches the one-mile 
radius surrounding the school grounds, including bodies of water. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase, potentially significantly, to expand 
the school mapping data produced under the School Mapping Data Program, but a reliable 
estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. The Interagency Commission on School 
Construction (IAC) can update mapping standards with existing resources. No effect on 
revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  Local school system revenues and expenditures may increase, potentially 
significantly, to expand the school mapping data produced under the School Mapping Data 
Program, but a reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 166 and 167 of 2024 established the School Mapping Data 
Program in the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) to provide funds to local school 
systems to produce school mapping data for each public school in the county, including 
charter schools. Local school systems can apply for funding from the program, and any 
school mapping data produced with funding from the program must comply with standards 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1000/ Page 2 
developed by IAC. The Acts further specified minimum requirements for school mapping 
data, including that it be (1) compatible with software platforms used by the school and 
public safety agencies that provide emergency services to the school, as specified and  
(2) be verified for accuracy by a walk-through of the school buildings and grounds. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget, as enacted, included an appropriation of $3.0 million for the 
program. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  MCSS advises that, of the original $3.0 million appropriation 
for the School Mapping Data Program, it has awarded $2.3 million to local school systems, 
covering 976 schools. This leaves 446 schools without grant funding and $700,000 in 
unallocated funds. 
 
MCSS estimates that an additional $2.0 million is needed to provide grants to the remaining 
local school systems that did not apply for grants and to enable the 976 schools covered by 
existing funding to expand the data they collect to include a one-mile radius. The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) partially disagrees because the School Mapping 
Data Program is a discretionary grant program, not a mandate. The bill requires only that 
local school systems that receive funding include data covering a one-mile radius. 
Therefore, additional funding is not needed for those school systems that have not or will 
not apply for funding. 
 
Moreover, it is unclear if current grantees require additional funding to comply with the 
bill. IAC notes that the bill lacks specificity regarding the additional data that is to be 
included. It advises that a simple aerial view of the property and surrounding areas can be 
accomplished with little or no additional cost but adding more specific site details likely 
requires significant additional effort and expenditures.  
 
Only two local school systems responded to a request for information about the bill’s 
effects. Prince George’s County Public Schools says it can incorporate the additional 
information with its existing grant funding, and Baltimore City Public Schools (BCPS) 
advises that it requires $725,000 in additional funding to incorporate the expanded data. 
BCPS’s estimate hinges on an interpretation of the requirements in current law that the 
school mapping data produced with grant funds be verified by a walk-through, potentially 
requiring BCPS to conduct walk throughs of the entire city to verify the mapping data. 
However, current law specifies that the walk throughs must be conducted of “the school 
buildings and grounds,” so it is not clear if the walk throughs envisioned by BCPS are 
needed. 
 
In the absence of (1) additional data from local school systems that have received grants; 
(2) greater specificity regarding the data to be added to school maps; and (3) a clear 
interpretation of current law regarding the need for walk-throughs, DLS cannot provide a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1000/ Page 3 
reliable estimate of any potential increase in State expenditures (and therefore local school 
system revenues and expenditures) needed to implement the bill. However, based on 
estimates from MCSS, IAC, and Baltimore City, any such increase may be significant. 
DLS notes that $700,000 in unspent grant funds remain available from MCSS but may be 
insufficient to support compliance with the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Center for School Safety; Interagency Commission on 
School Construction; Baltimore City Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
me/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3