START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1038 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1038 
(Caroline County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Caroline County - Regulation of Animals - Dogs 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement that a dog owner in Caroline County must apply to the 
county tax collector for a dog license each year. The bill also repeals other related 
provisions related to dog licensing in the county, but retains the authority of the county 
commissioners to adopt rules and regulations regarding the issuance of dog licenses in the 
county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Caroline County finances, as 
discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In Caroline County, the county tax collector is generally 
responsible for the issuance and replacement of dog licenses and dog tags. The county 
commissioners are required to prepare and supply tags to the county tax collector each 
year. 
 
By July 1 of each year, owners of a dog at least six months of age in the county must apply 
to the county tax collector for a license for the dog. The applicant must pay a dog or kennel 
license fee, as determined by the county commissioners, at the time of application. The 
license expires on July 1 of the year after it has been issued.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1038/ Page 2 
A dog license in Caroline County must include the date of issuance, a serial number, and a 
description of the dog licensed. The tag must be:  (1) metal; (2) imprinted with the 
corresponding serial number; (3) imprinted with the calendar year the tag is issued; (4) no 
more than one inch in length; and (5) come equipped with a substantial metal fastener. A 
kennel license tag must contain the word “kennel”. 
 
License holders are required to attach the tag to a substantial collar and keep the collar and 
tag on the dog at all times, with limited exceptions. If the tag is lost, the county tax collector 
is responsible for replacing lost tags after:  (1) the original licensee submits an application; 
(2) a new license has been produced; and (3) a 25 cent fee is paid. 
 
The bill repeals the above provisions in statute but retains the authority of the county 
commissioners to adopt rules and regulations regarding the issuance of dog licenses. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  While the bill repeals provisions requiring a person owning or 
keeping a dog in Caroline County to apply to the county tax collector for a dog license, the 
bill retains the authority of the county commissioners to adopt rules and regulations 
regarding the issuance of dog licenses. The Department of Legislative Services anticipates 
the county will retain its current dog licensing fees. According to the Caroline County 
Animal Control website, the cost for the registration and vaccine certification is $3.00 for 
any dog that is spayed or neutered, and $10.00 for any dog that is not spayed or neutered, 
which is paid to the Caroline County Humane Society. In addition, there is a 25 cent fee to 
replace a license tag. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 703 (Caroline County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2