START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1020 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1020 
(Delegate Chang) 
Appropriations 
 
 
State Police Retirement System - Mandatory Retirement Age - Alteration 
 
   
This bill increases the mandatory retirement age for members of the State Police 
Retirement System (SPRS) from 60 to 62 and makes corresponding changes to eligibility 
requirements for the Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP). The bill also allows 
any SPRS member that began participation in DROP before June 1, 2026, and continues 
participation on or after that date to extend their participation in DROP until reaching 
age 62 or completing seven years in DROP, whichever occurs first. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities decrease by $2.11 million, and the normal cost 
decreases by $60,000. As a result, State pension contributions (general funds) decrease by 
$290,000 in FY 2028. Savings continue to accrue in the out years according to actuarial 
assumptions. No effect on revenues.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
(290,000) 
(300,000) 
(310,000) 
(320,000) 
Net Effect 
$0 
$290,000 
$300,000 
$310,000 
$320,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1020/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An SPRS member is eligible to retire at age 50 or after accumulating 
22 years of eligibility service (if hired before July 1, 2011), or 25 years of eligibility service 
(if hired on or after July 1, 2011). A member must retire at age 60. 
 
SPRS members are eligible to participate in DROP. For SPRS, members hired before 
July 1, 2011, are eligible to participate if they have at least 22 years of eligibility service 
but fewer than 32 years. SPRS members hired on or after July 1, 2011, are eligible for 
DROP if they have at least 25 years of eligibility service but fewer than 32 years. 
Regardless of their date of hire, their time in DROP cannot exceed 7 years (however, 
members are subject to shorter limits if their time in DROP will cause them to pass 
age 60 or their maximum number of years of service). During the DROP period, members 
continue employment at their regular salary but are deemed to be retired and do not earn 
any additional service credit. The retirement allowance is placed in an account earning  
4% annual interest. At the end of the DROP period, the lump sum held in the DROP 
account is paid to the member, who must then terminate employment and receive a regular 
retirement allowance. 
 
State Expenditures:  With an increased mandatory retirement age, some members of 
SPRS may decide to retire later than they might otherwise have. For this analysis, the 
General Assembly’s consulting actuary adjusted the retirement assumptions for SPRS. 
Specifically, the actuary delayed the 100% retirement assumption at age 60 (the current 
age of mandatory retirement) to 100% by age 62, phased in with 10% of members with 
less than 22 years of service (the years of service required for a normal retirement for 
members hired before July 1, 2011) retiring by ages 60 and 61, and 40% of members with 
22 or more years of service retiring by ages 60 and 61. However, most members who have 
more than 22 years of service are not expected to be working at age 60. This analysis 
assumes that the bill does not materially change the average length of the DROP period for 
members who would be in DROP as of the effective date of the bill. 
 
For the current population, more than 90% of SPRS members will have more than 28 years 
of service at age 60, which is the number of years of service needed to reach the maximum 
accrual rate of 71.4% of average final compensation. After 28 years of service, the only 
increase that members see to their pension benefits is from an increase in average final 
compensation. Therefore, any members that do stay beyond age 60 end up contributing to 
the pension system without receiving any additional accrual benefits, which decreases 
liabilities and contributions for the State.  
 
An increase in retirement age would first be recognized in the June 30, 2026 actuarial 
valuation, which determines pension contribution rates for fiscal 2028. Thus, there is no 
fiscal effect until fiscal 2028. SPRS employer contributions are made entirely with general 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1020/ Page 3 
funds. The actuary estimates that pension liabilities decrease by $2.11 million and the 
normal cost decreases by $60,000. Amortizing the decrease in liabilities over 12 years and 
subtracting the full normal cost decrease results in a decrease in first-year expenditures 
(general funds) for State pension contributions of $290,000. Savings continue accrue in the 
out years according to actuarial assumptions. To the extent that actual retirement patterns 
differ from the assumptions used in this analysis, the fiscal effects will differ. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 654 (Senator Augustine) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Department of State Police; State Retirement Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3