START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1052 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1052 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Maryland School for the Deaf - Membership of Board of Trustees - Alterations 
 
 
This bill decreases the number of members on the Board of Trustees for the 
Maryland School for the Deaf from 19 to 13. The bill also increases the minimum number 
of board members that must be deaf from 6 to 7. Finally, the bill establishes provisions for 
phasing out 6 board members. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expenditures for the Maryland School for the Deaf for meal costs for 
quarterly board meetings are expected to decrease. However, any decrease is expected to 
be minimal. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The terms of the first six appointed board members whose terms expire 
after the effective date of the bill will terminate at the end of the last day of each respective 
term. On the termination of an appointed member, the Governor, with the advice and 
consent of the Senate, must prioritize appointing members who are deaf, in accordance 
with the bill. 
 
Current Law:  The governance of the Maryland School for the Deaf is vested in its  
Board of Trustees, which consists of 19 members appointed by the Governor with the 
advice and consent of the Senate. At least 6 board members are required to be deaf, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1052/ Page 2 
each board member must be a resident of the State, a member of the general public, and 
have a demonstrated and active interest in the education of deaf children. Each geographic 
region of the State must be represented by at least 1 board member. The term of a 
board member is six years, and the terms of members are staggered. At the end of a term, 
a member continues to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A board member 
may not serve more than two consecutive terms. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 339 (Senator Lewis Young) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland School for the Deaf; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2