START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 1096 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1096 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Tax Credits - Notice Through Property Tax Bill 
 
 
This bill requires Baltimore City and county governments to give written notice, through 
the annual property tax bill, of specified property tax credits for which a taxpayer may be 
eligible. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in county expenditures relating to new notification costs, 
beginning in FY 2027, which could total approximately $0.5 million statewide. County 
revenues are not directly affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A well-defined statutory relationship exists between the State and local 
governments in the administration of the property tax system. While property tax revenues 
are a relatively minor revenue source to the State, the State has assumed responsibility for 
the valuation and assessment of property. Local governments, on the other hand, levy and 
collect property taxes.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1096/ Page 2 
Statewide Mandatory Property Tax Credit Programs 
 
The major statewide mandatory credits include the homeowners’ and renters’ tax credit 
programs (“circuit breaker”), the enterprise zone credit, and the homestead property tax 
credit program. These credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 1 of the Tax – Property Article. 
Statewide mandatory tax credits reduce local property taxes; however, with respect to the 
homeowners’, renters’, and enterprise zone tax credits, counties are reimbursed in full or 
in part by the State for their revenue losses. Local governments may enact a local 
supplement to the Homeowners’ Tax Credit Program, providing additional relief to 
homeowners, although they must incur the cost of the local supplement. 
 
Statewide Optional Property Tax Credits 
 
Tax credits that may be authorized by local governments, against local property taxes only, 
are specified by law for various types of property. Currently, there are 73 optional property 
tax credits authorized by the General Assembly that are made available on a statewide 
basis. These credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the Tax – Property Article. 
 
County Specific Property Tax Credits 
 
Tax credit programs mandated by law may be applicable only to specific counties or 
municipalities. These credits can be found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Tax – Property 
Article. In addition to statewide optional tax credits, some optional credits are applicable 
only to a specified county or municipality within a specified county. These county specific 
optional credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Tax – Property Article.  
 
Notice Requirement 
 
Baltimore City and county governments must give notice of each county property tax credit 
that the taxpayer is entitled to when sending out a tax bill to a taxpayer who is entitled to a 
property tax credit. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County governments are responsible for property tax billings on 
behalf of the State, county, and municipal governments and therefore will be responsible 
for preparing and sending out the additional notices required by the bill. As a point of 
reference, there are approximately 2.1 million residential real property accounts in the 
State. Assuming the additional notification costs average $0.25 per account, county 
government expenditures could increase by approximately $0.5 million annually, 
beginning in fiscal 2027. The estimated notification costs reflect one additional page within 
the property tax bill for a new insert and an increase in mailing costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1096/ Page 3 
Anne Arundel and Montgomery counties provided more specific information regarding 
potential costs, as discussed below. 
 
Anne Arundel County 
 
Anne Arundel County reports that to include a comprehensive list of all potential tax credits 
would require a significant revision of the tax bill stock that is ordered by the county or 
substantially change the tax flyer that is included with property tax bills. Alternatively, the 
county may have to issue another insert entirely for just tax credit programs, which would 
increase mailing costs. 
 
Anne Arundel County advises that the county currently informs property owners of 
potential tax credits in two ways:  (1) by including broad descriptions of some common 
programs and providing contact information to staff in the Tax Division on the back of the 
property tax bill; and (2) by including the two most significant programs – the Homestead 
Property Tax Credit Program and the Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program – on the 
required tax flyer. 
 
Anne Arundel County issues approximately 200,000 tax bills each July. In addition, there 
are 40,000 to 52,000 mailings for installments, half-year payments, and new construction 
bills. The annual cost for these mailings total approximately $700,000. 
 
In addition to the Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit and Homestead Property Tax Credit, 
Anne Arundel County has enacted 19 local property tax credits. The county reports that 
listing all of these credits on the annual tax bill could be substantial, especially if 
descriptions or eligibility requirements are included to help property owners understand 
how to apply or whether they are truly eligible. 
 
Mailing inserts with tax bills requires an automated process that a contractor performs, 
often at about $0.25 to $0.50 per bill. Anne Arundel County advises that if the required 
information cannot fit on the back of the existing bill stock, it may require a separate insert 
to be included with the tax bill. The cost for an insert specific to tax credit programs is 
likely the same as the cost for the tax flyers, which totaled approximately $6,000 for the 
fiscal 2026 mailing. If the contractor cannot accommodate the additional inserts, the county 
may have to find another contractor to perform the property tax mailing, which may cost 
more than is currently paid.   
 
Anne Arundel County also notes that there could be a potential operational impact on the 
Office of Finance if there is an increase in call volume as property owners have questions 
regarding the additional information included on or with the tax bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1096/ Page 4 
Montgomery County 
 
Montgomery County advises that the bill will increase printing and mailing costs for 
approximately 365,000 tax bills as the county is currently at the maximum weight for the 
first class mailing of the tax bills. The exact cost cannot be quantified and will depend on 
the amount of additional information the tax bill must contain. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel and Montgomery counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4