START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1058 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1058 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings and Budget and Taxation 
 
Youth Delinquency Prevention Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Youth Delinquency Prevention Fund, to be administered by the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP). The purpose of the fund is 
to provide grants to community-based programs, including youth service bureaus (YSBs), 
that provide services to (1) provide community-oriented delinquency prevention, youth 
suicide prevention, drug and alcohol use prevention, and youth development;  
(2) ameliorate conditions that contribute to delinquency, youth suicide, substance use 
disorder, and family disruption; and (3) advocate for youth needs.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 annually to capitalize the 
fund; special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly. 
General fund expenditures increase by as much as $47,900 in FY 2027 for GOCPP to 
administer the fund. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
GF Expenditure 
$147,900 
$153,300 
$156,000 
$158,600 
$161,200 
SF Expenditure 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
Net Effect 
($147,900) 
($153,300) 
($156,000) 
($158,600) 
($161,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may increase grants to and services provided by YSBs.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1058/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the 
fund; (2) interest earnings of the fund; and (3) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only for carrying out the purpose 
of the fund, and expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the 
State budget. Money expended from the fund for carrying out the purpose of the fund is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for carrying out the purpose of the fund.  
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to reversion requirements under 
§ 7-302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article. The Treasurer must hold the fund 
separately, and the Comptroller must account for the fund. No part of the fund may revert 
or be credited to the General Fund or any other special fund of the State. The fund is subject 
to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits.  
 
Reporting Requirements:  On or before December 1, 2027, and every December 1 
thereafter, GOCPP must submit a report to the Legislative Policy Committee, the 
Senate Budget and Taxation, and the House Appropriations committees that includes for 
the immediately preceding fiscal year: 
 
 
the amount of funds transferred and distributed from the fund; 
 
the number of grants distributed by the fund; 
 
the amount of each grant distributed by the fund; 
 
the number of children and families served using the grants distributed from the 
fund, disaggregated by (1) age of the child, (2) geographic region, (3) race, and  
(4) ethnicity; 
 
if a child or served using the grants distributed from the fund has interacted with the 
criminal justice system or the juvenile justice system after receiving the grant; 
 
the amount of any unspent money in the fund; and 
 
the reasons why the unspent funds, if any, were not spent. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Youth Service Bureaus 
 
A YSB is a community-based entity that is operated to (1) provide community-oriented 
delinquency prevention, youth suicide prevention, drug and alcohol abuse prevention, and 
youth development; (2) ameliorate conditions that contribute to delinquency, youth suicide, 
drug and alcohol abuse, and family disruption; and (3) function as an advocate of youth 
needs. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1058/ Page 3 
To be eligible to receive State funding, a YSB must provide, at convenient hours and free 
of charge or at a reasonable rate based on the client’s family income: 
 
 
individual, family, or group counseling;  
 
referral and information services;  
 
crisis intervention, including intervention relating to youth suicide prevention;  
 
alcohol and drug abuse assessment and referral services by staff who have received 
specified assessment and referral training;  
 
informal counseling; and  
 
in accordance with the needs of the community and subject to the availability of 
funds, (1) tutoring; (2) alternative leisure activities; (3) employment assistance;  
(4) community education, including training and information relating to youth 
suicide prevention; (5) aftercare services; and (6) other specialized services. 
 
The State and local government must jointly fund an eligible YSB. The State must provide 
75% of the funding, as provided in the State budget. Each eligible YSB must submit a 
proposed annual budget to the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS). The proposed DJS 
budget must list the eligible YSBs and estimate the amount of State funds to be allocated 
to each YSB. A local governing body that provides matching funds for a YSB may choose 
to have State funds paid directly to the private sponsor or to the local governing body. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Capitalization of the New Special Fund and Grants to Community – Based Programs 
 
General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $100,000 annually to capitalize the 
Youth Delinquency Prevention Fund created under the bill. Although the bill does not 
include a mandated appropriation or otherwise specify a funding amount, this analysis 
assumes that $100,000 annually is needed in order to implement a modest grant program 
in accordance with the bill. Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund 
increase correspondingly each year, reflecting receipt of the capitalization funds and 
spending from the fund as grants are awarded.  
 
Administrative Costs for the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
 
The bill does not authorize the new special fund to be used for administrative costs; thus, 
additional funds are needed as existing staff within GOCPP cannot handle the additional 
workload created by the bill. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by as much 
as $47,885 in fiscal 2027, which reflects the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time grants specialist to administer the fund, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1058/ Page 4 
ensure proper compliance, and prepare the annual report. It is the maximum anticipated 
personnel and personnel expenditures needed to implement the bill.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$39,786 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Maximum FY 2027 GOCPP Personnel Expenditures 
$47,885 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 537 (Senator McCray) - Judicial Proceedings and Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department 
of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative Services - Office of Legislative Audits; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4