START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1068 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1068 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Special Enrollment Period for Newly Hired Employees of 
Small Businesses 
 
 
This bill requires certain health insurance carriers to provide a special enrollment period 
(SEP) for an individual who has become employed by a small employer that does not offer 
an employer-sponsored health benefit plan. The SEP must be open for 60 days and begin 
on the first day of employment of the individual by a small employer that does not offer an 
employer-sponsored health benefit plan. Coverage must become effective on the first day 
of the month following the date of plan selection. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; MIA’s 
review of filings and complaints can likely be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Any operational impact on the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange is minimal and can be 
absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A carrier participating in the Individual Exchange must provide an SEP 
for an individual who purchases coverage through the Individual Exchange because the 
individual has become employed by a small employer that does not offer an 
employer-sponsored health benefit plan. Other carriers must provide an SEP for an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1068/ Page 2 
individual who purchases coverage outside the Individual Exchange because the individual 
has become employed by a small employer that does not offer an employer-sponsored 
health benefit plan. 
 
Current Law:  Carriers must provide SEPs for qualified individuals to enroll or change 
health benefit plans according to federal regulations. Triggering events include, among 
others, when an individual or a dependent (1) loses minimum essential coverage, 
pregnancy-related coverage, or medically needy coverage; (2) gains or becomes a 
dependent through marriage, birth, adoption, placement for adoption, or placement in foster 
care, or through a child support order or other court order; (3) loses a dependent or is no 
longer considered a dependent through divorce or legal separation or if the enrollee or a 
dependent dies; and (4) gains citizenship or lawfully present status. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2