START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1075 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1075 
(Delegate Smith) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Maryland Graduate and Professional Scholarship Program - 
Eligible Institutions 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Graduate and Professional Scholarship 
Program to include individuals attending the University of Maryland Eastern Shore 
enrolled in one of the following degree programs:  (1) Master of Medical Science in 
Physician Assistant Studies; (2) Doctor of Pharmacy; (3) Doctor of Physical Therapy; or 
(4) Doctor of Veterinary Medicine. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Maryland Graduate and Professional 
Scholarship does not necessitate additional spending, as discussed below. The  
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can make needed administrative 
changes with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A recipient of a graduate and professional scholarship must be a 
Maryland resident, demonstrate a financial need, and attend one of several specified 
graduate and professional schools. Scholarships range from $1,000 to $5,000 per 
school year and may not be received for more than eight semesters. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1075/ Page 2 
MHEC must allocate funds from the Graduate and Professional Scholarship Program to 
institutions of higher education based on the proportion of State residents enrolled in 
eligible programs at each institution. Institutions then distribute the scholarship funds to 
eligible students. 
 
State Expenditures:  Funding for the Graduate and Professional Scholarship Program is 
as provided in the annual State budget. Therefore, expanding eligibility does not necessitate 
additional spending. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $1.2 million in funding 
for the program. In fiscal 2025, the program made $282,850 in awards to 213 applicants. 
MHEC advises that, since funding is allocated to each institution of higher education based 
on the proportion of State residents enrolled in eligible programs, adding another institution 
without additional funding will result in decreased funding allocations among currently 
eligible institutions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 486 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
caw/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2