START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1042 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1042 
(Delegate Woorman) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Structural Racism Training - Funding Sources 
 
 
This bill clarifies that it is the intent of the General Assembly that the structural racism 
training required by Chapter 478 of 2025 for renewal of a health occupations license be 
developed and offered at no cost to the State using funding from external sources, such as 
the grant provided to the Maryland Nurses Association (MNA) from the American Nurses 
Association. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying in nature and does not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Structural racism” means the totality of ways in which societies foster 
racial discrimination by mutually reinforcing systems of housing, education, employment, 
earnings, benefits, credit, media, health care, and criminal justice. 
 
Chapter 745 of 2021 requires applicants for the renewal of a license or certificate issued 
by a health occupations board to attest to completion of an approved implicit bias training 
program the first time they renew their license or certificate after April 1, 2022. 
 
Chapter 478 of 2025 expanded the scope of required training for individuals licensed or 
certified by a health occupations board to include implicit bias and structural racism. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1042/ Page 2 
Applicants for the renewal of a license or certificate issued by a health occupations board 
must attest to completion of an approved implicit bias and structural racism training 
program the first time they renew their license or certificate after April 1, 2026. The 
Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Professional Competency Program, in coordination 
with the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities, must identify and approve 
implicit bias and structural racism training programs. Each health occupations board may 
adopt regulations allowing an applicant for license renewal to receive continuing education 
credits for completing an implicit bias and structural racism training program. 
 
Uncodified language in Chapter 478 specifies that it is the intent of the General Assembly 
that the structural racism training required under the bill be developed and offered using 
grant funding provided to MNA from the American Nurses Association to advance 
antiracism efforts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2