START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1091 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1091 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance and Dental Plan Organizations - Dentists - Assignment of 
Benefits and Reimbursement of Nonpreferred Providers 
 
 
This bill expands provisions of law governing the assignment of benefits (AOB) under 
certain health insurance policies to apply to dentists (in addition to physicians under current 
law). The bill also establishes parallel provisions governing AOB and nonpreferred 
provider dentists for dental plan organizations (DPOs). The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any additional 
workload on MIA can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary: 
 
Assignment of Benefits and Nonpreferred Providers 
 
Under current law, if a preferred provider insurance policy offered by an insurer provides 
benefits for a service, an insured is entitled to receive the benefits for that service either 
through direct payments to the health care provider or through reimbursement to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1091/ Page 2 
insured. An insured may also request an AOB – the transfer of health care coverage 
reimbursement benefits – to a nonparticipating provider. An insurer may not prohibit an 
AOB to a provider who is a physician by an insured or refuse to directly reimburse a 
nonpreferred provider who is a physician under an AOB, except under specified 
circumstances. 
 
Current law specifies that, if an insured has not provided an AOB, the insurer must include 
specified information with the payment to the insured for health care services rendered by 
a nonpreferred provider physician. If a nonpreferred provider physician seeks an AOB from 
an insured, the physician must provide specified information to the insured prior to 
performing a health care service. A nonpreferred provider physician must submit a 
specified disclosure form to document to the insurer the AOB by an insured. An insurer 
may refuse to directly reimburse a nonpreferred provider under an AOB if (1) the insurer 
receives notice of the AOB after the time the insurer has paid the benefits to the insured; 
(2) the insurer, due to an inadvertent administrative error, has previously paid the insured; 
(3) the insured withdraws the AOB before the insurer has paid the benefits to the 
nonpreferred provider; or (4) the insured paid the nonpreferred provider the full amount 
due at the time of service. 
 
The bill adds dentists to these AOB provisions and generally establishes parallel provisions 
regarding AOBs for a DPO. The Insurance Commissioner must develop a disclosure form 
for DPOs and dentists seeking an AOB from a DPO. 
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, “provider” means a physician, hospital, or other person that is licensed 
or otherwise authorized to provide health care services. “Similarly licensed provider” 
means, for a physician, either a physician who is board certified or eligible in the same 
practice specialty or a group physician practice that contains board certified or eligible 
physicians in the same practice specialty; or for a health care provider who is not a 
physician, a health care provider who holds the same type of license or certification. 
 
The bill adds a dentist to the definition of “provider” and expands the definition of 
“similarly licensed provider” to specify that it means, for a dentist, either a dentist licensed 
to practice dentistry in the State who performs the same or similar dental services or a 
group dental practice that consists of dentists licensed in the State who perform the same 
or similar dental services; or for a health care provider or dentist who is not a physician, a 
health care provider or dentist who holds the same type of license or certification. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Nonpreferred provider dental offices that are small employers 
gain the ability to obtain an AOB from patients but must provide certain disclosures to 
patients and submit a copy of the disclosure form to the carrier to document the AOB. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1091/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 813 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3