START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1054 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1054 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Ethics Violations, Malfeasance, Misfeasance, and Nonfeasance - 
Statute of Limitations 
 
 
This bill increases, from two years to three years, the statute of limitations for the 
prosecution of the commission of, attempted commission of, or conspiracy to commit the 
following misdemeanors:  (1) a criminal offense under the Maryland Public Ethics Law; 
or (2) criminal malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office committed by an officer 
of the State, an officer of a State agency, an officer of a political subdivision of the State, 
or an officer of a bicounty or multicounty agency in the State. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, under § 5‐106 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, 
unless otherwise specified, a prosecution for a misdemeanor must be initiated within 
one year after the offense was committed. As noted above, the statute of limitations for the 
offenses affected by the bill is two years. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1054/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2