START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1049 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1049 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Credit Unions - Mergers and Consolidations - Alteration of Voting Requirement 
 
 
This bill makes a vote to approve a merger by members of a “surviving credit union” 
optional (instead of mandatory under current law) and makes conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In the event of a proposed merger between or among credit unions in the 
State, a majority of the board of each credit union proposing a merger must adopt a 
resolution declaring the merger is advisable.  
 
A majority of the board of each merging credit union (i.e., a credit union being acquired or 
absorbed) proposing the merger must set a date for a vote on the proposed merger by its 
members at a meeting of the membership or by mail ballot to be filed on or before the date 
of the meeting.  
 
A majority of the board of a surviving credit union may, but is not required to, set a date 
for a vote on the proposed merger by its members at a meeting of the membership or by 
mail ballot to be filed on or before the date of the meeting. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1049/ Page 2 
A merger must be in accordance with a plan that: 
 
 
states the field of membership type that the surviving credit union will have; 
 
is agreed to by a majority of the boards of each credit union party to the merger; and 
 
approved by the members of each merging credit union party to the merger by 
majority vote of the members of the credit union who vote on the proposal. 
 
The approval process for the consolidation of credit unions is not affected by the bill. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Definitions 
 
A “merging credit union” means a credit union that is absorbed or acquired by another 
credit union in a merger and ceases to exist after the merger. 
 
A “surviving credit union” means a credit union that absorbs or acquires another credit 
union in a merger and continues to exist after the merger. 
 
Procedure for the Merger or Consolidation of Credit Unions, Generally 
 
A majority of the board of each credit union proposing a merger or consolidation must 
adopt a resolution declaring the merger or consolidation is advisable.  
 
A majority of the board of each credit union party to the merger or consolidation must set 
a date for a vote on the proposed merger or consolidation by its members at a meeting of 
the membership or by mail ballot to be filed on or before the date of the meeting. 
 
A merger or consolidation must be in accordance with a plan that: 
 
 
states the field of membership type that the surviving or new credit union will have; 
 
is agreed to by a majority of the boards of each credit union party to the merger or 
consolidation; and 
 
unless provided otherwise by the Commissioner of the Office of Financial 
Regulation, approved by the members of each credit union party to the merger or 
consolidation by majority vote of the members of the credit union who vote on the 
proposal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1049/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 783 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3