START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1079 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1079 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Office of Regulatory Management and State Government Authorizations 
 
   
This bill establishes the Office of Regulation Management to oversee and implement a 
25% reduction in regulatory requirements in the State and related activities. The 
requirements of the bill are in addition to the requirements of the Administrative Procedure 
Act for the promulgation of regulations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $529,400 in FY 2027 for 
staffing; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing operating expenses. 
Expenditures (all funds) further increase significantly, likely by millions of dollars over 
multiple years (not reflected below), to reimburse the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) for information technology development costs, but a reliable estimate 
is not feasible, as discussed below; reimbursable revenues increase commensurately. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
529,400 
630,300 
658,800 
687,900 
717,400 
Net Effect 
($529,400) 
($630,300) 
($658,800) 
($687,900) 
($717,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1079/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:     
 
Definitions 
 
“Authorization” means a permit, license, certification, registration, or any other instrument 
that a person is required to obtain before engaging in a particular activity.  
 
“Average processing duration” means the amount of time in the previous fiscal year that a 
unit takes to fully process any given application for an authorization. 
 
“Low-volume authorization” means an authorization for which a unit receives an average 
of fewer than five applications per year.  
 
Office of Regulatory Management – Established 
 
The head of the office is the director, who is appointed by the Governor with the advice 
and consent of the Senate and is entitled to a salary provided in the State budget. The office 
must also have its staff provided for in the State budget.  
 
By December 31, 2026, the office must develop policies and procedures for (1) the 
oversight and implementation of a 25% reduction in regulatory requirements; (2) the 
oversight and implementation of the streamlining of the regulatory and permitting approval 
process of all units of State government to achieve a substantial reduction in the time 
required for approval or rejection of permits, licenses, certifications, and registrations; and 
(3) the increased transparency of the State regulatory process. 
 
Reports by Units of State Government to the Office of Regulatory Management 
 
By December 1, 2026, each unit must submit a report to the office containing (1) specified 
information related to the processing of and fees for authorizations; (2) a certification that 
the unit has, for each authorization, assigned staff and instituted specified processes; and 
(3) a strategy to simplify existing authorizations, as specified. 
 
By April 1, 2027, and quarterly thereafter, each unit must submit an update to the report 
describing any progress the unit has made in implementing the strategy outlined in the 
report. Each unit, in collaboration with DoIT, must develop and implement processes for 
submitting applications for authorizations online, processing payments electronically, and 
amending pending applications.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1079/ Page 3 
By July 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, each unit of State government must submit a 
report to the office and the Joint Committee on Administrative, Executive, and Legislative 
Review (AELR) listing all of the regulations that the unit anticipates amending, adopting, 
or repealing during the next fiscal year.  
 
Current Law:    
 
Adoption of Proposed Regulations – Generally 
 
Under the Administrative Procedure Act, all proposed regulations are submitted to AELR 
for review at least 15 days before they are submitted to the Maryland Register for 
publication. Often changes are negotiated between AELR and the unit before publication. 
AELR is not required to give its explicit approval in order for a proposed regulation to 
become effective. In the usual course, the unit may adopt a proposed regulation 45 days 
after the regulation was published in the Maryland Register. Thirty of the 45 days must be 
reserved as a public comment period. 
 
If the proposed regulation includes an increase or decrease in a fee for a license, the 
promulgating unit must clearly include a written explanation justifying the increase or 
decrease in the fee. 
 
If AELR cannot complete its review of the proposed regulation within the 45-day period, 
it may delay, or “hold,” the adoption of the regulation. During this time, AELR may suggest 
to the unit that certain changes be made. If no agreement is reached, the unit may 
subsequently notify AELR of its intent to adopt the regulation despite AELR’s hold. The 
hold period ends on the later of the 60th day after the unit’s notice to the committee or the 
105th day after the initial publication of the regulation in the Maryland Register. 
 
At any time, AELR may formally vote to oppose the adoption of the regulation. In this 
case, notice of the opposition is sent to the Governor and the unit, and further negotiations 
ensue. The Governor may instruct the unit to withdraw or modify the regulation. However, 
once AELR has opposed the adoption of the regulation, it may not be adopted unless 
approved by the Governor. 
 
Transparent Government Act of 2024 and the Government Efficiency Commission 
 
Chapters 412 and 413 of 2024 required each principal department and independent unit of 
State government, by October 1, 2024, to (1) create a catalog containing specified 
information of each type of permit, license, or certificate that it issues and (2) submit the 
catalog to the Governor. By December 1, 2024, each principal department and independent 
unit was required to post on its website an interim description, to the extent practicable, of 
the application process for each permit, license, or certificate it issues, including specified 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1079/ Page 4 
information; by October 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, a completed update of that 
information must be posted.  
 
Chapters 412 and 413 also established the Government Efficiency Commission with the 
stated purpose of enhancing government efficiency and economic competitiveness by 
monitoring efficiency in the processing of permits, licenses, and certificates. The 
commission must (1) compile and index the aforementioned reports submitted to the 
Governor; (2) review statutory and regulatory provisions that may impact the efficiency of 
processing permits, licenses, and certificates; and (3) make recommendations generally 
regarding permit, license, and certificate efficiency and removing related barriers. 
Beginning December 1, 2024, and annually thereafter, the commission must submit a 
report on its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
The commission submitted its most recent annual report in December 2025.  
 
OneStop Portal 
 
DoIT manages the OneStop Portal, a platform designed to consolidate all of the State’s 
licensure and certification platforms into a single online platform. The goal of OneStop is 
to retire outdated paper-based applications and legacy databases used by many State 
agencies for licensing. However, not every permit, license, and certificate issued by State 
entities is available on OneStop. Additional information regarding the permits, licenses, 
and certificates available on OneStop can be viewed on its website.  
 
Administration of State-issued Permits, Licenses, and Certificates – Generally 
 
Several principal departments and independent units of State government administer and 
oversee the issuance of permits, licenses, and certificates for various purposes. Permit, 
license, and certificate fees are generally distributed to the general fund or a special fund 
dedicated to the regulatory function addressed by the specific permit, license, or certificate. 
Examples of State agencies that issue permits, licenses, and certificates include: 
 
 
the Maryland State Department of Education oversees the licensure and certification 
of educators, nonpublic schools, and specified childcare providers;  
 
the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) issues State licenses for health care 
facilities and community-based programs operating in Maryland; MDH also houses 
20 independent health occupational boards that oversee the licensure and 
certification of various health-related professions, including acupuncturists, nurses, 
pharmacists and pharmacies, and physicians; 
 
the Maryland Department of Labor oversees more than 20 professional licensing 
boards, commissions, and offices that issue licenses and certifications for, among 
others, barbers, electricians, locksmiths, cosmetologists, real estate agents, and 
plumbers;  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1079/ Page 5 
 
the Department of State Police (DSP) issues licenses related to firearms and 
professional licenses generally relating to security guards, security services, private 
detectives, 
and 
special 
police 
officers, 
among 
other 
specified 
law 
enforcement-related professions; 
 
the Office of the State Fire Marshal within DSP oversees the testing, licensing, and 
regulation of nongovernmental electrical inspectors and sprinkler contractors, in 
addition to other licenses and certifications relating to fire protection and 
prevention; 
 
the Maryland Department of the Environment issues several permits, licenses, and 
certificates, including those relating to lead paint, mining, oil and gas, refuse 
disposal, natural wood waste, hazardous waste, controlled hazardous substances, 
animal feeding operations, composting, scrap tires, sewage sludge, water quality 
discharge permits, water and sewerage construction, water appropriation and use, 
well construction, drinking water quality, wetlands and waterways, erosion and 
sediment control, and waterworks and waste system operators; 
 
the Maryland Department of Agriculture issues various permits, licenses, and 
registrations, including those relating to nutrient management, weights and 
measures, food quality assurance (such as eggs, grain dealers, and organic 
production and handling operations), pesticides, fertilizers, turf and seed, animal 
feed, pet foods, veterinarians, nurseries, apiaries, and horse stables; 
 
the Department of Natural Resources issues several permits and licenses, including 
those relating to hunting, wildlife, fishing, aquaculture, vessels and boating, 
endangered species, roadside trees, tree experts, off-road vehicles, and open air 
burning; and 
 
the Maryland Department of Transportation issues various permits and licenses, 
including those related to driving motor vehicles, hauling, car dealers, junkyard and 
scrap metal processing, airports, highway access, and outdoor advertising. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $518,260 in fiscal 2027 
for staffing costs for the office established by the bill and for DoIT to assist affected State 
entities develop and implement an online process for authorizations online, processing 
payments electronically, and amending pending applications.  
 
Staff for the Office of Regulatory Management 
 
The bill establishes the office, which must be led by a director. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures increase by $529,398 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 90-day start‑up 
delay if effective date is July 1, 2026. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring  
(1) one director to lead the office; (2) two regulatory administrators to develop the policies 
and procedures regarding the State’s regulatory system; (3) one assistant Attorney General 
to provide legal advice to the office and respond to any legal challenges; and  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1079/ Page 6 
(4) one administrative assistant to provide support to the office. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, rent, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$472,556 
Operating Expenses 
    56,842 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$529,398 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This estimate does not include 
costs related to human resources, finance, and information technology services for the new 
agency, which, for many small agencies, is provided on a centralized basis, with costs 
charged back to the agency’s budget. A reliable estimate of any such charges is not feasible 
at this time as it depends on the level of services required by the new agency. 
 
Department of Information Technology 
 
DoIT advises that it requires significant staffing resources, additional software integration, 
and maintenance capacity to support state-wide coordination and to support affected State 
agencies with establishing online processes for their specific application or licensure 
processes. Specifically, DoIT estimates it needs approximately $11.6 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to meet the bill’s requirements.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) agrees that potential costs to automate all 
authorizations in the State are significant, but, in the absence of a reliable inventory of the 
authorizations that are already automated and how many affected State agencies require 
DoIT’s assistance in establishing an online process, a more reliable estimate is not feasible. 
Nevertheless, expenditures (all funds) increase, likely significantly, for State agencies to 
reimburse DoIT for any related development costs, and reimbursable revenues for DoIT 
increase commensurately. 
 
Other Effects 
 
DLS can handle accepting the reports submitted to AELR with existing resources. It is also 
assumed that affected State agencies can submit the required reports to the office with 
existing budgeted resources. However, many agencies, especially those with a substantial 
number of authorizations, likely experience an administrative burden that may require the 
reassignment of agency resources away from other critical functions to comply with the 
bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1079/ Page 7 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may benefit to the extent the bill results in a 
simplified and streamlined process for applying for State administered permits, licenses, 
certifications, and registrations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Institute for 
Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland Department of Aging; Alcohol, Tobacco, 
and Cannabis Commission; Maryland Cannabis Administration; Office of the Attorney 
General; Comptroller’s Office; Secretary of State; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Ethics Commission; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Military 
Department; Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7