START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1071 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1071 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - Stormwater Management - Agricultural Land 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to adopt 
regulations that establish provisions and a model ordinance that require local stormwater 
management programs to enforce stormwater management regulations on agricultural land 
with the advice and consent of the local soil conservation district. The bill also requires 
MDE, in the Maryland Stormwater Design Manual incorporated by reference in 
regulations, to (1) define agriculture and accessory uses on agricultural lands, including 
on-farm processing and office space, as distinct from commercial development, and  
(2) allow for flexibility in enforcement of stormwater management regulations on 
agricultural land. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $80,600 in FY 2027; future years 
reflect annualization, inflation, ongoing costs, and the termination of contractual staff in 
FY 2030. State revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
80,600 
92,700 
96,700 
25,200 
0 
Net Effect 
($80,600) 
($92,700) 
($96,700) 
($25,200) 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  While the bill may have operational impacts on local stormwater approval 
authorities and local soil conservation districts, it is not expected to have a material 
fiscal impact on local governments, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1071/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Stormwater Management Act and Implementing Regulations 
 
The intent of the Stormwater Management Act is to reduce, as much as possible, the 
adverse effects of stormwater runoff. To achieve that goal, pursuant to § 4-203 of the 
Environment Article, MDE is in charge of implementing the Stormwater Management Act 
and is required to adopt rules and regulations that establish criteria and procedures for 
stormwater management in Maryland. 
 
The rules and regulations must, among other things, (1) specify the minimum content of 
the local ordinances or the rules and regulations of the affected county governing body to 
be adopted, which may be done by inclusion of a model ordinance or model rules and 
regulations, and (2) establish regulations and a model ordinance that require: 
 
 
the implementation of environmental site design to the maximum extent practicable; 
 
the review and modification (if necessary) of planning and zoning or public works 
ordinances to remove impediments to environmental site design and 
implementation; and 
 
a developer to demonstrate that environmental site design has been implemented to 
the maximum extent practicable and standard best management practices have been 
used only where absolutely necessary. 
 
MDE must review and update the regulations at least once every five years. In reviewing 
and updating the regulations, MDE must (1) at a minimum, revise water quality and water 
quantity control standards using the most recent precipitation data available and (2) as 
necessary, update and revise the regulations to meet the statutory requirements. 
 
Local Stormwater Management Programs 
 
Each county and municipality must have an ordinance implementing a stormwater 
management program that is consistent with flood management plans and that meets 
certain minimum requirements. Each county or municipality may provide by ordinance for 
the review and approval of stormwater management plans by the local soil conservation 
district. Each governing body of a county or municipality may also adopt a system of 
charges to fund the implementation of their stormwater management programs, as 
specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1071/ Page 3 
MDE must provide technical assistance, training, research, and coordination in stormwater 
management technology to local governments. MDE is also required to inspect and review 
local stormwater management programs at least once every three years. 
 
Stormwater Management Plans 
 
Generally, unless exempted, a person may not develop any land for residential, 
commercial, industrial, or institutional use unless the person has submitted a stormwater 
management plan and has received approval of the plan from the applicable local approval 
authority. State and federal agencies are required to submit a stormwater management plan 
and obtain State approval from MDE prior to undertaking specified construction activity. 
 
Current regulations exempt agricultural land management practices from regulations that 
implement State and local stormwater management programs. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for MDE increase by $80,585 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one contractual regulatory and compliance engineer to 
(1) establish the required provisions and model ordinance (and define certain terms in order 
to do so); (2) update the Maryland Stormwater Design Manual; and (3) update regulations. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$71,444 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$80,585 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) termination of the 
contractual employee after the first quarter of fiscal 2030. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local approval authorities will need to update their local stormwater 
management ordinances once MDE develops the new model ordinance and updated 
regulations are adopted. However, since MDE will have already developed the model 
ordinance, and because, according to the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA), 
local approval authorities and soil conservation districts already work together in many 
cases, the bill’s requirements are not anticipated to materially affect local finances. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1071/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s changes are anticipated to benefit agricultural 
operations in the State (many of which are small businesses) by allowing farms to meet 
stormwater management requirements through agricultural-focused best management 
practices as opposed to commercial best management practices. According to the 
Prince George’s Soil Conservation District, agriculture-focused best management 
practices tend to be more cost-effective than the urban practices required under the current 
Maryland Stormwater Design Manual. 
 
MDA also anticipates that the bill has a positive impact on small agricultural businesses by 
standardizing consistent collaboration between local approval authorities and soil 
conservation districts statewide. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 861 (Senators Zucker and Feldman) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of County 
Health Officers; City of Annapolis; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4