START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1095 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1095 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Calvert County - Property Tax Credit - Tobacco Barns 
 
 
This bill authorizes Calvert County to grant, by law, a property tax credit against the county 
property tax imposed on real property that was formerly used solely as a tobacco barn if 
the real property (1) is located on land that is subject to a tobacco buyout agreement or 
(2) is located on land that qualifies for an agricultural use assessment and is used in 
connection with an activity that is recognized by the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) as an approved agricultural activity. Calvert County may provide, by 
law, for (1) the amount of the property tax credit; (2) the duration of the property tax credit; 
and (3) any other provision necessary to administer the property tax credit. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Calvert County property tax revenues decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent that the property tax credit is granted. County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Baltimore City, counties, and municipalities are authorized to grant a 
property tax credit against the property tax imposed on real property that is used solely as 
a tobacco barn. Prince George’s and St. Mary’s counties have enacted the property tax 
credit. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1095/ Page 2 
Charles County is authorized to grant a property tax credit against the county property tax 
imposed on real property that was formerly used solely as a tobacco barn if the real property 
(1) is located on land that is subject to a tobacco buyout agreement or (2) is located on land 
that qualifies for an agricultural use assessment and is used in connection with an activity 
that is recognized by SDAT as an approved agricultural activity. Information provided by 
Charles County indicates that the county has not enacted this optional property tax credit. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Calvert County property tax revenues decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2027 to the extent that the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue 
decrease depends on the number of properties that are eligible for the tax credit, the 
assessed value of each property, and the amount of the property tax credit granted. 
Calvert County reports that the county does not have an inventory of potentially eligible 
properties. 
 
Property Tax Collections in Calvert County 
 
Calvert County’s real property tax rate is $0.9670 per $100 of assessment for fiscal 2026. 
Calvert County is projected to collect approximately $229.1 million in property tax 
revenues in fiscal 2026, as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the 
report is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 998 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2