START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1036 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1036 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Office of the Attorney General - Independent Investigations Division - Federal 
Law Enforcement or Immigration Enforcement 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the Independent Investigations Division (IID) of the Office 
of the Attorney General (OAG) to investigate a death or serious physical injury if a person 
dies or sustains serious physical injury in connection with an interaction with federal law 
enforcement or federal immigration enforcement. After conducting an investigation, IID 
must submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly setting forth the findings 
of the investigation. If the Attorney General determines that an investigation provides 
sufficient grounds for prosecution of a federal law enforcement officer or a federal 
immigration enforcement officer for the commission of a crime, the Attorney General must 
prosecute the case. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is generally anticipated that OAG can implement the bill using existing 
budgeted resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  IID is the primary investigative unit for police-involved incidents that 
result in the death of individuals or injuries likely to result in death. OAG must determine 
whether an incident is police-involved and whether an injury is likely to result in death. In 
addition, IID must investigate all police-involved incidents that result in the death of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1036/ Page 2 
individuals or injuries that are likely to result in the death of an individual. IID may 
investigate any other crimes related to police misconduct that are discovered during an 
investigation of these incidents. A State’s Attorney may refer, for investigation by IID, a 
police-involved incident resulting in serious bodily injury to an individual that is not 
otherwise within IID’s jurisdiction; however, IID may decline to investigate the referred 
incident. IID may investigate any other crime related to police misconduct that is 
discovered during these investigations (i.e., investigations under IID’s main jurisdiction 
and investigations of police-involved incidents referred to IID by a States’ Attorney). In 
conducting these investigations, IID may act with the full powers, rights, privileges, and 
duties of a State’s Attorney, including the use of a grand jury in any county. To investigate 
alleged criminal offenses committed by police officers, IID may (1) detail one or more 
police officers employed by the Department of State Police and (2) employ other civilian 
personnel as needed. 
 
By January 31 each year, IID must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
the activities of the division in the prior calendar year, including (1) the number of 
investigations that were conducted by IID and (2) the number of prosecutions that were 
initiated as a result of an investigation by or a referral to IID. 
 
State Expenditures:  OAG advises that the expanded duties of IID under the bill require 
new staff. Specifically, it anticipates the need for three assistant Attorneys General, 
two investigators, and one paralegal, with associated expenditures of approximately 
$1.0 million on an annual basis. OAG did not provide further justification for its estimate. 
 
The Department of Legislative Servies disagrees and advises that the need for any 
additional resources on a permanent basis – particularly at the magnitude indicated by OAG 
– is speculative. Based on current staffing levels and reported caseloads, IID can likely 
handle some additional cases. To the extent that a significant number of cases are referred 
to IID that cannot be handled by existing staff, OAG can request additional resources 
through the annual budget process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1036/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3