START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1025 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1025 
(Delegates Rose and Miller) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
State Board of Cosmetologists - Licensing - Eyelash Extensions 
 
 
This bill repeals the option for an applicant for a limited license to provide eyelash 
extension services to qualify for a license only by passing a practical and written 
examination administered by the State Board of Cosmetologists instead of completing 
specified training. As a result, applicants must meet alternative apprenticeship or training 
requirements authorized under current statutory provisions. A requirement that all 
applicants for limited licenses from the State Board of Cosmetologists pass an examination 
remains unchanged. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Cosmetologists can implement the bill’s licensing 
changes with existing resources. Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Cosmetologists issues two full-service licenses 
(cosmetologist and senior cosmetologist) and five limited licenses (hairstylist, 
blow‑drying, nail technician, esthetician, and eyelash extension services). A cosmetologist 
or senior cosmetologist license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, nail, esthetic, and 
eyelash extension services. A limited license authorizes the licensee to provide just that 
service. All applicants for a limited license must pass an examination given by the board 
to qualify for a license. The board also registers apprentices. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1025/ Page 2 
“Provide eyelash extension services” means to provide an individual, for compensation, 
the service of:   
 
 
cleaning the eye area; 
 
applying (1) eyelash primers and adhesives; (2) eyelash extensions; and (3) sealant; 
or 
 
drying the eye area for eyelash extensions. 
 
An applicant for a limited license to provide eyelash extension services must:   
 
 
be at least 17 years old; 
 
have completed successfully a ninth grade education or the equivalent; and 
 
pass a practical and written examination or have received training by (1) serving as 
a registered apprentice for at least three months, as specified or (2) successfully 
completing at least 100 hours of instruction in providing eyelash extension services 
in a cosmetology school approved by the Maryland State Department of Education 
or the Maryland Higher Education Commission in consultation with the board. 
 
As with other limited licenses, the board must adopt regulations establishing curriculum 
standards for the license; the board must also establish continuing education standards.  
 
Beginning January 1, 2027, an individual registered as an apprentice who is learning to 
practice eyelash extension services must do so (1) under the supervision of a licensed senior 
cosmetologist who has completed the relevant continuing education requirements or 
(2) under a licensed eyelash extension technician with two years’ experience. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2