START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1063 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1063 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Natural Resources - Hunting - Management 
 
 
This bill allows for the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to authorize the reduction 
of the deer population on any single, contiguous property of at least 10 acres where it has 
documented deer damage. The bill also (1) modifies Sunday hunting hour restrictions 
during deer firearms season in specified counties; (2) allows for a person to hunt migratory 
game birds on Sunday and for specified persons (junior, senior, and apprentice hunters, 
and full-time students who hold a hunting license) to hunt migratory Canada geese 
(Atlantic population) on Sundays during the open season; and (3) for a three-year period, 
beginning July 1, 2027, and ending June 30, 2030, repeals the existing, county-specific 
Sunday hunting authorizations and requires DNR to adopt regulations allowing for 
Sunday hunting – at a minimum allowing for Sunday hunting in the manner authorized by 
statute on June 30, 2027. DNR must report, by December 1, 2029, on the effectiveness of 
the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1063/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Authorization of Deer Population Reduction 
 
The bill establishes that DNR may authorize the reduction of the deer population on any 
single, contiguous property of at least 10 acres where the department has documented deer 
damage. “Deer damage” includes (1) widespread damage caused by deer, including the 
elimination of forest understory, tree regeneration, and native plants and (2) the destruction 
of agricultural crops or landscaping, including ornamental landscaping, caused by deer. 
 
The method of reducing the deer population (1) is at DNR’s discretion and (2) may include 
the issuance of a permit to a property owner, or the property owner’s employee, lessee, or 
agent, to shoot deer on the property on Sundays. However, a permit must prohibit 
deer hunting on Sundays during deer firearms season within 25 yards of a DNR trail 
designated for equestrian use. DNR may allow a person issued a permit to shoot deer on 
any Sunday throughout the year in accordance with the terms of the permit. DNR must 
map areas of the State to which a permit may apply and make the maps readily available 
to the public. 
 
Sunday Hunting 
 
The bill allows – in Kent, Montgomery, Talbot, and Wicomico counties – for additional 
time to hunt deer on each Sunday during deer firearms season aside from the one Sunday 
during deer firearms season in those counties when time restrictions do not apply. The bill 
allows for hunting from 3:00 p.m. until sunset on those Sundays, in addition to the existing 
allowed time period from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. 
 
The bill also authorizes DNR to allow a person to hunt migratory game birds on Sunday, 
subject to a requirement that the department allow the following persons to hunt migratory 
Canada geese (Atlantic population) on Sundays during the open season:  (1) junior hunters; 
(2) senior hunters; (3) apprentice hunters; and (4) full-time students who hold a hunting 
license. 
 
Under provisions that take effect July 1, 2027, and terminate June 30, 2030, the bill repeals 
the various existing, county-specific authorizations for Sunday hunting and instead 
requires (1) that DNR adopt regulations allowing persons to hunt on Sundays during the 
game bird and game mammal seasons and (2) that the regulations adopted must at a 
minimum allow Sunday hunting on the hours and days authorized for Sunday hunting by 
species, hunting season, and county on June 30, 2027. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1063/ Page 3 
Report on the Effectiveness of the Bill 
 
By December 1, 2029, DNR must (1) report to the General Assembly on the effectiveness 
of the bill on deer management and balancing stakeholder interests and (2) include in the 
report input from all relevant stakeholders. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Sunday Hunting 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited in the State, with 
specified exceptions. For an overview of Sunday hunting laws in the State, please see the 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland. 
 
Deer Management Permit 
 
Maryland landowners or agricultural lessees who are experiencing severe economic loss to 
commercially grown crops (including row crops, truck crops, pasture, nursery stock, 
orchards, and certain tree plantings) or significant ecological damage to certain native plant 
communities due to deer may apply to receive a deer management permit from DNR. A 
deer management permit is issued after an investigation of the damage by DNR’s Wildlife 
and Heritage Service (WHS) and a decision of what actions must be taken, if any, to reduce 
the deer population, considering the (1) nature, extent, and severity of damage; (2) type of 
damage; (3) time of year; and (4) deer population surveys and estimates. The permit must 
describe the hunting device to be used and the number and type of deer to be taken. 
 
The permit allows permit holders or their agents, known as “designated shooters,” to 
remove deer from the designated property outside the established deer hunting seasons and 
deer bag limits, subject to permit conditions imposed by DNR, including on any Sunday 
throughout the year. Both a permit holder and all designated shooters are required to carry 
a copy of the permit signed by both the permit holder and designated shooter while 
attempting to take a deer under the terms of the permit. A deer management permit is valid 
for a period not to exceed one year and is free. 
 
Deer Cooperator License/Permit 
 
WHS may also issue deer cooperator licenses that allow a licensee to conduct deer removal 
and handling operations. The agricultural deer cooperator license is valid only on 
agricultural lands actively farmed for commercial crops (a general deer cooperator license 
is valid on other lands). An applicant must pay a $100 fee, and the license expires one year 
from the date it is issued. An applicant for a license must be the owner or lessee of the land, 
or their employee, and must meet certain requirements, including successful completion of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1063/ Page 4 
a written examination and a shooting proficiency test. In addition to licensees, certified 
shooters may operate under a deer cooperator license to assist with operations if they meet 
certain requirements, including successful completion of a shooting proficiency test. 
 
A licensee must submit an operational plan to WHS 45 days before an operation in order 
to be issued an agricultural deer cooperator operational permit to implement the plan. The 
operational plan must contain various, detailed information and approvals, including 
evidence of community support for the operation and a letter of authorization from the 
county office of law permitting the discharge of weapons at night. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Authorizing additional Sunday hunting may have a meaningful 
positive economic impact on certain types of businesses. The 2011 National Survey of 
Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation conducted by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service (FWS) indicated that the average hunter in the State spent $49 per hunting 
day on trip-related expenditures (food and lodging, transportation, and other trip costs) in 
2011, and hunters in the State spent $50.2 million total on trip-related expenditures and 
$264 million on hunting overall in 2011 (including trip-related, equipment, and any other 
expenditures). While FWS’s more recent surveys, in 2016 and 2022, have not included 
state-specific spending/cost information, if it is assumed that hunting spending/costs in 
Maryland increased by a similar or greater amount between 2011 and 2022 compared to 
the increase in national spending/costs during that period, hunters spent at least 
$67 per hunting day on trip-related expenditures in 2022. 
 
In addition to businesses directly affected by hunting, to the extent the bill’s Sunday 
hunting provisions result in a decrease in the deer population, the bill may also affect 
several other types of businesses, such as farms (due to a reduction in crop damage) and 
businesses that own or repair vehicles (due to a reduction in deer-vehicle collisions). 
 
The bill’s provisions allowing DNR to authorize the reduction of the deer population on 
any single, contiguous property of at least 10 acres where the department has documented 
deer damage may also benefit small business landowners experiencing economic loss from 
deer damage. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 643 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1063/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1063/ Page 6 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland 
 
 
Sunday Hunting, Generally 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited, with specified 
exceptions. Chapter 95 of 2020 reorganized and clarified statutory provisions related to 
Sunday hunting in the State. Chapter 95 also (1) explicitly stated that a person may not 
hunt on public lands within the State park system on a Sunday and (2) authorized the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to set all of the seasons for Sunday hunting. 
 
Game Birds and Mammals on Private Property and Public Land 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Allegany, Cecil, Garrett, St. Mary’s, and Washington counties during the open 
season for these animals on private property and public land designated for Sunday hunting 
by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting in Frederick County from the first Sunday in October 
through the second Sunday in January of the following year on private property and public 
land designated for Sunday hunting by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Dorchester County during the open season for these animals on private property. 
DNR also may allow Sunday turkey hunting in Dorchester County during the spring turkey 
hunting season on public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting 
may only occur from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time 
restriction does not apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from the 
first Sunday in October through the second Sunday in January, inclusive, or (2) on each 
Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Calvert, Caroline, Charles, and Queen Anne’s counties during the open season for 
these animals on private property. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season; (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season; and (3) on 
each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1063/ Page 7 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Somerset County during the open season for these animals on private property and 
public land leased to a hunt club. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Wicomico County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur 
from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not 
apply (1) on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays 
in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Worcester County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur 
from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not 
apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in 
October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
Deer on Private Property 
 
All Seasons:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in 
Carroll County in all deer hunting seasons from the first Sunday in October through the 
second Sunday in January of the following year; (2) in Kent County on each Sunday in all 
deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer 
firearms season as designated by DNR, and on each Sunday during the deer bow hunting 
season and the deer muzzle loader season); (3) in Montgomery County on each Sunday in 
all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, and on one Sunday in the 
deer firearms season and the deer bow hunting season as designated by DNR); and (4) in 
Talbot County on each Sunday in all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior 
deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer firearms season as designated by DNR, and on the 
last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer 
bow hunting season). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1063/ Page 8 
Firearms Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in  
Harford County on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) in Anne Arundel 
County on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season. 
 
Bow Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in  
Harford County on the last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in 
November of the deer bow season and (2) in Anne Arundel County on the first Sunday in 
November of the deer bow season. 
 
Turkey on Private Property 
 
DNR may allow Sunday turkey hunting on private property on Sundays during the spring 
turkey hunting season in Carroll and Kent counties and from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. in Talbot County. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Junior Hunt:  DNR may allow a person who is age 16 or younger and is participating in a 
junior hunt to hunt on a Sunday. 
 
Traditional Sunday Hunting:  DNR may allow the following persons to hunt game birds 
and mammals on a Sunday:  (1) a person using State-certified raptors to hunt game birds 
or mammals during open season for these animals; (2) an unarmed person participating in 
an organized fox chase; and (3) a person using a regulated shooting ground to hunt 
pen-reared game birds or tower-released flighted mallard ducks. 
 
Deer Management Permit Holders:  DNR may allow a person with a deer management 
permit to shoot deer on any Sunday throughout the year in accordance with the terms of 
the permit. 
 
Express Prohibitions 
 
In general, a person may not hunt on a Sunday in Baltimore City or Baltimore, Howard, or  
Prince George’s counties. This prohibition in these counties does not apply to the 
above-described acts of traditional Sunday hunting. In addition, a person with a deer 
management permit may shoot deer under the permit on a Sunday in these counties. 
Further, a person may not hunt migratory game birds on a Sunday, and a person may not 
hunt on public land within the State park system on a Sunday. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1063/ Page 9 
Background on Deer Hunting in Maryland 
 
Because white-tailed deer thrive in habitat that is composed of woods and openings and 
because hunter access in those areas is limited, suburban development has provided 
excellent deer habitat in the State. This has resulted in growing deer populations in 
suburban areas. Higher populations of deer can lead to a greater number of negative 
interactions with suburban residents, such as deer-vehicle collisions and vegetation 
damage. Deer also cause agricultural damage. 

END OF PAGE 9