START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1098 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1098 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Bankruptcy Proceedings - Exemptions From Execution - Residential Real 
Property 
 
 
This bill specifies that the exemption for owner‐occupied residential real property in 
bankruptcy proceedings includes residential real property of a settlor held in a revocable 
trust. The bill also increases the exemption amount for residential real property to 
(1) $300,000 for an individual who is at least age 60 and is either a veteran or has a 
disability, as specified and (2) $150,000 for any other individual. If multiple individuals in 
the same bankruptcy proceeding claim the exemption for the same property, the total 
exemption may not exceed $300,000. Beginning in fiscal 2028, the exemption amounts are 
adjusted annually based on changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and rounded to the 
nearest $25. The bill repeals existing provisions prohibiting repeat claims for an exemption 
of the same owner‐occupied residential real property. The bill applies prospectively to 
bankruptcy proceedings filed on or after June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, in any federal bankruptcy proceeding 
under Title 11 of the U.S. Code (the federal Bankruptcy Code), an individual debtor 
domiciled in the State may claim the statutory exemptions from execution on a money 
judgment and further exempt other specified assets. One of these specified assets is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1098/ Page 2 
owner-occupied residential real property, including a condominium unit or a manufactured 
home that has been converted to real property or a cooperative housing corporation that 
owns property that the debtor occupies as a residence. The bill adds residential real property 
of a settlor that is held in a revocable trust to this exemption. 
 
Under current law, the exemption allowed for this property may not exceed the amount 
under 11 U.S.C. § 522(d)(1), adjusted in accordance with 11 U.S.C. § 104 ($31,575 as of 
April 1, 2025). The bill repeals this provision and replaces it with a limit of (1) $300,000 for 
an individual who is at least age 60 and is a veteran or has a disability certified by a licensed 
physician that is reasonably expected to last for 12 months after the beginning of the 
bankruptcy proceeding and (2) $150,000 for any other individual. If multiple individuals 
in the same bankruptcy proceeding claim the exemption for the same property, the total 
exemption amount may not exceed $300,000. Beginning in fiscal 2028, these exemption 
amounts must be adjusted annually based on changes in CPI and rounded to the nearest 
$25. 
 
Under current law, an individual may not claim this exemption on a particular property if 
the individual or specified family members of the individual have successfully claimed an 
exemption on the property within the eight years preceding the bankruptcy filing. A 
husband and wife may not both claim an exemption on the property in the same bankruptcy 
proceeding. The bill repeals these provisions.  
 
The State has opted out of the federal bankruptcy exemptions that are similar to those 
exemptions specified above; thus, in a bankruptcy proceeding, a debtor is not entitled to 
the federal exemptions provided by § 522(d) of the federal Bankruptcy Code. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been filed within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 939 (Senator Henson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2