START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 1005

D4 6lr2567

By: ~~Delegate~~ ~~Forbes~~ Delegates Cardin, Phillips, Stinnett, Simmons, McComas,
Moreno, Taylor, Simpson, Conaway, Woods, and Williams
Introduced and read first time: February 6, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

Committee Report: Favorable with amendments
House action: Adopted
Read second time: March 2, 2026

CHAPTER ______

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Child Abuse and Neglect – Reporting
3 (Survivor Reporting Reform Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Human Services to develop a certain form
5 for the submission of a certain written report concerning suspected child abuse or
6 neglect for cases in which the victim is currently an adult; and generally relating to
7 child abuse and neglect.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Family Law
10 Section 5–704
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Family Law

16 5–704.

17 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including any law on privileged
18 communications, each health practitioner, police officer, educator, or human service

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law.
Underlining indicates amendments to bill.
~~Strike~~ ~~out~~ indicates matter stricken from the bill by amendment or deleted from the law by
amendment. *hb1005*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 1005

1 worker, acting in a professional capacity in this State who has reason to believe that a child
2 has been subjected to abuse or neglect:

3 (1) shall notify the local department or the appropriate law enforcement
4 agency; and

5 (2) if acting as a staff member of a hospital, public health agency, child care
6 institution, juvenile detention center, school, or similar institution, shall immediately
7 notify and give all information required by this section to the head of the institution or the
8 designee of the head.

9 (b) (1) An individual who notifies the appropriate authorities under subsection
10 (a) of this section shall make:

11 (i) an oral report, by telephone or direct communication, as soon as
12 possible to the local department or appropriate law enforcement agency; and

13 (ii) a written report:

14 1. to the local department not later than 48 hours after the
15 contact, examination, attention, or treatment that caused the individual to believe that the
16 child had been subjected to abuse or neglect; and

17 2. with a copy to the local State’s Attorney.

18 (2) (i) An agency to which an oral report of suspected abuse or neglect
19 is made under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall immediately notify the other agency.

20 (ii) This paragraph does not prohibit a local department and an
21 appropriate law enforcement agency from agreeing to cooperative arrangements.

22 (c) Insofar as is reasonably possible, an individual who makes a report under this
23 section shall include in the report the following information:

24 (1) the name, age, and home address of the child;

25 (2) the name and home address of the child’s parent or other person who is
26 responsible for the child’s care;

27 (3) the whereabouts of the child;

28 (4) the nature and extent of the abuse or neglect of the child, including any
29 evidence or information available to the reporter concerning possible previous instances of
30 abuse or neglect; and

31 (5) any other information that would help to determine:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 1005 3

1 (i) the cause of the suspected abuse or neglect; and

2 (ii) the identity of any individual responsible for the abuse or neglect.

3 (D) (1) ON OR BEFORE MAY 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP
4 A FORM FOR SUBMITTING THE WRITTEN REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION
5 FOR CASES IN WHICH THE INDIVIDUAL BELIEVED TO HAVE BEEN SUBJECTED TO
6 ABUSE OR NEGLECT AS A CHILD IS CURRENTLY AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD.

7 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

8 (I) CONSULT WITH HEALTH PRACTITIONERS, SURVIVORS OF
9 CHILD ABUSE, LOCAL DEPARTMENTS, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, AND THE
10 STATE’S ATTORNEY IN THE PROCESS OF DEVELOPING THE FORM UNDER
11 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

12 (II) MAKE THE FORM AVAILABLE TO INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
13 REQUIRED TO SUBMIT REPORTS OF SUSPECTED ABUSE OR NEGLECT UNDER THIS
14 SECTION.

15 (3) THE FORM SHALL:

16 (I) INCLUDE A DOCUMENT TO BE GIVEN TO THE INDIVIDUAL
17 WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF THE REPORT REGARDING HOW THE INFORMATION IN THE
18 REPORT MAY BE USED;

19 (II) REQUIRE THE INDIVIDUAL MAKING THE REPORT TO
20 DOCUMENT WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF THE REPORT
21 PREFERS THE SUSPECTED ABUSE OR NEGLECT TO BE INVESTIGATED; AND

22 (III) REQUIRE THE INDIVIDUAL MAKING THE REPORT TO
23 INCLUDE IN THE REPORT, INSOFAR AS REASONABLY POSSIBLE, THE FOLLOWING
24 INFORMATION:

25 1. THE NAME, AGE, HOME ADDRESS, AND PREFERRED
26 METHOD OF CONTACT OF THE INDIVIDUAL WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF THE REPORT;

27 2. THE NAME AND HOME ADDRESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S
28 PARENT OR OTHER PERSON WHO WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE INDIVIDUAL’S CARE
29 AT THE TIME OF THE SUSPECTED ABUSE OR NEGLECT;

30 3. THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE ABUSE OR NEGLECT
31 OF THE INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING ANY EVIDENCE OR INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 1005

1 THE REPORTER CONCERNING POSSIBLE PREVIOUS INSTANCES OF ABUSE OR
2 NEGLECT; AND

3 4. ANY INFORMATION, IF KNOWN AT THE TIME OF THE
4 REPORT, REGARDING WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL WHO IS SUSPECTED OF ABUSE OR
5 NEGLECT CURRENTLY HAS ACCESS TO ANY CHILDREN; AND

6 4. 5. ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT WOULD HELP TO
7 DETERMINE THE IDENTITY OF ANY INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ABUSE OR
8 NEGLECT.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
10 October 1, 2026.

Approved:

________________________________________________________________________________
Governor.

________________________________________________________________________________
Speaker of the House of Delegates.

________________________________________________________________________________
President of the Senate.
END OF PAGE 4