START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1031 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1031 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Law Enforcement - Use of Force - National Guard Members 
 
 
This bill prohibits a National Guard member from using force against a person unless, 
under the totality of the circumstances, the force is necessary and proportional to  
(1) prevent an imminent threat of physical injury to a person or (2) effectuate a legitimate 
law enforcement objective. A National Guard member must cease the use of force as soon 
as (1) the person on whom the force is used is under the National Guard member’s control 
or no longer poses an imminent threat of physical injury or death to the National Guard 
member or to another person or (2) the National Guard member determines that force will 
no longer accomplish a legitimate law enforcement objective. A National Guard member 
may not intentionally violate the prohibition and requirements described above resulting in 
serious physical injury or death to a person; a National Guard member who does so is guilty 
of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years. A 
sentence imposed under the bill may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent 
with a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing a violation. Finally, the bill 
establishes several requirements for a National Guard member relating to use of force. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential increase in general fund expenditures, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1031/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A National Guard member must: 
 
 
when time, circumstances, and safety allow, take steps to gain compliance and de-
escalate conflict without using physical force; 
 
intervene to prevent or terminate the use of force by another National Guard member 
beyond what is authorized under the bill; 
 
render basic first aid to a person injured as a result of National Guard action and 
promptly request appropriate medical assistance; and 
 
fully document all use of force incidents that the National Guard member observed 
or was involved in. 
 
“National Guard member” means a member of the National Guard supporting operations 
or missions in the State at the request of the President of the United States or the 
Secretary of Defense of the United States, as specified. 
 
“Serious physical injury” means physical injury that (1) creates a substantial risk of death 
or (2) causes permanent or protracted serious disfigurement, loss of the function of any 
bodily member or organ, or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
 
Current Law:  A member of the National Guard has the same police power, authority, and 
status with respect to the enforcement of the law relating to criminal matters in the military 
area to which the member is assigned, as a law enforcement or peace officer has in the 
officer’s respective jurisdiction if (1) the Adjutant General designates the member as 
National Guard full-time support personnel under Title 32 of the U. S. Code; (2) the 
Military Department controls or has jurisdiction over the member; and (3) the member is 
acting as a National Guard member. A member of the National Guard has the immunities 
and defenses available to a law enforcement or peace officer in a criminal proceeding or 
civil suit brought because of an act performed in the course of employment and duty under 
these provisions. 
 
Chapter 60 of 2021, among other things, established the Maryland Use of Force Statute, 
which establishes requirements regarding a police officer’s use of force; requires a police 
officer to sign an affirmative written sanctity of life pledge to respect every human life and 
act with compassion toward others; requires a law enforcement agency to adopt specified 
policies; and requires a police officer to undergo specified training. The statute applies to 
police officers and special police officers. 
 
A police officer may not use force against a person unless, under the totality of the 
circumstances, the force is necessary and proportional to prevent an imminent threat of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1031/ Page 3 
physical injury to a person or effectuate a legitimate law enforcement objective. A police 
officer must cease the use of force as soon as (1) the person on whom the force is used is 
under the police officer’s control or no longer poses an imminent threat of physical injury 
or death to the police officer or to another person or (2) the police officer determines that 
force will no longer accomplish a legitimate law enforcement objective. A police officer 
who intentionally violates the prohibitions on use of force that results in serious physical 
injury or death to a person is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up 
to 10 years. A sentence imposed for a conviction may be separate from and consecutive to 
or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing a violation. 
 
Also, a police officer must (1) when time, circumstances, and safety allow, take steps to 
gain compliance and de-escalate conflict without using physical force; (2) intervene to 
prevent or terminate the use of force by another police officer beyond the authorized use 
of force described above; (3) render basic first aid to a person injured as a result of police 
action and promptly request appropriate medical assistance; and (4) fully document all use 
of force incidents that the officer observed or was involved in. 
 
A police supervisor must respond to the scene of any incident during which a police officer 
used physical force and caused serious physical injury and gather and review all known 
video recordings of a use of force incident. A law enforcement agency must have a written 
de-escalation of force policy and adopt a written policy requiring supervisory and 
command-level review of all use of force incidents. 
 
A police officer must (1) undergo training on when a police officer may or may not draw 
a firearm or point a firearm at a person and enforcement options that are less likely to cause 
death or serious physical injury, including scenario-based training, de-escalation tactics 
and techniques, and reasonable alternatives to decrease physical injury and (2) sign a 
training completion document stating that the officer understands and must comply with 
the Maryland Use of Force Statute. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Military Department advises that the bill likely results in a 
significant increase in general fund expenditures for additional pay and allowances related 
to training for approximately 6,000 National Guard members and the need for civil 
disturbance gear for all members. The Department of Legislative Services acknowledges 
that additional training for National Guard members may be necessary but cannot 
independently verify the magnitude of any increase in general fund expenditures at this 
time.  
 
The bill’s criminal penalty provision is not anticipated to materially affect State 
expenditures. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1031/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Commission on 
Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Military 
Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4