START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1001 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1001 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Local Board of Elections Employees - Authority at Polling Places 
 
 
This bill provides a local board of elections employee with authority at a polling place 
similar to the authority of election judges, including by authorizing a local board of 
elections employee, while serving in a polling place, to (1) keep the peace and (2) order 
the arrest of any person who breaches the peace, breaches any provision of the Election 
Law Article, or interferes with the work of election judges. A police officer who is on duty 
at a polling place must obey the order of a local board employee and is fully protected in 
making any arrest under such an order as if acting pursuant to a valid warrant. The bill also 
provides a local board employee authority to protect the rights of, and manage the access 
and conduct of, challengers and watchers in the polling place, similar to the authority of 
election judges. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes a local board of elections employee, while serving in 
a polling place, to (1) keep the peace and (2) order the arrest of any person who breaches 
the peace, breaches any provision of the Election Law Article, or interferes with the work 
of the election judges in conducting the election and carrying out their assigned tasks. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1001/ Page 2 
The bill also authorizes a local board employee to protect a challenger or watcher in the 
exercise of their rights. A local board employee is not required to admit a challenger or 
watcher to a polling place before the polls open if the challenger or watcher was not present 
at the polling place at least 30 minutes before its opening. A local board employee may 
require challengers and watchers to leave a polling place before it opens if the local board 
employee has reason to believe that the presence of the challengers and watchers will 
prevent the timely opening of the polling place. 
 
The bill establishes that a local board employee may exercise the above authority 
independent of an election judge assigned to the polling place. 
 
A police officer who is on duty at a polling place must obey the order of a local board 
employee and is fully protected in making an arrest under such an order as if the officer 
received a valid warrant to make the arrest. 
 
The bill authorizes a local board employee to eject a challenger or watcher who violates 
specified prohibitions related to actions by a challenger or watcher. A local board employee 
may limit the number of nonaccredited challengers and watchers allowed in the polling 
place at any one time for the purpose of challenging the right of an individual to vote. A 
nonaccredited challenger or watcher must leave the polling place as soon as a local board 
employee decides the right to vote of the individual challenged by the challenger or 
watcher. 
 
Current Law:  A police officer on duty at a polling place must obey the order of an election 
judge at the polling place and is fully protected in making an arrest under an order of an 
election judge as if the officer had received a valid arrest warrant. A police officer on duty 
must also protect a challenger or watcher in the discharge of the challenger or watcher’s 
duties. 
 
State law allows for challengers and watchers who are registered voters and designated by 
SBE, a local board, a candidate, a political party, or any other group of voters supporting 
or opposing a candidate, principle, or proposition on the ballot to be present at a polling 
place. A person’s right to vote may only be challenged on the basis of their identity. 
 
Challengers and watchers may enter a polling place a half hour before polls open and 
remain in the polling place until the polls are closed and election judges leave the polling 
place. A challenger or watcher may not attempt to (1) ascertain how a voter voted or intends 
to vote; (2) converse in the polling place with any voter; (3) assist any voter in voting; or 
(4) physically handle an original election document. An election judge may eject a 
challenger or watcher who violates any of those prohibitions. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1001/ Page 3 
An election judge may permit an individual who is not an accredited challenger or watcher 
to enter the polling place to challenge a voter, after which the individual must leave the 
polling place. A majority of election judges may limit the number of nonaccredited 
challengers and watchers allowed in the polling place at any one time and all restrictions 
on the actions of an accredited challenger or watcher apply to a nonaccredited challenger 
or watcher. A nonaccredited challenger or watcher must leave the polling place as soon as 
a majority of the election judges decides the right to vote of the individual challenged by 
the challenger or watcher. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 670 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, and Garrett 
counties; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3