START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1070 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1070 
(Delegate Smith) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Department of Social and Economic Mobility - Workforce Opportunities Grant 
Program and Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workforce Opportunities Grant Program and associated special 
fund in the Department of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) to provide grants to 
support the planning and execution of workforce events and job fairs in the State that 
connect job seekers with employers. Subject to the availability of funding, DoSEM must 
establish an application process to award grants on a competitive basis, as specified. For 
each of fiscal 2028 through 2030, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of at least $500,000 for the fund. DoSEM must submit a report with specified 
information on the program to the Governor and General Assembly annually beginning 
January 1, 2028. The bill terminates September 30, 2031. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in FY 2028 through 2030 
to capitalize the Workforce Opportunities Grant Fund. Correspondingly, special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase by $500,000 in FY 2028 through 2030. DoSEM can 
implement the bill with existing resources. General fund revenues increase minimally from 
interest earnings of the new special fund in FY 2028. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation for FY 2028 through 2030. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1070/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Revenues increase for local workforce development boards (LWDBs) that 
are also a unit of local government for FY 2028 to 2030 to the extent such boards are 
awarded grants under the program. Expenditures for authorized uses of grant funds 
accordingly increase for such LWDBs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Workforce Opportunities Grant Program 
 
Subject to the availability of funding for the program, DoSEM must award grants on a 
competitive basis to nonprofit organizations, local workforce board, and partnerships that 
include employers, community organizations and other stakeholders that meet specified 
criteria. Grant funds may be used for outreach, logistics, venues, support services, staffing, 
and event coordination. 
 
Workforce Opportunities Grant Fund 
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund overseen and administered by DoSEM that is not 
subject to reversion. The State Treasurer must invest money of the fund in the same manner 
as other State money is invested. Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the 
fund. Expenditures from the fund may only be made in accordance with the State budget. 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, 
and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
The fund may be used only for grant purposes, and expenditures from the fund may be 
made only in accordance with the State budget. For each of fiscal 2028 through 2030, the 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of at least $500,000 for 
the fund. 
 
Reporting 
 
DoSEM must submit a report on the program to the Governor and General Assembly 
annually beginning January 1, 2028. The report must include the (1) the number and 
location of events held using grant funds awarded under the program; (2) the number of 
employers and job seekers participating in events supported by grant funds awarded under 
the program; and (3) data on job placements and hires resulting from events supported by 
grant funds awarded under the program. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1070/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Department of Social and Economic Mobility 
 
Chapter 605 of 2025 established DoSEM as a principal department in the 
Executive Branch. The head of DoSEM is the Secretary of Social and Economic Mobility, 
who is appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. DoSEM 
consists of three units:  (corresponding to three offices transferred to the new department):  
(1) the Office of Minority Business Enterprises (still referred to as OMBE) from the 
Maryland Department of Transportation; (2) the Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (OSBA); and (3) the Office of Social Equity (still referred to as OSE) 
from the Maryland Cannabis Administration. The purpose of DoSEM is to:   
 
 
provide support for units of State government, individuals, and businesses for the 
maintenance of social equity policies in the State;  
 
monitor trends in social equity programs and policies across the nation;  
 
propose new and innovative approaches to social equity programs; 
 
compile and produce reports and recommendations related to social equity;  
 
ensure the fulfillment of the roles and responsibilities of the entities and social 
equity programs in the State for which it is the successor;  
 
track the performance of social equity programs and small or disadvantaged 
business assistance programs;  
 
promote and encourage full participation in the regulated cannabis industry by 
individuals from communities that have previously been disproportionately 
impacted by the war on drugs, as specified;  
 
support small or disadvantaged businesses in the State through all duties assigned 
to OSBA; and  
 
carry out OMBE’s duties, including duties assigned to support small or 
disadvantaged businesses. 
 
Chapter 605 also creates the DoSEM Special Fund; the purpose of the fund is to pay the 
costs of the operation of OSE and OMBE in the department. The Governor must include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation from the Transportation Trust Fund to the fund 
equal to the amount needed to cover OMBE’s operating and administrative expenses. Also, 
revenues collected from the sales and use tax imposed on the sale of adult-use cannabis 
must be deposited into the fund in an amount necessary to cover OSE’s operating and 
administrative expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1070/ Page 4 
Local Workforce Development Boards 
 
LWDBs are mandated under the federal Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act 
(WIOA), with local employers making up a majority of the members of each board. 
Maryland has 13 regional LWDBs serving all 24 counties, including Baltimore City; 
although most LWDBs operate independently, some are administered by local 
governments. Primarily through more than 30 American Job Centers located throughout 
the State, LWDBs offer basic career services (e.g., job search assistance); individualized 
career services (e.g., training in interviewing skills); and referrals to more industry specific 
training (e.g., apprenticeships or technical classroom training). Priority is given to people 
with barriers to employment, as defined by WIOA. Some services target youth, returning 
citizens, and veterans.  
 
The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) advises that the agency works closely 
with Maryland’s 13 LWDBs to ensure strong outreach to businesses that foster jobseeker 
connections. MD Labor further advises that co-planning and hosting job fairs is a regular 
part of the department’s existing programming, as is competitive grantmaking.  
 
State Revenues:  Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the new special fund 
remain in the fund, the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024) which requires, notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds or accounts (with certain 
exceptions) accrue to the general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund 
revenues increase from interest earnings of the new special fund in fiscal 2028. The fund 
is exempted from a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article that applies beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are part of eligible partnerships may receive 
grant funds for authorized workforce opportunity activities. Small businesses that do not 
directly receive grant funding may also benefit from any connections the grant program 
makes between job seekers and small business employers. 
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 539 (Senator Smith) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1070/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Social 
and Economic Mobility; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5