START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1015 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1015 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Services - Eligibility for Recently 
Relocated Individuals (Ralph's Act) 
 
 
This bill specifies that certain individuals who received home- and community-based 
waiver services (HCBS) or similar services in another state must be eligible to receive such 
services from the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). MDH must establish an 
expedited process to determine whether an individual is eligible to receive services. The 
determination must be completed within 30 days. If an individual is determined eligible, 
the individual must be placed in the crisis resolution category and given access to waiver 
services through the most appropriate reserve category as determined based on the services 
the individual received in their previous state of residence. MDH may determine, before 
an individual establishes residency in the State (1) whether an individual is eligible to 
receive services; (2) the appropriate service priority category; and (3) whether the 
individual is eligible for crisis resolution services.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Even though MDH operations are affected, the department may be able to 
handle approvals with existing resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not likely 
affected.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An individual must be eligible to receive services from MDH if:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1015/ Page 2 
 
the individual (1) is a dependent of an immediate family member; (2) received 
HCBS or services under a similar assistance program in another state for the 
immediately preceding 10 years; and (3) moved to the State to live with the 
immediate family member on the death or incapacitation of the individual’s 
caretaker in the other state; and 
 
the immediate family member has resided in the State for the immediately preceding 
two years.  
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to Title 7 of the Human Services Article, “services” means 
residential, day, or other services that provide for evaluation, diagnosis, treatment, care, 
supervision, assistance, or attention to individuals with developmental disability and that 
promote habilitation of these individuals.  
 
Medicaid Waiver Programs  
 
The Development Disabilities Administration (DDA), within MDH, provides self-directed 
services through three special Medicaid waiver programs known as the Medicaid HCBS 
programs, including the Family Supports, Community Supports, and Community Pathways 
waivers. Medicaid waiver programs allow states to make exceptions to specified rules and 
enable services to be provided in different settings that are tailored to individuals with 
different needs or varying income levels. For those who qualify, the waiver programs offer 
services within the community as an alternative to receiving services in an institution. 
Applicants must meet specific technical, medical, and financial criteria to receive services.  
 
A participant in self-directed DDA services works with a coordinator of community 
services to identify needs and preferences and identify an allocated budget amount. A 
participant develops a self-directed budget for services authorized in their person-centered 
plan. Participants then select staff or vendors and arrange for services and supports as 
authorized in the person-centered plan. 
 
Eligibility Determination 
 
To be eligible for individual support services, an individual must have a severe chronic 
disability that (1) is attributable to a physical or mental impairment, other than the sole 
diagnosis of mental illness, or to a combination of mental and physical impairments and 
(2) is likely to continue indefinitely. 
 
An applicant for services provided or funded, wholly or partly, by the State must apply to 
MDH in writing. Within 60 days after MDH receives the application, the Secretary must:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1015/ Page 3 
 
determine whether there is a reasonable likelihood that the individual has a 
developmental disability or does not have a developmental disability, but may be 
eligible for individual support services; and 
 
if it is determined that an individual is eligible for support services, then (1) approve 
the application; (2) determine the nature of the disability; (3) determine the nature 
of services that the individual may require; (4) determine the type of environment 
in which any needed services could be provided with the least restriction on the 
liberty of the individual; (5) determine what types of evaluations, if any, the 
individual requires; (6) inform the individual of these determinations; and (7) inform 
the individual that these determinations are preliminary and may be subject to 
modification as a result of further evaluation. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.22.12.06), upon determination of eligibility, 
DDA must send a letter to the applicant notifying the individual of the decision regarding 
the applicant’s eligibility, service needs, priorities, and right to an informal hearing. 
 
Pursuant to COMAR 10.22.12.07, DDA must base the recommendation regarding service 
priority on the determination that the individual meets the criteria for one or more of the 
following categories, which are listed in the order of priority in which applicants must 
receive services:  (1) category 1, crisis resolution; (2) category 2, crisis prevention; and 
(3) category 3, current request. 
 
To qualify for the crisis resolution category, the applicant must meet one or more of the 
following criteria:  
 
 
homeless or living in temporary housing with clear time-limited ability to continue 
to live in this setting with no viable non-DDA-funded alternative; 
 
at serious risk of physical harm in the current environment, as specified; 
 
at serious risk of causing physical harm to others in the current environment; 
 
in danger of losing DDA-funded residential services because of a lack of current 
day services; 
 
one who has lost DDA-funded day services, as specified; or 
 
living with a caregiver who is unable to provide adequate care due to the caregiver’s 
impaired health, which may place the applicant at risk of serious physical harm. 
 
Waiver Program Waitlists 
 
Chapter 464 of 2022 required MDH to, among other things, develop plans to reduce the 
waitlists for seven specified waiver programs (including Family Supports, Community 
Supports, and Community Pathways waivers) by 50%, beginning in fiscal 2024. In 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1015/ Page 4 
February 2023, MDH reported plans, and the funding required, to reduce the waitlist and 
registries for several waiver programs by fiscal 2028.  
 
In the November 2023 report submitted pursuant to the 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report, 
MDH indicated that each DDA waiver offers enrollment to a fixed number of people each 
year, set to reflect the available funding in the annual State budget. Once enrolled in a 
waiver, an individual occupies a “slot,” or a unique placement in the waiver, until they no 
longer meet the program’s eligibility requirements. Therefore, annually, a majority of 
overall slots are used by individuals carried forward from an enrollment in the previous 
fiscal year. DDA waiver program eligibility and reserve categories have been regularly 
amended to use resources with maximum efficiency and reach the most participants 
possible. Moreover, reserve capacity categories help to provide added flexibility in the 
function of the DDA’s waiver programs in a resource-constrained environment. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, MDH must establish an expedited process (to be 
completed within 30 days) to determine whether an individual relocating to the State is 
eligible to receive specified DDA services. MDH may determine, before an individual 
establishes residency in the State, whether an individual is eligible to receive services, the 
appropriate service priority category, and eligibility for crisis resolution services.  
 
MDH advises that establishing and implementing an expedited review process under the 
bill places additional administrative burden on an already understaffed Office of Eligibility 
Services, which impacts timely eligibility determinations for current Maryland residents 
and worsens current system backlogs. MDH asserts that the bill requires development of 
new policies, procedures, and requirements, all of which will require approval from the 
federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) as these waiver programs 
operate under federal authority. MDH also advises that additional staff is needed to ensure 
current pending cases are not adversely affected. 
 
Nevertheless, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that, as the bill likely 
applies in a very limited number of cases, MDH can likely use existing resources to handle 
obtaining CMS approval and process, on an expedited basis, any such applications. This 
redirection of resources may delay processing of other applications. If, however, the 
availability of the expedited approval spurs more applications, including for those who 
cannot meet the eligibility criteria, another position is needed – at a cost of approximately 
$80,000 on an annual basis, with those costs shared equally between general and 
federal funds.  
 
Waitlist Impacts 
 
MDH advises that the bill may negatively impact current Maryland residents on the waitlist 
for DDA services. More specifically, an individual who may qualify for the crisis 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1015/ Page 5 
resolution category under the bill may receive services before an individual who has been 
waiting for services in the crisis prevention or current request category. DLS notes that it 
is unclear how many out-of-State individuals may seek services in Maryland, or how many 
of these individuals may be determined eligible for services under the bill. However, the 
limitations on eligibility likely significantly limit the number of individuals who could 
qualify.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 721 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5