START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1048 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1048 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Chain Restaurants - Sodium and Added Sugars Warning Icons 
and Disclosure and Notice 
 
 
This bill requires each “chain restaurant,” beginning January 1, 2027, to display on each 
menu or menu board (1) alongside each “standard menu item” with at least  
1,150 milligrams or more of sodium per serving or at least 25 grams of added sugar  
per serving, respectively, a “high sodium content” or “high added sugars content” warning 
icon and related text; and (2) a written disclosure and notice to customers that standard 
menu items may contain high sodium or high sugar and full nutritional information is 
available through a QR Code, online, or by request. By January 1, 2027, the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must adopt regulations to (1) establish a high sodium content 
warning icon, high added sugars content warning icon, and accompanying text;  
(2) establish a minimum size for each warning icon that is at least as large as the largest 
text character used in the name of the menu item alongside which the icon will be 
displayed; and (3) implement the bill. Concurrent with the adoption of regulations, MDH 
must publish guidance on its website that details the purpose of the bill and how a restaurant 
may comply. During calendar 2027, MDH must direct chain restaurants to its website for 
this guidance. The bill also establishes penalties for violations. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can adopt regulations, train local health department (LHD) inspectors, 
and direct restaurants to its website using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  LHDs can inspect chain restaurants’ menus during the standard inspection 
process using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1048/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
“Chain restaurant” means a food service facility that is (1) part of a chain with 20 or more 
locations doing business under the same name, regardless of ownership structure, and 
offering for sale substantially similar menu items and (2) subject to specified federal 
labeling requirements. 
 
“High added sugars content” means 25 grams or more of added sugars per serving. “High 
sodium content” means 1,150 milligrams or more of sodium per serving. 
 
“Standard menu item” means a food or beverage item that is listed on a menu or menu 
board. It does not include a food or beverage item that appears on a menu or menu board 
for less than 60 calendar days per year.  
 
Icons, Accompanying Text, and Written Disclosure 
 
For a high sodium content warning, the following text must be prominently, clearly, and 
conspicuously displayed at the point of selection:  “The high sodium content warning icon 
indicates a menu item with a sodium (salt) content that exceeds half the total daily 
recommended limit. Diets higher in sodium are associated with an increased risk of 
developing high blood pressure, which is a major cause of heart disease and stroke.” 
 
For a high added sugars content warning, the following text must be prominently, clearly, 
and conspicuously displayed at the point of selection:  “The high added sugars content 
warning icon indicates a menu item with sugar content that exceeds half the total daily 
recommended limit. Diets with higher amounts of added sugars over time may increase the 
risk of Type 2 diabetes, weight gain, and tooth decay.” 
 
A chain restaurant may comply with the written disclosure requirement by making the full 
nutritional information of the food or beverage item available (1) through use of a QR code 
that links to the restaurant’s online nutritional information and (2) on request of a customer, 
in any printed format. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1048/ Page 3 
Penalties 
 
A person who violates the bill is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to: 
(1) for a first offense, a fine of up to $500, and (2) for a subsequent offense, a fine of up to 
$1,000. 
 
Current Law:  “Food service facility” means (1) a place where food or drink is prepared 
for sale or service on the premises or elsewhere or (2) any operation where food is served 
to or provided for the public, with or without charge.   
 
A food establishment other than a cottage food business that violates any provision of 
Subtitle 3 of the Health-General Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is 
subject to (1) for a first offense, a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
90 days and (2) for a second offense, a fine of up to $2,500 and/or imprisonment for up to 
one year. The food establishment is also liable for a civil penalty of up to $5,000 and may 
be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
 
Chapters 251 and 252 of 2013 require food establishments to display a poster related to 
food allergies, as designed and made available by MDH. There are currently no State or 
federal laws requiring food establishments to display warnings of high added sugar or 
sodium content.  
 
Under federal law (21 U.S.C. § 343), a restaurant or similar food establishment that is part 
of a chain with at least 20 locations must generally disclose in a clear and conspicuous 
manner, either on the menu board or adjacent to the name of the standard menu item, (1) the 
number of calories in a standard menu item and (2) based on suggested daily caloric intake 
and in the context of a total daily diet, the significance of the caloric information provided 
on the menu. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent a chain restaurant is owned by a small business 
franchisee, they must comply with the bill or be subject to penalties for noncompliance.  
 
Additional Comments:  The cities of Philadelphia and New York City both require chain 
restaurants to include sodium warnings on menu items that contain more than the adult 
daily value (2,300 milligrams) of sodium. New York City also requires chain restaurants 
to include an icon on their menus next to any item that contains at least 50 grams or more 
of added sugars. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1048/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 866 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Association of 
County Health Officers; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
Third Reader - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4