START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1081 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1081 
(Delegates Korman and Edelson) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Transit Administration Reform Act 
 
   
This bill makes changes to the structure, authority, and responsibilities of the Maryland 
Transit Administration (MTA) with respect to procurement law, oversight of MTA 
operations by boards and commissions, and tort liability. Additionally, MTA must contract 
with the Baltimore Metropolitan Council (BMC) to complete a technical study regarding 
the creation of a rail authority, as specified. The bill also proposes a constitutional 
amendment to authorize “quick-take” condemnation authority for MTA, or a successor 
State agency, and clarifies that the authority applies to the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), or a successor State agency, instead of the State Roads Commission (SRC). 
Contingent on the enactment of the constitutional amendment, the bill also (1) establishes 
procedures and processes that must be followed by MTA when it seeks to condemn 
property for a transit purpose using “quick-take” authority and (2) modifies the related 
responsibilities for local boards of property review.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The overall effect on Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures cannot 
be estimated, as there are many unknowns; even so, the net effect is anticipated to be a 
decrease in TTF expenditures, as discussed below. Known TTF expenditures for staffing 
and the required study increase by a net of $319,500 in FY 2027; future year net increases 
range from $210,500 in FY 2028 to $310,100 in FY 2031. Revenues are not directly 
affected.  
 
Local Effect:  It is anticipated that the bill’s requirements for local boards of property 
review can be handled using existing budgeted resources. Otherwise, local government 
operations and finances are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1081/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Broadly, the bill: 
 
 
exempts certain MTA projects from State procurement law;  
 
requires the Maryland Transportation Commission (MTC) to make qualification 
and compensation determinations for certain MTA employees; 
 
repeals the Baltimore Regional Transit Commission (BRTC) established by  
Chapter 504 of 2023 and, instead, establishes two new oversight boards (for 
Baltimore area transit and commuter service, respectively) with similar duties and 
responsibilities; 
 
establishes minimum staffing requirements for the two new oversight boards; 
 
specifies that the liability of MTA as to a tort action may not exceed $400,000 to a 
single claimant for injuries arising from a single incident or occurrence; 
 
requires MTA to contract with BMC to complete a technical study by  
December 1, 2026, regarding the creation of a rail authority, as specified;  
 
proposes a constitutional amendment to expand the “quick-take” condemnation 
authority to MTA and clarifies that the existing “quick-take” authority applies to 
SHA, instead of SRC; and 
 
contingent on the enactment of the constitutional amendment, (1) establishes 
various procedures for MTA to follow when it seeks to condemn property for a 
transit purpose using “quick-take” authority and (2) specifies that the 
responsibilities of local boards of property review also apply when MTA seeks to 
condemn property.  
 
The following sections include additional detail about each of the bill’s requirements.  
 
Procurement Law Exemption  
 
Division II of the State Finance and Procurement Article does not apply to MTA capital 
construction projects on existing and defined fixed guideway systems. Division II 
encompasses State procurement law, which generally assigns oversight authority over 
Executive Branch procurement to the Board of Public Works (BPW), promotes the use of 
competitive procurement processes, and requires that various preferences and conditions 
are factored into solicitations and contract awards. However, existing provisions that 
require units of State government exempt from Division II to have written policies and 
procedures for their exempted procurements also apply to MTA’s procurements under the 
bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1081/ Page 3 
Maryland Transportation Commission – Staffing Requirements  
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, MTC must determine the qualifications and 
appointments, as well as compensation and leave, for up to 12 management personnel 
positions required by MTA to operate and administer all State-owned transit facilities. In 
making the determinations and appointments, MTC must consider the comparative status 
of employees serving in similar positions and discharging similar duties at comparable 
transit agencies, as specified. The bill establishes administrative processes for MTC to 
submit any salary increases to the Secretary of Budget and Management for review, as 
specified. 
 
MTC employees appointed under the bill are State employees and must be entitled to 
participate in the retirement and pension systems for State employees.  
 
Baltimore Regional Transit Commission Repeal and New Oversight Boards 
 
The bill repeals BRTC and, instead, establishes the Board of Directors for Baltimore Core 
Transit Service and the Commuter Services Advisory Board, both in MTA, to generally 
oversee the transit services provided by MTA. The duties and responsibilities of BRTC are 
generally covered by the new duties and responsibilities established for the two boards. A 
more thorough discussion of each board’s duties and responsibilities is included below; 
however, for both boards, MTA must:  
 
 
reallocate its staff to ensure sufficient support for the boards; and  
 
at a minimum, establish (1) a separate deputy administrator and an analyst for each 
board and (2) a support officer to be shared between the boards.  
 
 
Board of Directors for Baltimore Core Transit Service 
 
The Board of Directors for Baltimore Core Transit Service is established in MTA; 
“Baltimore Core Transit Service” means MTA’s Baltimore-area local bus, light rail, 
metro‑subway, and paratransit. The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) and 
MTA must provide staff for the board, including a deputy administrator who must serve as 
the Executive Director and report directly to the MTA Administrator. MTA must provide 
office space for the board. A member of the board may not receive compensation as a 
member but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The bill establishes various duties, 
responsibilities, and administrative requirements for the board, including that the board 
must: 
 
 
approve major service plans, policies, and initiatives for Baltimore Core Transit 
Service and provide advice on major project initiatives, as determined by the board 
and MTA on a reasonable basis; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1081/ Page 4 
 
review and approve MTA’s operating and capital budget requests for Baltimore 
Core Transit Service and establish, in consultation with MDOT and MTA, a 
timeline for review and approval that meets specified requirements; 
 
have approval authority over specified decisions related to federal grant funding; 
 
provide input and engage in advocacy for Baltimore Core Transit Service; 
 
request, review, and evaluate specified performance data and information from 
MTA, and issue related written recommendations; 
 
review and/or approve various reports, plans, and services, as specified;  
 
organize, establish, and adopt various administrative policies and procedures; 
 
submit an annual report on system performance, trends, major projects, and other 
activities to specified committees of the General Assembly, make the report 
available to the general public, and ensure that the report is readily available on 
MTA’s website; 
 
discuss certain issues at least once each year, as specified; and 
 
meet at a time and place designated by the chair and meet as often as its duties 
require, but not less than quarterly. 
 
 
Commuter Services Advisory Board 
 
The Commuter Services Advisory Board is also established in MTA; “commuter service” 
means MARC train service and MTA’s commuter bus service. MDOT and MTA must 
provide staff for the board, including a deputy administrator who must serve as  
Executive Director and report directly to the MTA Administrator. MTA must provide 
office space for the board. A member of the board may not receive compensation as a 
member but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The board must: 
 
 
provide advice and guidance on MARC and commuter bus plans and policies; 
 
review and comment on major MARC and commuter bus service plans and updates; 
 
provide advice and guidance on the hiring and removal of the deputy administrator; 
 
review and comment on MTA’s operating and capital budget requests for MARC 
and commuter bus service and establish, in consultation with MDOT and MTA, a 
timeline for review and comment that meets specified requirements;  
 
submit an annual report on system performance, trends, major projects, and other 
activities to specified committees of the General Assembly, make the report 
available to the general public, and ensure that the report is readily available on 
MTA’s website; and  
 
meet at a time and place designated by the chair and meet as often as its duties 
require, but not less than quarterly. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1081/ Page 5 
Technical Study 
 
MDOT must contract with BMC to complete a technical study by December 1, 2026, that: 
 
 
provides findings and considerations on the creation of a rail authority in Maryland, 
with the intent that this rail authority would be focused on financing for rail services;  
 
examines peer models that may provide insight for the findings and considerations, 
including models in the Commonwealth of Virginia and Austin, Texas;  
 
provides potential next steps to consider in the creation of a rail authority in 
Maryland; and  
 
ensures that current rail transit services remain under MTA and that funding options 
for a statewide rail authority do not undermine future financial support for  
Baltimore Core Transit Services.  
 
BMC may consult with the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments in 
completing the technical study.  
 
Constitutional Amendment – Condemnation Authority  
 
The bill proposes a constitutional amendment to modify the “quick-take” condemnation 
authority granted by the Maryland Constitution by (1) expanding the authority to MTA, or 
a successor State agency; (2) clarifying that the authority applies for SHA instead of SRC; 
and (3) clarifying that other related requirements specified by the Maryland Constitution 
apply to SHA, MTA, or any respective State agencies.  
 
Contingent on the enactment of the constitutional amendment, the bill establishes two sets 
of procedures and processes for MTA to follow when it seeks to condemn property for a 
transit purpose using the “quick-take” authority. If MTA considers the first set of 
procedures inappropriate, MTA may (1) use the second set of procedures, after making 
every reasonable and good faith effort to negotiate or (2) use the standard condemnation 
process required under current law.  
 
Broadly, the first set of procedures includes specifications related to planning and studies, 
the submission and filing of records with various State government entities, including the 
courts, the development of plats and property value estimates, and step-by-step processes 
for MTA to provide for payment and take possession of the property being condemned. 
The second set of procedures more directly specifies that, to condemn property, MTA must 
only file a petition for condemnation in the court for the county in which the property to be 
acquired is located and make the appropriate payment to the property owner. After the 
petition is filed and payment is made, MTA may take possession of the property and 
proceed with construction without interference by the owner. Condemnation proceedings 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1081/ Page 6 
under the second set of procedures must otherwise follow the standard condemnation 
procedures set forth in current law. 
 
Local Boards of Property Review 
 
Contingent on the enactment of the constitutional amendment, the responsibilities for local 
boards of property review are expanded with respect to the boards’ responsibilities during 
“quick-take” condemnations. Specifically, the boards must:  
 
 
determine the fair value of the property to be acquired by MTA when it uses the 
procedures specified above; 
 
promptly hear all cases certified to it by MTA; and 
 
determine the total amount of the award that must be paid by MTA.  
 
Additionally, on request of a board, MTA must provide a local board of property review 
with clerical assistance, as specified.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Transit Administration – Reorganization   
 
MTA is a modal unit within MDOT, and it operates a comprehensive transit system 
throughout the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus 
lines in Baltimore and other services, such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, 
commuter buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Aside from the  
District of Columbia transit system, MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies 
responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
Chapter 462 of 2025 established the Workgroup on the Reorganization of MTA to study 
the potential for reorganizing MDOT and MTA, including (1) options allowing MTA to 
continue providing local Baltimore City transit services, including light rail, subway, and 
bus services and the creation of a new unit or reorganization of the Office of the Secretary 
to provide statewide transit services; (2) the current contractual obligations and agreements 
of MTA and the necessary steps to transfer the obligations and agreements in the event of 
a reorganization of MDOT and MTA; and (3) the governance changes to MTA necessary 
to ensure that Baltimore City has the appropriate oversight and input into local 
Baltimore City transit service.  
 
The bill implements several of the recommendations included in the workgroup’s interim 
report, which can be found on MTA’s website. Chapter 462 requires the workgroup to 
submit a final report to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2026. By 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1081/ Page 7 
that same date, the workgroup must also submit to the Speaker of the House and the 
President of the Senate draft legislation to effectuate the workgroup’s recommendations.  
 
Maryland Transportation Commission 
 
Established in 1971, MTC is comprised of 17 members:  10 members appointed by the 
Governor with the advice of the Secretary of Transportation and the 7 regional members 
of SRC who serve as ex officio members. MTC meets monthly; a summary of its meetings 
and activities can be found on MDOT’s website.  
 
MTC must study the entire transportation system of the State and regularly discuss with 
the Secretary any matter relating to the State’s transportation system. Each of the 
seven regional members of SRC must (1) conduct a continuing survey of the 
secondary highways in that member’s region and (2) report on the highway needs and 
problems of that region to MTC. MTC may request from the Secretary any information 
relating to MDOT that is needed for MTC’s studies, surveys, and deliberations. Further, 
MTC must advise and make recommendations to the Secretary and the heads of the units 
in MDOT on all matters that concern transportation policy formation and program 
execution.  
 
The Baltimore Regional Transit Commission  
 
Established by Chapter 504, BRTC must be staffed by BMC, and MTA must allocate funds 
for the operational expenses incurred by the commission, including funding for one senior 
planner and two junior planner staffing positions. BRTC must:  
 
 
provide input and engage in advocacy for the Baltimore region public transit 
systems maintained by MTA;  
 
request and review information from the Annual Attainment Report and MTA 
concerning the attainment of its goals, as specified, evaluate other performance 
measures, and issue related recommendations;  
 
review and comment on service change reports and major service change proposals 
on a quarterly basis;  
 
review and comment on MTA’s annual operating and capital budget request for the 
Baltimore region, including bus, light rail, metro, commuter bus, MARC service, 
and paratransit as part of the development of the draft and final Consolidated 
Transportation Program;  
 
review and approve any update to the Central Maryland Regional Transit Plan;  
 
review and comment on the Capital Needs Inventory Report; and  
 
review local transit plans and services in the Baltimore region to ensure coordination 
between the local transit services and MTA. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1081/ Page 8 
In carrying out its duties, the commission must endeavor to ensure that MTA’s plans, 
budgets, decisions, policies, goals, priorities, operations, and services address the public 
transit needs of residents and businesses in the Baltimore region. 
 
Procurement  
 
Except for procurements for roads and bridges, and certain cybersecurity infrastructure 
modernization, BPW controls procurement by State agencies and may delegate that 
authority to other agencies. As such, authority over contracts for construction, 
commodities, services, and more for most Executive Branch agencies is delegated to the 
Department of General Services (DGS); the Office of State Procurement within DGS 
carries out the delegated authority. However, most contracts valued at more than $200,000 
(except for commodities) must still be approved by BPW. 
 
The University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College are exempt from most provisions of 
State procurement law, while many other State agencies and entities (such as the 
Department of Commerce, Maryland Energy Administration, and Chesapeake Bay Trust) 
are exempted in whole or in part from most State procurement law.  
 
Nevertheless, units of State government that are exempt from Division II of the  
State Finance and Procurement must have written policies and procedures that apply for 
the exempted unit’s procurements. The policies and procedures must be submitted to BPW 
for review at the beginning of each fiscal year and include: 
 
 
the types of procurements exempted; 
 
the methods of procurement to be used for exempted procurement; 
 
the advertising requirements for each type of exempted procurement;  
 
procurement goals, including minority business enterprise participation, for each 
type of exempted procurement; and  
 
the approval process for each type of exempted procurement.  
 
Tort Liability  
 
While most State agencies are covered by the liability limits of the Maryland Tort Claims 
Act (MTCA), MTA’s tort liability is governed by the Transportation Article. Unlike 
MTCA, the Transportation Article does not include a limit on liability.  
 
Among other provisions, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for 
injuries arising from a single incident or occurrence. However, for claims arising on or 
after July 1, 2022, if liability of the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1081/ Page 9 
omissions or a violation of a constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, 
other specified limits on liability apply. 
 
Eminent Domain  
 
The power to take, or condemn, private property for public use is one of the inherent powers 
of state government and, through the state, its political subdivisions. Courts have long held 
that this power, known as “eminent domain,” is derived from the sovereignty of the state. 
Both the federal and State constitutions limit the condemnation authority.  
Both constitutions establish two requirements for taking property through the power of 
eminent domain:  (1) the property taken must be for a “public use”; and (2) the party whose 
property is taken must receive “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair 
market value of the real property. In either event, the party whose property is being taken 
is generally entitled to a judicial proceeding prior to the taking of the property. However, 
the Maryland Constitution does authorize “quick-take” condemnations in limited 
circumstances prior to a court proceeding.  
 
Under Title 12, Chapter 200, of the Maryland Rules, which governs court actions for 
acquisition of property by condemnation under the power of eminent domain, a complaint 
filed in an action for condemnation must contain, among other things:  
 
 
the names of all persons whose interest in the property is sought to be condemned;  
 
a description of the property;  
 
a statement of the nature of the interest the plaintiff seeks to acquire by the proposed 
condemnation;  
 
a statement that there is a public necessity for the proposed condemnation; and  
 
a statement that the parties are unable to agree or that a defendant is unable to agree 
because the defendant is unknown or under legal disability.  
 
State Roads Commission  
 
SRC is chaired by the SHA Administrator and includes seven other members that represent 
different geographic regions of the State. SRC has oversight authority over real estate 
transactions undertaken by SHA. For example, the Maryland Constitution requires SRC to 
determine when property is needed by SHA for highway purposes and to estimate the fair 
value of said property when it is acquired. 
 
State law specifies that, on behalf of and at the request of SHA, SRC may exercise the 
authority granted by the Maryland Constitution related to the condemnation of property, 
including the ability to “quick-take” property, for any highway purpose.  
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1081/ Page 10 
Local Boards of Property Review 
 
There is a board of property review in each county and, if necessary, additional boards of 
property review may be appointed in any county. Each county must provide a suitable place 
for its board to meet and, whenever possible, the clerk of the court must provide suitable 
clerical assistance. If the clerk fails to provide clerical assistance, SHA must provide it on 
request of the board. Regarding the “quick-take” condemnation authority for SRC, each 
board of property review: 
 
 
must hear promptly all cases certified to it by SRC; 
 
must determine the total amount of the award to be paid to SRC; and  
 
may determine the portion of an award to be paid to persons, other than the fee 
owner, who have an interest in the property.  
 
Unless all parties in a case certified to a board agree otherwise, the full board must hear 
and decide a case, as specified. The board must determine the fair value of a property to be 
acquired as of the date payment is made, as specified.  
 
If any party is dissatisfied with the findings or award of a board of property review, the 
case may be appealed to the court. On appeal, the court must hear and determine the case 
de novo. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase by an estimated $319,456 in fiscal 2027 
for costs and savings associated with staffing and the study required by the bill. In addition, 
beginning in fiscal 2027, the bill likely (1) increases TTF expenditures depending on the 
staff compensation determinations made by MTC; (2) decreases TTF expenditures due to 
project efficiencies resulting from MTA being exempt from procurement law; and  
(3) decreases TTF expenditures, potentially significantly, due to the tort liability limits 
established by the bill for MTA. Additionally, if the constitutional amendment is approved 
by the voters at the 2026 general election, TTF expenditures may decrease significantly 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027 to the extent that MTA can more quickly and efficiently 
acquire rights-of-way for its transit projects.  
 
Due in large part to the potential savings resulting from the tort liability limits established 
by the bill for MTA, even if the constitutional amendment is not approved by the voters at 
the 2026 general election, the net effect of the bill is likely a decrease in overall TTF 
expenditures for MTA. The following sections contain additional detail about the various 
known and unknown impacts of the bill on MDOT’s and MTA’s operations and finances.  
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1081/ Page 11 
Staffing and Study Costs and Savings 
 
The bill repeals BRTC and the required funding that MTA must provide for BRTC staff 
under current law, which is approximately $500,000 per year. Instead, the bill establishes 
two new boards to generally oversee MTA operations in the Baltimore region, requires 
each board to have a separate deputy administrator and analyst, and requires the two boards 
to share a support officer. Additionally, the bill requires MDOT to contract with BMC to 
complete a technical study regarding the establishment of a rail authority.  
 
Related to these provisions, net TTF expenditures increase by $319,456 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring the five staff required by the bill for the two new boards. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. It also includes 
$375,000 in prorated savings due to the repeal of BRTC and a one-time cost of $100,000 
for MDOT to contract with BMC for the required study.  
 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$548,752 
Study Costs 
100,000 
BRTC Savings 
-375,000 
Operating Expenses 
    45,704 
Net FY 2027 TTF Expenditures 
$319,456 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. It also reflects the termination 
of the one-time cost for the study and ongoing savings of $500,000 annually due to the 
repeal of BRTC.  
 
The bill also requires MTC to determine qualifications and compensation for up to 
12 management positions that operate and administer MTA’s transit facilities. Depending 
on the determinations made by MTC, TTF expenditures may increase further; however, 
any such impact cannot be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill. The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes, however, that the impact is likely to total 
no more than several hundred thousand dollars annually because these management 
positions already exist within MTA.  
 
Procurement Exemption 
 
The bill exempts MTA capital construction projects on existing and defined fixed 
guideway systems from State procurement law. MDOT advises, and DLS concurs, that the 
change may decrease TTF expenditures for some projects by allowing the procurements 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1081/ Page 12 
and related contract awards to take place more quickly and efficiently; however, any such 
impact cannot be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill.  
 
Tort Liability Limits 
 
Although a precise estimate cannot be made at this time, the bill may significantly decrease 
TTF expenditures by MTA for liability awards and insurance premiums. MDOT advises 
that MTA currently purchases excess insurance coverage of up to $290.0 million, which is 
in addition to its budgeted $10.0 million for self-insurance. Moreover, MDOT advises that 
in recent years, MTA has had to pay claims totaling millions of dollars; similar claims that 
take place under the bill would be capped at $400,000.  
 
According to MTA, the bill’s liability cap may also allow it to decrease expenditures on 
procurements from third-party vendors. MTA currently requires contractors to carry 
$5.0 million in liability insurance due to the administration’s unlimited liability. A 
reduction in this insurance requirement may reduce the costs for MTA contracts with these 
vendors. 
 
Constitutional Amendment – Condemnation Authority 
 
If the constitutional amendment is approved by the voters at the 2026 general election, 
MTA would have additional tools with which to acquire property for transit projects, which 
may decrease overall TTF expenditures, potentially significantly, by allowing projects to 
advance more quickly. Any such impact, however, cannot be reliably estimated without 
actual experience under the bill.  
 
The proposed change that clarifies that the “quick-take” authority applies to SHA instead 
of SRC appears to be technical in nature because the bill does not otherwise change SRC’s 
responsibilities related to the oversight of SHA’s property acquisition. As a result, this 
change is not anticipated to materially affect SHA operations or finances.  
 
It is assumed that MTA can provide clerical assistance to local boards of property review 
using existing budgeted resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  As noted above, MTA requires contractors to carry $5.0 million 
in liability insurance due to the administration’s unlimited liability. The cost of obtaining 
the excess coverage can be a financial burden for MTA’s contractors and may limit the 
parties who are able to bid on MTA’s contracts. The bill’s liability cap reduces insurance 
requirements for MTA contracts, which reduces insurance costs for small businesses doing 
business with MTA and enhances contracting opportunities with MTA for small 
businesses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1081/ Page 13 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 947 (Senator McCray) - Finance and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State 
Archives; Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of General Services; Anne Arundel and Baltimore counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 13