START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1094 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1094 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Graduate-Level Clinical Interns - Required Reimbursement 
 
 
This bill requires certain health insurance policies that provide reimbursement for a service 
within the lawful scope of practice of a licensed graduate professional counselor (LGPC), 
licensed master social worker (LMSW), or licensed psychologist to reimburse for the 
service provided by a graduate-level counseling clinical intern, graduate-level social work 
clinical intern, or graduate-level psychology clinical intern under specified circumstances. 
The bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health 
benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Any 
additional MIA workload can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Services must be reimbursable if they are (1) provided at an outpatient 
health care facility; (2) provided by a counseling clinical intern, social work clinical intern, 
or psychology clinical intern who is enrolled in a counseling, social work, or psychology 
graduate program and providing the services under specified direct supervision; and 
(3) billed by the appropriate supervisor. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1094/ Page 2 
A graduate-level counseling clinical intern must provide services under direct supervision 
of a “board-approved supervisor” (as defined in State Board of Professional Counselors 
and Therapists regulations) who meets specified qualifications. 
 
A graduate-level social work clinical intern must provide services under the direct 
supervision of  a licensed certified social worker-clinical (LCSW-C). 
 
A graduate-level psychology clinical intern must provide services under the direct 
supervision of a licensed psychologist.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Reimbursement Parity 
 
Each individual, group, or blanket health insurance policy issued by an insurer or nonprofit 
health service plan that provides reimbursement for certain services must reimburse 
specified providers for those services. 
 
If a policy, contract, or certificate provides for reimbursement for a service that is within 
the lawful scope of practice of a licensed clinical professional counselor (LCPC), a licensed 
clinical marriage and family therapist, a licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor, or a 
licensed clinical professional art therapist, the insured or any other person covered by the 
policy or certificate is entitled to reimbursement for the service. 
 
If a policy or certificate provides for reimbursement for a service that is within the lawful 
scope of practice of a licensed certified social worker (LCSW), the insured or any other 
person covered by the policy or certificate is entitled to reimbursement for the service 
regardless of whether the service is performed by a physician or an LCSW-C. 
 
If a policy, contract, or certificate provides for reimbursement for a service that is within 
the lawful scope of practice of a licensed psychologist, the insured or any other person 
covered by the policy, contract, or certificate is entitled to reimbursement for the service 
regardless of whether the service is performed by a physician or licensed psychologist. 
 
Graduate-level Health Occupations 
 
An LGPC is an individual approved by the State Board of Professional Counselors and 
Therapists to practice “graduate professional counseling,” which is clinical professional 
counseling performed under the supervision of an LCPC or another licensed health care 
provider approved by the board while obtaining the two years of postgraduate supervised 
experience required for licensure as a clinical professional counselor. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1094/ Page 3 
An LMSW is an individual licensed by State Board of Social Work Examiners, on or after 
July 1, 2018, to practice “master social work,” which means to practice social work under 
the supervision of an LCSW, LCSW-C, or LMSW or, if approved by the board, to engage 
in independent practice. 
 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists 
 
Per Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.58.12.02) a “board-approved supervisor” means 
(1) an LCPC, licensed clinical marriage and family therapist, licensed clinical professional 
art therapist, or licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor who meets the requirements 
for licensure and has been approved by the board or (2) an individual who is authorized by 
law to practice a health occupation, which includes the diagnosis, prevention, treatment, 
and amelioration of psychological problems and emotional or mental conditions of 
individuals or groups, and has been approved by the board. 
 
To qualify as a supervisor, a licensee must meet the qualifications specified in Maryland 
regulations (COMAR 10.58.12.08). A board-approved supervisor must have two years of 
active clinical practice experience and complete specified education and training 
experience relating to supervision. A board-approved supervisor must also file the 
completed board-approved supervisor application form, provide the supervisee with a copy 
of the board’s licensed clinical professional counselor supervisor letter, and have an active 
license that is without restrictions or conditions due to disciplinary action for the two years 
preceding an application for board-approved supervisor status. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business behavioral health clinics may receive additional 
reimbursement for services provided by graduate-level clinical interns and their respective 
licensed supervisors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 910 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1094/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4