START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1012 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1012 
(Delegate Fair) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Local Suicide Fatality Review Teams - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes a county or municipality to establish a multidisciplinary and 
multiagency suicide fatality review team to prevent suicide deaths by (1) reviewing suicide 
deaths that occur within the county; (2) identifying systemic, service, and policy factors 
associated with risk of suicide; (3) promoting coordination between entities involved in 
suicide prevention, crisis response, treatment, and postvention; and (4) developing 
recommendations to prevent suicide. Two or more counties may establish a 
single multicounty team, but they must execute a memorandum of understanding on 
membership, staffing, and operation. The bill outlines (1) membership of a local team;  
(2) requirements and recommendations for local team operations; and (3) requirements for 
use of records and data. An individual guilty of violating the bill’s meeting or data privacy 
restrictions is subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  This analysis assumes that any potential operational impact on the Maryland 
Department of Health can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. Penalty 
provisions are not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  Local health department (LHD) and municipal government expenditures 
may increase indeterminately, as early as FY 2027, for any jurisdiction that chooses to 
establish a local suicide fatality review team, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1012/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Local Team Membership 
 
The membership of a local team must be drawn from the following, if available:   
 
 
the county health officer (or their designee); 
 
the director of the local department of social services (or their designee); 
 
the director of the local health authority (or their designee); 
 
the superintendent of schools for the county (or their designee); 
 
a State, county, or municipal law enforcement officer; 
 
the director of behavioral health services in the county (or their designee); 
 
an emergency medical services provider in the county; 
 
a representative of a hospital; 
 
a health care professional who specializes in the prevention, diagnosis, and 
treatment of mental or behavioral health conditions; 
 
a member of the public with interest or expertise in suicide prevention, appointed 
by the county health officer; and 
 
any other individual necessary for the work of the local team, recommended by the 
team and appointed by the county health officer. 
 
Each team must elect a chair from among its members. 
 
Local Team Operations 
 
Each team must coordinate with and operate subject to guidance issued by the State Suicide 
Fatality Review Committee. 
 
Each team may (1) examine trends in suicide and factors that contribute to risk; (2) identify 
gaps in care systems or coordination between entities involved in suicide prevention, crisis 
response, treatment, and postvention; and (3) submit recommendations to the State Suicide 
Fatality Review Committee or other local entities as appropriate. 
 
Except when discussing individual cases of suicide, meetings must be open to the public 
and subject to the Open Meetings Act. During a public meeting, information may not be 
disclosed that either discloses the involvement of an agency with or identifies  
(1) a deceased individual; (2) an individual who has experienced suicide or a suicide 
attempt; (3) a family member, guardian, or caretaker of an individual described above; or 
(4) an individual convicted of a crime or adjudicated as having committed a delinquent act 
that caused a death or near fatality. This does not prohibit a local team from requesting the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1012/ Page 3 
attendance of a person who has information relevant to the team’s exercise of its purpose 
and duties at a meeting.  
 
Data and Records  
 
Generally, all information and records acquired by a local team are confidential, exempt 
from disclosure under the Public Information Act (PIA), and may only be disclosed as 
necessary to carry out the team’s purpose and duties. Mental health and substance abuse 
treatment records are subject to additional limitations under State and federal law. 
 
Statistical compilations of data and reports of a local team without personally identifiable 
information are public records. 
 
Except as necessary to carry out a local team’s purpose and duties, team members and those 
who attend a meeting may not disclose (1) any proceeding at a nonpublic meeting or (2) any 
information that may not be disclosed as outlined above.  
 
Team members, those who attend a team meeting, and those who present information to a 
local team may not be questioned in a civil or criminal proceeding about information 
presented or opinions formed because of a meeting. However, an individual is not 
prohibited from testifying to independently obtained information or public information. 
Information, documents, or records of a local team are not subject to subpoena, discovery, 
or introduction into evidence in a civil or criminal proceeding, but if the information, 
documents, or records are otherwise available from other sources, they are not immune 
solely because of presentation in a local team meeting.  
 
Current Law:  Chapters 80 and 81 of 2022 established the State Suicide Fatality Review 
Committee to identify and address the factors contributing to suicide deaths and facilitate 
system changes in the State to prevent suicide deaths. The State team must:   
 
 
meet at least quarterly to review suicide deaths; 
 
make determinations regarding (1) issues related to individuals at risk for suicide, 
specifically trends, risk factors, current best practices in suicide prevention, lapses 
in systemic responses, and barriers to safety and well-being and (2) strategies for 
the prevention of suicide deaths; 
 
report at least annually to the Governor and the General Assembly on its activities 
and its recommendations as specified; 
 
undertake annual specified statistical studies; and 
 
disseminate findings and recommendations based on the studies conducted to 
policymakers, health care providers, health care facilities, and the public. 
 
In general, all information and records acquired by the State team are confidential, exempt 
from disclosure under PIA, and not subject to discovery or introduction into evidence in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1012/ Page 4 
any proceedings. Mental health records are subject to additional limitations. Meetings of 
the State team must be closed to the public and are not subject to the Open Meetings Act. 
The meetings are subject to specified confidentiality requirements for disclosure of a 
medical record.  
 
Local Fatality Review Teams  
 
Under Maryland law, there are three types of local fatality review teams:  local child fatality 
review teams (Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Health – General Article); local drug overdose 
fatality review teams (Title 5, Subtitle 9 of the Health – General Article); and local 
domestic violence fatality review teams (Title 4, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article). 
Each county is required to have a child fatality review team (or a multicounty local team), 
while counties are authorized to establish a drug overdose fatality review team or a 
domestic violence fatality review team. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Municipal League advises that expenditures for 
municipal governments may increase indeterminately, to the extent that a municipal 
government chooses to form a local review team, depending on the amount of staff, 
supplies, and operational support a municipality provides to the team.  
 
The Maryland Association of County Health Officers (MACHO) similarly advises that, for 
any jurisdiction that opts to establish a local review team, LHD expenditures would 
increase to set up the review team. Based on the cost of establishing other fatality review 
teams at the county level, MACHO advises that expenditures would increase by $30,000 
to $50,000 to establish a local review team. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Association of 
County Health Officers; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4