START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1017 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1017 
(Delegate Wells) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Correctional Services - Private Immigration Detention Facilities - Zoning 
Requirement 
 
 
This emergency bill prohibits, notwithstanding any other provision of law, the State or a 
unit of local government from approving the use of a building or structure as an 
immigration detention facility by a private entity unless the immigration detention facility 
is expressly included in the applicable zoning authority. In addition, the bill prohibits a 
private entity from operating or occupying a building or structure as an immigration 
detention facility without a use and occupancy authorization or change in use and 
occupancy approval consistent with the bill’s provisions. The Attorney General may bring 
a civil action to enforce the bill’s provisions. The court may issue temporary, preliminary, 
or permanent injunctive relief to prevent an act that would constitute a violation of the bill’s 
provisions. A private entity that operates or attempts to operate an immigration detention 
facility in violation of the bill is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $10,000 for each 
day the violation continues. The remedies provided under the bill are in addition to any 
other remedy available under State or local law. The bill applies retroactively to affect any 
agreement between the State or a unit of local government and a private entity entered into 
before the effective date of the bill for the use of any building or structure if that building 
or structure is intended to be used as an immigration detention facility, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1017/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For purposes of the bill’s provisions, a building or structure must be 
considered proposed for use as an immigration detention facility, regardless of how the use 
is described in an application or permit request, if:   
 
 
individuals are intended to be held in involuntary custody and will not be free to 
leave; or 
 
the design, construction, or improvements include features consistent with secure or 
involuntary confinement, including:  (1) perimeter security measures designed to 
prevent occupants from leaving; (2) controlled access points; or (3) locked holding 
areas. 
 
A general zoning classification authorizing government, public, or institutional uses does 
not constitute express authorization for a building or structure to be used as an immigration 
detention facility by a private entity.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 19 of the 2021 special session prohibits the State, local 
governments, and specified State and local agents from (1) entering into an agreement of 
any kind for the detention of individuals in an immigration detention facility owned, 
managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity; (2) paying, reimbursing, 
subsidizing, or defraying in any way any costs related to the sale, purchase, construction, 
development, ownership, management, or operation of an immigration detention facility 
that is or will be owned, managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity; 
(3) receiving any payment related to the detention of individuals in an immigration 
detention facility owned, managed, or operated in whole or in part, by a private entity; or 
(4) otherwise giving any financial incentive or benefit to any private entity or person in 
connection with the sale, purchase, construction, development, ownership, management, 
or operation of an immigration detention facility that is or will be owned, managed, or 
operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity. 
 
The State, local governments, and specified State and local agents are prohibited from 
approving a zoning variance or issuing a permit for the construction of a building or the 
reuse of existing buildings or structures by any private entity for use as an immigration 
detention facility unless the entity (1) provides notice to the public of the proposed zoning 
variance or permit action at least 180 days before authorizing the variance or issuing the 
permit and (2) solicits and hears public comments on the proposed zoning variance or 
permit action in at least two separate meetings open to the public. 
 
The State, local governments, and specified State and local agents are prohibited from 
entering into or renewing an immigration detention agreement. Those with an existing 
immigration detention agreement must have exercised the termination provision contained 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1017/ Page 3 
in the immigration detention agreement no later than October 1, 2022. In any dispute over 
an immigration detention agreement with the State, these provisions govern. However, the 
provisions may not be construed to authorize or prohibit the State, local governments, and 
specified State and local agents from entering into an agreement with the federal 
government under 8 U.S.C. § 1357(g). 
 
“Immigration detention agreement” means any contract, agreement, intergovernmental 
service agreement, or a memorandum of understanding that authorizes a State or local 
government agency to house or detain individuals for federal civil immigration violations. 
“Immigration detention facility” means any building, facility, or structure used, in whole 
or in part, to house or detain individuals for federal civil immigration violations. 
 
“Immigration detention facility” means any building, facility, or structure used, in whole 
or in part, to house or detain individuals for federal civil immigration violations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3