START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1030 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1030 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Office of the State Prosecutor - Investigation of Threats - Judges 
 
 
This bill adds a violation of § 3‐708 of the Criminal Law Article if the violation was 
committed against a “judge or judge‐elect” to the offenses and violations that may be 
investigated by the State Prosecutor.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the workload of the 
State Prosecutor or otherwise materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Threat Against State or Local Officials 
 
Pursuant to § 3‐708 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not knowingly and willfully 
make a threat to take the life of, kidnap, or cause physical injury to a State official, a local 
official, a deputy State’s Attorney, an assistant State’s Attorney, or an assistant public 
defender. A person may not knowingly send, deliver, part with, or make for the purpose of 
sending or delivering a prohibited threat. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject 
to imprisonment for up three years and/or a $2,500 maximum fine. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1030/ Page 2 
“Threat” includes (1) an oral threat or (2) a threat in any written form, whether or not the 
writing is signed, or if the writing is signed, whether or not it is signed with a fictitious 
name or any other mark. 
 
“Local official” means an individual serving in a publicly elected office of a local 
government unit. “State official” means a (1) constitutional officer or officer-elect in an 
executive unit; (2) member or member-elect of the General Assembly; (3) judge or  
judge-elect; (4) judicial appointee; (5) State’s Attorney; (6) clerk of the circuit court; 
(7) register of wills; or (8) sheriff. The Governor, Governor-elect, Lieutenant Governor, 
and Lieutenant Governor-elect are specifically included as State officials under this 
prohibition.  
 
State Prosecutor – Investigatory Power 
 
Generally, the State Prosecutor may investigate various criminal offenses and violations of 
State law, including laws related to elections and voting, public ethics, bribery, and 
criminal misconduct in office committed by an officer or employee of the State, or a 
political subdivision of the State, or of a bicounty or multicounty unit of the State.  
 
The State Prosecutor may investigate an alleged offense on the State Prosecutor’s own 
initiative or on request of the Governor, the Attorney General, the General Assembly, the 
State Ethics Commission, or a State’s Attorney. Also, on the request of the Governor, the 
Attorney General, the General Assembly, or a State’s Attorney, the State Prosecutor may 
investigate criminal activity that is committed (1) partly in the State and partly in another 
jurisdiction or (2) in more than one political subdivision of the State.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 634 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Prosecutor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1030/ Page 3 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3