START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1002 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1002 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Nursing Facilities - Involuntary Discharge or Transfer 
 
   
This bill specifies that a resident of a nursing facility may not be involuntarily transferred 
or discharged to a location other than the location identified in a specified notice, such as 
a hotel, shelter, or other temporary housing before the facility to which the resident is to be 
transferred has confirmed that the resident may be transferred to the facility and the facility 
is prepared to accept the resident. The bill also alters specified requirements for (1) the 
notice provided to a resident regarding any proposed discharge or transfer; (2) an updated 
notice of any proposed discharge or transfer; and (3) a post discharge plan of care. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Generally, under current law, “facility” means a related 
institution that, under the rules and regulations of the Maryland Department of Health, is a 
comprehensive care facility or an extended care facility. Maryland regulations define 
“comprehensive care facility” as a nursing home that admits patients suffering from disease 
or disabilities or advanced age, requiring medical service and nursing service rendered by 
or under the supervision of a registered nurse. “Extended care facility” means a nursing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1002/ Page 2 
home that offers subacute care, providing treatment services for patients requiring inpatient 
care but who do not currently require continuous hospital services.  
 
Under current law, it is the policy of the State that, in addition to any other rights, each 
resident of a facility has the following basic rights:  (1) the right to notice, procedural 
fairness, and humane treatment when being transferred or discharged from a facility; and 
(2) the right to participate in decision making regarding transitions in care, including a 
transfer or discharge from a facility.  
 
Involuntary Transfer or Discharge 
 
Under current law, a facility must provide a resident with a written notice 30 days before 
any proposed discharge or transfer and provide the resident with the opportunity for a 
hearing before the discharge or transfer. A resident of a facility may not be transferred or 
discharged involuntarily except if:  (1) the transfer or discharge is necessary for the 
resident’s welfare and their needs cannot be met in the facility; (2) the transfer or discharge 
is appropriate because the resident’s health has improved sufficiently so that the resident 
no longer needs the services provided by the facility; (3) the health or safety of an 
individual in a facility is endangered; (4) the resident has failed, after reasonable and 
appropriate notice, to pay for a stay at the facility; or (5) the facility ceases to operate. 
 
Required Written Notice of Proposed Discharge or Transfer  
 
Under current law, a facility must provide the resident with written notice of any proposed 
discharge or transfer, and the opportunity for a hearing before the discharge or transfer. 
The notice must include at least the following information:   
 
 
notice of the intended discharge or transfer of the resident;  
 
each reason for the discharge or transfer;  
 
the location to which the resident will be discharged or transferred, which may 
change as a result of an appeal or the discharge planning process; 
 
the name of the social worker or other professionally qualified staff, which may 
change during the discharge planning process, who is designated to provide social 
services and discharge planning services in connection with the discharge or transfer 
and will be responsible for the post discharge plan of care; 
 
a proposed date within 10 days after the date of the notice for a meeting between 
the resident, the resident’s representative, and facility staff to develop the post 
discharge plan of care; 
 
the right of the resident to request a hearing;  
 
the right of the resident to consult with any lawyer the resident chooses;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1002/ Page 3 
 
the availability of the services of the Legal Aid Bureau, the Older Americans Act 
Senior Legal Assistance Programs, and other agencies that may provide assistance 
to individuals who need legal counsel;  
 
the availability of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program; and  
 
specified provisions of current law related to notice of discharge or transfer.  
 
The bill requires the notice to also include: 
 
 
the name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the entity to 
which the resident must submit a request for a hearing, and instructions for 
obtaining, completing, and submitting a request for a hearing; 
 
the mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program; and 
 
the availability of Disability Rights Maryland to assist residents with intellectual or 
developmental disabilities, mental disorders, and related disorders, and the mailing 
address, email address, and telephone number of Disability Rights Maryland.  
 
Under current law, a facility must provide the required written notice as soon as practicable 
before discharge or transfer if (1) an emergency exists and the health or safety of the 
resident or other residents would be placed in imminent and serious jeopardy if the resident 
were not transferred or discharged as soon as possible or (2) the resident has not resided in 
the facility for 30 days.  
 
The bill removes the requirement to provide the required written notice as soon as 
practicable before discharge or transfer if the resident has not resided in the facility for 
30 days. 
 
Updated Notice of Proposed Discharge or Transfer 
 
Under current law, if the information in the notice changes before discharge or transfer, the 
facility must provide the changes to the recipients of the notice as soon as practicable after 
the new information becomes available.  
 
The bill specifies that, if an updated notice is provided, the resident may not be discharged 
or transferred for at least 30 days after the updated notice has been provided. An updated 
notice must indicate any differences between the prior notice and the updated notice.  
 
Required Post Discharge Plan of Care 
 
Under current law, before any discharge or transfer, a facility must develop a post discharge 
plan of care to assist the resident with adjusting to the resident’s new living environment. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1002/ Page 4 
That plan of care must also (1) address the resident’s post discharge goals of care and 
treatment preferences and (2) identify each of the resident’s reasonably anticipated medical 
and basic needs after discharge or transfer and establish a plan for meeting those needs.  
 
The bill requires a post discharge plan to also (1) identify the address at which the resident 
will reside post discharge and (2) in accordance with regulations adopted by the Secretary 
of Health, provide a safe, secure, and sustainable environment for the resident.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 493 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4