START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1029 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1029 
(Delegate Roberts, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Termination of Residential Real Estate Contracts - Contingency 
Clauses 
 
 
This bill alters the time period within which a holder of trust money must distribute trust 
money to a purchaser following termination of a residential real estate contract under a 
contingency clause. It also alters the definition of “contingency clause” that is applicable 
to the circumstances under which a residential real estate contract may be terminated by a 
purchaser. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, “contingency” means a clause included 
in a contract of sale for residential real estate that (1) requires a specific event or action to 
occur for the contact to be enforceable and (2) entitles a party exercising the contingency 
to terminate the contact and receive distribution of the trust money. 
 
Section 10‐803 of the Real Property Article lists numerous examples of contingencies, 
including clauses relating to appraisals; conservation easements; home or environmental 
inspections; property condition disclosures and disclaimer act notices; short sales; and 
water and sewer assessments notices. The bill repeals the specific examples. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1029/ Page 2 
Under current law, a real estate broker or an escrow agent holding trust money must release 
the funds to the purchaser if the purchaser terminates a residential real estate contract in 
accordance with the terms of a contingency clause. The purchaser must provide written 
notice requesting the return of the funds to both the holder of the trust money and the seller. 
 
Under current law, within 10 days after receiving this notice, the seller must provide the 
holder of the trust money with (1) a copy of a complaint filed in the District Court or (2) a 
notarized, written request for mediation relating to the distribution of the trust money. The 
bill specifies that the seller must provide a copy of a notarized, written request for 
mediation provided to a mediator regarding to the distribution of the trust money. 
 
On receipt of a complaint/request for mediation, existing statute requires the holder of trust 
money to continue to hold the trust money until a court order or mediation agreement 
authorizes the distribution or the holder files an interpleader action in the District Court. 
 
Conversely, under current law, if the holder of the trust money does not receive a copy of 
a complaint or a request for mediation within 30 days after a request has been made for the 
return of the trust money, the holder must distribute the trust money to the purchaser and 
notify the purchaser and seller of the distribution. The bill repeals the existing requirement 
that the trust money holder wait up to 30 days after a purchaser’s request, instead requiring 
the holder, if no complaint or mediation request was received within the 10‐day period 
referenced above, to return the trust money to the purchaser within 5 days and to notify 
both the purchaser and the seller of the distribution. 
 
A holder of trust money may not be held liable for a decision to distribute the trust money 
in accordance with State statute. A claimant aggrieved by a distribution of trust money may 
file an action in the District Court, as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 691 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1029/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3