START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1004 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1004 
(Delegate Alston, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Prohibited Ingredients in Food 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from manufacturing, selling, delivering, holding, or offering 
for sale food that contains (1) brominated vegetable oil (BVO) (CAS No. 8016-94-2); 
(2) potassium bromate (CAS No. 7758-01-2); (3) propylparaben (CAS No, 94-13-3); 
(4) red 3 (CAS No. 16423-68-0); or (5) any other ingredient or additive that is prohibited 
for use in food under regulations adopted by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
or any other federal law or regulation. Violations are subject to existing criminal and civil 
penalties. The bill takes effect July 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can likely handle enforcement 
with existing budgeted resources. The application of existing penalty provisions is not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that local health departments (LHDs) must inspect food 
products sold in licensed food establishments, LHDs may require additional staff. 
Expenditures may increase accordingly beginning in FY 2028. The application of existing 
penalty provisions is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Food” means (1) any substance that is used as food or drink for human 
beings or as a component of food or drink for human beings or (2) chewing gum or any 
substance that is used as a component of chewing gum 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1004/ Page 2 
MDH’s Center for Food Processing is responsible for licensing and inspecting facilities 
that make, process, store, hold, or distribute food to sell wholesale to other businesses in 
Maryland. The Center for Facility and Process Review conducts a plan and process review 
for all food processing plants and prototypical food service facilities. Food processing plans 
are inspected to ensure compliance with applicable State and federal laws and regulations. 
Facilities that manufacture, process, pack, and hold food and operate (receive or distribute) 
across state lines fall under FDA jurisdiction and must comply with federal regulations. 
 
The federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act prohibits the manufacture or sale of any food 
that is adulterated or misbranded. The Food Additives Amendment to the Act authorizes 
FDA to regulate food ingredients. MDH implements the Maryland Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act, which conforms to the federal act. 
 
A person who violates any Maryland Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act prohibition, with 
specified exceptions, is subject to both criminal and civil penalties. More specifically, a 
violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, a fine up to $10,000 and 
imprisonment of up to a year for the first conviction, and a fine up to $25,000 and 
imprisonment up to three years for a second or subsequent conviction. In addition, a person 
who violates the Maryland Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is subject to a civil penalty of 
up to $5,000 in an action in any District Court and can be enjoined from continuing the 
violation. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
Additional Comments:  FDA manages a Generally Recognized As Safe database and 
Substance Added to Food List to approve intentionally added food ingredients that have 
been adequately tested and deemed safe. Potassium bromate and propylparaben are 
generally deemed safe. On July 2, 2024, FDA issued a rule to revoke the authorization for 
the use of BVO in food. Additionally, the FDA manages a Color Additive Status List. On 
January 15, 2025, FDA issued an order to revoke the authorization for the use of red dye 3 
in food and ingested drugs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1136 and HB 1098 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1004/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3