START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1022 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1022 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Health and Environment and 
Transportation 
 
 
PFAS Chemicals - Product Phase Outs and Registration Requirements 
 
 
This bill expands product bans for specified consumer products that contain intentionally 
added PFAS chemicals; the bans are phased in by product type, with the first bans taking 
effect January 1, 2028. The bill also requires manufacturers to register their products that 
contain intentionally added PFAS chemicals with the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) by January 1, 2028 (and pay a related registration fee). The bill 
establishes related compliance, enforcement, and penalty provisions. Penalties from new 
and specified existing penalty provisions, as well as manufacturer registration fees, are paid 
into a newly established Maryland PFAS Chemicals Protection and Remediation Fund 
(PFAS Fund). The PFAS Fund is used to assess, prevent, and remediate PFAS chemical 
contamination by, among other things, providing grants and loans to public and private 
entities for related projects. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General/special fund expenditures for MDE increase by $201,400 in  
FY 2027; future years are annualized and reflect additional staff, ongoing costs, inflation, 
and grant and loan awards. Special fund revenues to the new fund increase beginning as 
early as FY 2027. General fund revenues are also affected as early as FY 2027, as discussed 
below. State expenditures (all/multiple funds) may increase as early as FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Other potential effects are discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
-/(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF/SF Exp. 
$201,400 
$677,800 
$736,700 
$758,900 
$781,200 
All/Mult. Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1022/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments, as consumers of affected products, may incur an 
increase in expenditures as early as FY 2027. Local grant and loan revenues (and 
corresponding expenditures) may increase, likely not before FY 2028. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Product Bans and Regulations 
 
By January 1, 2027, MDE must adopt regulations to identify “currently unavoidable uses” 
of PFAS chemicals that are essential for health, safety, or the functioning of society and 
for which there are no reasonably available alternatives. MDE must consult with the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and other units of State government as necessary 
in developing the regulations. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2028, except as specified, a manufacturer may not sell, offer for sale, 
distribute, or distribute for sale in the State (directly or indirectly through intermediaries) 
the following products if the product contains intentionally added PFAS chemicals:  (1) a 
cleaning product; (2) cookware; (3) a cosmetic; (4) a personal care product; (5) a feminine 
hygiene product; (6) a pet food package or packaging component intended for direct 
contact with pet food; (7) a juvenile product; or (8) an intimacy product. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2029, except as specified, a manufacturer may not sell, offer for sale, 
distribute, or distribute for sale in the State (directly or indirectly through intermediaries) 
the following products if the product contains intentionally added PFAS chemicals:  (1) a 
fabric treatment; (2) ski wax; (3) a textile or textile furnishing; (4) upholstered furniture; 
or (5) paint. 
 
These product bans do not apply to (1) a product for which federal law governs and 
preempts State authority over the presence of PFAS chemicals in the product; (2) a used 
product offered for sale or resale, including any recycled material used in remanufacturing; 
or (3) a product for which MDE has determined by regulation that the use of PFAS 
chemicals is a currently unavoidable use, as defined by the bill. 
 
Manufacturer Registration, PFAS Chemicals Disclosure Form, and Registration Fee 
 
By January 1, 2028, each manufacturer of a product that contains intentionally added PFAS 
chemicals (regardless of whether MDE has determined the use of PFAS chemicals is a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1022/ Page 3 
currently unavoidable use) that is sold, offered for sale, distributed, or distributed for sale 
in the State (either directly or indirectly through intermediaries) must register the product 
with MDE. An affected manufacturer must do so by submitting a PFAS chemicals 
disclosure form to MDE and paying to MDE a PFAS chemicals registration fee set by MDE 
by regulation (discussed in more detail below). A manufacturer must submit a revision to 
a PFAS chemicals disclosure form within 30 days of a significant change to any previously 
supplied information or after receiving written request for additional information from 
MDE. On written approval from MDE, a manufacturer may provide the required 
information for a category, type of product, or product component. 
 
Within 60 days after receiving a PFAS chemicals disclosure form, MDE must provide 
written notice to the manufacturer that either confirms that the information is complete or 
requests additional information. MDE may waive some or all of the information required 
on a PFAS disclosure form under certain circumstances. In addition, MDE may extend the 
registration deadline for a manufacturer if MDE determines that circumstances merit an 
extension. 
 
MDE may enter into an agreement with other states or political subdivisions to collect 
information on PFAS chemical use and may accept information to a shared system as 
meeting the information requirements established by the bill for PFAS chemicals 
disclosure forms, as specified. 
 
MDE must establish a PFAS chemicals registration fee by regulation. The fee must be set 
at a level adequate to cover MDE’s costs to process, store, and enforce the bill’s registration 
and PFAS chemicals disclosure form requirements. Registration fees are deposited into the 
new PFAS Fund (discussed in more detail below). 
 
Beginning January 1, 2029, a manufacturer is prohibited from selling, offering for sale, 
distributing, or distributing for sale (directly or indirectly through intermediaries) a product 
that contains intentionally added PFAS chemicals unless the manufacturer is in compliance 
with the bill’s registration, PFAS chemicals disclosure form, and registration fee 
requirements. 
 
Enforcement 
 
The bill establishes provisions to ensure compliance with the bill’s new and expanded 
requirements and bans for products with intentionally added PFAS chemicals under Title 6, 
Subtitle 16 of the Environment Article. If MDE has reason to believe that a product is being 
sold, offered for sale, distributed, or distributed for sale in the State in violation of the 
subtitle, MDE must require the manufacturer to test the product and may require the 
manufacturer to provide the testing results to MDE, as specified. Additionally, at least 
once per year, MDE must randomly select products in each category of products for which 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1022/ Page 4 
intentionally added PFAS chemicals are prohibited and require each manufacturer of a 
randomly selected product to test the product, as specified. If testing demonstrates that the 
product does not contain intentionally added PFAS chemicals, the manufacturer must 
provide MDE with a specified certificate of compliance, the testing results, and any other 
information requested by MDE. If testing demonstrates that the product contains 
intentionally added PFAS chemicals, the manufacturer must (1) within 30 days, register 
the product as required by the bill and (2) if the sale of the product is prohibited in the 
State, provide notice to persons that sell, offer for sale, distribute, or distribute for sale the 
product in the State that is prohibited (and provide MDE with a list of each such person, as 
specified) and buy back any remaining stock from such a person. 
 
The bill specifies that existing penalties that apply to violations of existing prohibitions 
against the use or sale of class B fire-fighting foam and the sale of rugs or carpets to which 
PFAS chemicals have been intentionally added are administrative penalties, rather than 
civil penalties. The penalty amounts are unchanged. 
 
The bill also establishes new penalties for manufacturers who violate a provision of 
Subtitle 16, as altered by the bill. More specifically, a manufacturer who violates a 
provision of the subtitle is subject to an administrative penalty of up to $15,000. 
Additionally, MDE may issue an administrative order requiring a manufacturer to comply 
with the subtitle. In addition to the penalties discussed above, a manufacturer who violates 
an administrative order is subject to a civil penalty of up to $25,000, with each day of 
noncompliance considered a separate violation. Penalties imposed under these provisions 
are in addition to any damages, remediation or cleanup costs, environmental restoration 
costs, or other monetary or nonmonetary remedies that may be imposed by statute, 
regulation, or court order. 
 
The bill directs penalties collected under Title 6, Subtitle 16 of the Environment Article, as 
altered by the bill, into the new PFAS Fund. The bill also redirects penalties collected under 
existing provisions governing chemicals used in playground surfacing materials and toxics 
in packaging to the PFAS Fund. (Under current law, these penalties are deposited into the 
general fund.) 
 
Maryland PFAS Chemicals Protection and Remediation Fund 
 
Purpose and Administration of Fund:  The bill establishes the PFAS Fund, the stated 
purpose of which is to fund efforts to assess, prevent, and remediate contamination from 
PFAS chemicals across the State’s watersheds, communities, and ecosystems. MDE must 
administer the fund in consultation with MDH, the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA), the Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the Chesapeake Bay Trust (CBT), 
and local health departments (LHDs). 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1022/ Page 5 
Revenue Sources for Fund:  The fund consists of (1) PFAS chemicals registration fees 
collected under the bill; (2) specified penalties; (3) cost recovery by the State from PFAS 
chemicals polluters under State or federal environmental laws; (4) money obtained by the 
State through any civil settlement or consent decree related to PFAS chemicals pollution; 
(5) money accepted for the benefit of the fund through private donations, cost-share 
agreements, and other specified sources; (6) money appropriated in the State budget to the 
fund; (7) interest earnings; and (8) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. 
 
Uses of Fund:  The fund may only be used for (1) assessing and monitoring PFAS 
chemicals pollution, as specified; (2) implementing community assistance and remediation 
initiatives, as specified; (3) supporting research and innovation related to PFAS chemicals 
pollution, as specified; (4) providing grants and loans, as discussed below; (5) offsetting 
MDE’s administrative costs to design and implement programs related to PFAS chemicals, 
including the development of regulations; and (6) supporting related enforcement actions 
brought the by the State, as specified. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in 
accordance with the State budget. 
 
By January 15 each year, MDE must report to specified committees of the 
General Assembly on the status of the fund, as specified. 
 
Grants and Loans Awarded from the Fund:  MDE must provide grants and loans from the 
PFAS Fund to public and private entities for projects related to the purposes of the fund. 
Grants and loans must be awarded on a competitive basis. In awarding grants and loans, 
MDE must (1) prioritize projects that leverage other sources of funding, as specified;  
(2) reserve at least 35% of the total funding allocated for grants and loans for projects that 
address community and public health threats related to PFAS chemicals contamination; 
and (3) to the extent feasible, coordinate with other State grant- and loan-making programs, 
as specified. 
 
MDE must develop and publish criteria for project applications in consultation with MDH, 
MDA, DNR, CBT, and LHDs. In addition, MDE must maintain a public website listing 
detailed information regarding each grant and loan award made under these provisions and 
the outcomes of each project funded. 
 
Definitions 
 
The bill establishes numerous definitions for terms used in the bill, including 
“manufacturer,” which means (1) the person that produced or assembled a product or 
whose brand name is affixed to the product or (2) if the person that produced or assembled 
the product or whose brand name is affixed to the product does not have an office or 
employees in the United States, the importer or first domestic distributor of the product. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1022/ Page 6 
The bill also makes a conforming change to the existing definition of “PFAS chemicals” 
that is used throughout Title 6, Subtitle 16 of the Environment Article in order to 
incorporate the bill’s changes. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State Restrictions on PFAS in Products and Applicable Enforcement Provisions 
 
PFAS Chemicals in Fire-fighting Foam, Carpets, and Rugs:  Title 6, Subtitle 16 of the 
Environment Article governs PFAS chemicals and addresses the use, manufacture, sale, 
distribution, and disposal of Class B fire-fighting foam that contains intentionally added 
PFAS chemicals in the State as well as the manufacture, sale, and distribution for sale or 
use in the State a rug or carpet to which PFAS chemicals have been intentionally added. 
Manufacturers of rugs or carpets for sale or use in the State must establish a certificate of 
compliance to attest that the rug or carpet is in compliance and must provide the certificate 
to the MDE on request. 
 
A person who violates these provisions is subject to a civil penalty of up to $500 for a 
first violation and up to $1,000 for a second or subsequent violation. Penalty revenue is 
deposited into the general fund. 
 
Playground Surfacing Materials:  Title 6, Subtitle 16A of the Environment Article governs 
playground surfacing materials and, among other things, prohibits a person from installing, 
supplying, selling, soliciting, or offering for sale in the State playground surfacing 
materials that contain a component product, material, or substance to which PFAS 
chemicals were previously intentionally added in the formation of that component where 
the continued presence of the PFAS chemicals was desired in the component to provide a 
specific characteristic. 
 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 and §§ 9-343 through 9-344 of the Environment 
Article apply to enforce violations of Title 6, Subtitle 16A. In addition, a person who 
violates the subtitle is subject to a civil penalty of up to $2,500 for each violation or an 
administrative penalty of up to $2,500 for each violation, not exceeding $100,000 total. 
 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 of the Environment Article, which are 
established under provisions relating to Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article 
(Water Pollution Control), establish enforcement procedures that govern (1) the ability of 
MDE to issue complaints, conduct hearings, issue corrective orders, and obtain injunctive 
relief and (2) judicial review of final decisions. 
 
Under § 9-343 of the Environment Article, a person who violates any provision of or fails 
to perform any duty imposed by Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article, or who 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1022/ Page 7 
violates any provision or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or 
permit adopted or issued under that subtitle, is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a 
first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years for 
a subsequent offense. The person may also be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
In addition, a person is guilty of misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum 
fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years if the person (1) knowingly makes 
any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, 
or other document filed or required to be maintained under the subtitle or (2) falsifies, 
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required 
to be maintained under the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or 
issued under the subtitle. 
 
Pursuant to § 9-344 of the Environment Article, the Attorney General is in charge of 
prosecuting and defending cases that arise on behalf of the State. 
 
Penalty revenue collected under Subtitle 16A is deposited into the general fund. 
 
Toxics in Packaging:  Title 9, Subtitle 19 of the Environment Article governs toxics in 
packaging and, among other things, establishes that a manufacturer or distributor may not 
manufacture or knowingly sell, offer for sale, or distribute for sale or use in the State a food 
package or food packaging component designed and intended for direct food contact to 
which PFAS chemicals were intentionally added. 
 
A person who violates Title 9, Subtitle 19 or any regulation adopted in accordance with the 
subtitle is subject to civil and criminal penalty provisions. Specifically, a violator is subject 
to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation, not exceeding a total of $10,000 for 
any action. Each package or packaging component in violation constitutes a separate 
offense. Further, any person who has previously been assessed a related civil penalty and 
who willfully violates any of these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon 
conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $20,000. Penalty revenue is deposited into the 
general fund. 
 
PFAS in Cosmetics:  Under the Health-General Article, a person may not knowingly 
manufacture, sell, deliver, hold, or offer for sale in the State a cosmetic product that 
contains specified PFAS chemicals (and their salts) if intentionally added. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1022/ Page 8 
Federal Regulation and Restrictions on PFAS Use 
 
As part of its comprehensive national strategy to combat PFAS pollution, called the 
“Strategic Roadmap,” the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has taken steps to 
restrict, remediate, and research PFAS contamination and impacts. To that end, EPA has 
taken several actions under numerous federal laws designed to protect human health and 
the environment, including under the federal Toxic Substances Control Act, which 
regulates the introduction of new or already existing chemicals; the Safe Drinking Water 
Act; and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
(more commonly known as Superfund). 
 
Additionally, in 2024, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration announced that, as a result 
of voluntary market phase-out commitments, substances containing PFAS were no longer 
being sold into the U.S. market for use as grease-proofing agents on paper food packaging. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
Administrative Costs and Expenditures on Grant and Loan Awards:  General/special fund 
expenditures for MDE increase by $201,383 in fiscal 2027, and by 677,809 in fiscal 2028, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring three employees starting October 1, 2026 (one administrative specialist, 
one environmental compliance specialist, and one chemist), and three additional 
employees starting October 1, 2027 (one administrative specialist and two environmental 
compliance specialists), to (1) develop the required regulations; (2) conduct industry 
research to set registration fees at an adequate level to cover specified costs and identify 
currently unavoidable uses of PFAS chemicals; (3) develop the grant and loan program in 
consultation with MDH, MDA, DNR, CBT, and LHDs and administer both the fund and 
the new grant and loan program; (4) fulfill reporting requirements; (5) collect, maintain, 
and review manufacturer registrations and product information; and (6) conduct 
compliance activities. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses; beginning in fiscal 2028, it also includes expenditures to make 
grant and loan awards. The information and assumptions used in calculating the estimate 
are stated below: 
 
 
the bill establishes significant, ongoing requirements for MDE; 
 
it is assumed that manufacturer registration fee revenues partially offset MDE’s 
administrative costs, as discussed below, but that general funds are also needed; 
 
although the bill’s provisions related to grants and loans take effect October 1, 2026, 
MDE needs one year to coordinate with other State grant- and loan-making 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1022/ Page 9 
programs and develop the grant and loan program before grants and loans can be 
awarded; and 
 
for the grant and loan program to be viable, $250,000 in awards must be made 
each year beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Positions (New) 
3.0 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$173,961 
$391,910 
Grant and Loan Awards 
0 
$250,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
    35,899 
Total MDE Expenditures 
$201,383 
$677,809 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) ongoing grant and 
loan awards of $250,000 annually. 
 
The bill requires MDE to set the manufacturer registration fee at a level adequate to cover 
its costs to process, store, and enforce the requirements of the bill’s provisions relating to 
the registration and PFAS chemicals disclosure form requirements. However, only a 
portion of MDE’s costs (as estimated above) relate to those provisions. Accordingly, this 
analysis assumes that a combination of general funds and special funds are needed to cover 
MDE’s costs. To the extent that special fund revenues to the PFAS Fund (discussed below) 
are sufficient to cover MDE’s costs, the need for general funds decreases. 
 
Special Fund Revenues:  Special fund revenues for the PFAS Fund increase beginning as 
early as fiscal 2027 from (1) penalties (initially, primarily due to the redirection of existing 
penalties from the general fund to the new special fund and later, also from any penalties 
assessed for violations of the bill); (2) manufacturer registration fees; (3) interest earnings 
of the new fund (beginning in fiscal 2029, as discussed below); (4) any loan repayments 
(in future years, to the extent loans are made from the fund); and (5) any other money 
dedicated to the fund (as described above under Bill Summary). However, it is likely that 
special fund revenues are not significant until fiscal 2028, when affected manufacturers 
must generally be registered in order to continue selling products with intentionally added 
PFAS chemicals. 
 
Overall, a reliable estimate of the increase in special fund revenues to the new fund cannot 
be made at this time. First, it is unclear whether the registration fee that MDE must establish 
by regulation is a one-time fee or an ongoing fee. (The bill does not specify that the 
registration requirements – and payment of the registration fee – are annual, recurring 
requirements.) Second, registration fee revenues will also depend on the number of affected 
manufacturers and products and the fee structure established by MDE by regulation, which 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1022/ Page 10 
are unknown. Finally, any penalty revenues directed to the new fund cannot be reliably 
predicted in advance. 
 
General Fund Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 due to 
the redirection of existing penalty revenues from the general fund to the PFAS Fund. A 
reliable estimate of any such decrease cannot be made at this time, as complete information 
regarding recent penalties imposed under the affected provisions is not readily available. 
 
In addition, although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the PFAS Fund remain in 
the fund, the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024), which requires, notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds (with certain exceptions) 
accrue to the general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund revenues may 
increase from interest earnings of the new special fund in fiscal 2027 and 2028. However, 
any increase in general fund revenues from interest earnings is only that interest attributable 
to manufacturer registration fees since in the absence of the bill, penalty revenue would 
otherwise accrue to the general fund. Further, interest earnings from manufacturer 
registration fees is likely minimal in fiscal 2027. Thus, the primary increase in general fund 
revenues from interest earnings of the new special fund is in fiscal 2028. The fund is 
exempted from a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 
The net effect on general fund revenues in fiscal 2028 is unknown. 
 
Additional Impacts 
 
State Agencies as Consumers:  State expenditures (all/multiple fund types), may increase 
as early as fiscal 2027 to the extent that product costs increase due to the bill’s requirements 
and product bans. The overall magnitude of any such increase depends on compliance costs 
for manufacturers (which are assumed to be passed on to consumers), the availability of 
compliant alternatives, and the use of currently noncompliant products by various State 
agencies. 
 
State Entities as Eligible Grant and Loan Recipients:  To the extent that a unit of State 
government receives a grant or loan from the PFAS Fund, grant and/or loan revenues and 
expenditures for any such entity increase correspondingly, likely not before fiscal 2028. 
 
State Entities Required to Consult with the Maryland Department of the Environment:  It 
is assumed that MDH, MDA, and DNR can consult with MDE as needed using existing 
resources. (It is also assumed that CBT, a nonprofit grant-making organization established 
in statute, can consult with MDE as needed using existing resources.) 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1022/ Page 11 
Judiciary:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect the finances or 
operations of the Judiciary. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase as early as fiscal 2027 
to the extent that product costs increase as a result of the bill’s requirements and product 
bans. The overall impact depends on compliance costs for manufacturers (which are 
assumed to be passed on to consumers), the availability of compliant alternatives, and the 
use of currently noncompliant products by local governments. 
 
To the extent that a unit of local government receives a grant or loan under the bill, local 
grant and/or loan revenues and expenditures for any such entity increase correspondingly, 
likely not before fiscal 2028. 
 
It is assumed that LHDs can consult with MDE as necessary to develop and publish criteria 
for project applications for grants and loans awarded under the bill using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill likely has a meaningful impact on a range of small 
businesses throughout the State that manufacture, import, distribute, use, or sell products 
with intentionally added PFAS that are affected by the bill’s product bans, registration, 
and/or compliance requirements. Compliance under the bill includes a wide range of 
potential actions, including registering products, paying the registration fee, altering 
product components, conducting testing, obtaining certificates of compliance, providing 
product information, providing required notice, and buying back noncompliant products. 
The extent to which any affected manufacturers are Maryland small businesses, however, 
is unknown. Any increased manufacturing or compliance costs are likely passed on to 
retailers and consumers in the form of higher prices. 
 
Small businesses that manufacture, import, distribute, or sell comparable alternative 
products that do not contain intentionally added PFAS, as well as testing labs, 
environmental consulting firms, and compliance service providers, may see a meaningful 
increase in the demand for their products and services. 
 
Small businesses that are eligible for and receive grants or loans under the bill benefit from 
such funding, likely not before fiscal 2028. 
 
Additional Comments:  Nationwide, states are increasingly taking action to legislate 
responses to PFAS by introducing product bans and taking efforts to prevent and address 
PFAS in the environment. According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, 
in 2025, more than 300 PFAS-related bills were considered across 39 states. 
 
Of note, in 2025, New Mexico passed the Per- and Poly--Fluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) 
Protection Act which contains similar provisions to this bill. Additionally, Minnesota 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1022/ Page 12 
passed legislation in 2023 that requires manufacturers to report intentionally added PFAS 
in products sold in Minnesota and to pay a fee. Initial reports are due July 1, 2026; 
Minnesota has established the PFAS Product Reporting and Information System for 
Manufacturers through which manufacturers are able to submit product reports and pay 
fees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 686 (Senator Love) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Prince 
George’s and Howard counties; City of Annapolis; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan 
State University; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of General Services; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Chesapeake 
Bay Trust; National Conference of State Legislatures; Minnesota Pollution Control 
Agency; U.S. Food and Drug Administration; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12