START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1097 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1097 
(Delegate Roberts, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public High Schools - Sports Injury Recordkeeping and Reporting - 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each public high school in Maryland to maintain a standardized injury 
log with specified elements for all injuries that occur during athletic activities conducted 
by the school. Each injury must be documented within 24 hours of the injury being 
observed or reported. A coach, certified athletic trainer, school nurse, or other designated 
school personnel may document an injury. An injury log must be maintained by a school 
for at least five years and made available on request by the local school system and the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) for compliance and safety review 
purposes. By July 1, 2027, and each July 1 thereafter, each local school system must submit 
an aggregated report to MSDE of high school athletic injuries for the preceding 
school year. MSDE, in collaboration with the Maryland Department of Health, the 
Maryland Athletic Trainers’ Association, and the Maryland Public Secondary Schools 
Athletic Association (MPSSA), may adopt regulations and standardized reporting forms 
necessary to implement the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MSDE can, at its discretion, adopt regulations and standardized 
reporting forms using existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Some local school systems incur minimal additional training and technology 
costs beginning in FY 2027. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1097/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State regulations under MSDE govern the athletic programs for all 
high school students in Maryland public secondary schools, which are members of the 
MPSSAA. Local school systems may adopt rules governing their athletic programs that 
are more restrictive than those of MPSSAA. 
 
Each public middle school and high school must develop a venue-specific emergency 
action plan for all athletic facilities. A venue-specific action plan includes (1) the operation 
and use of automatic external defibrillators; (2) heat acclimatization; (3) coordination of 
care for other emergent injuries, including cervical spinal injury, concussion and closed 
head injury, major orthopedic injuries, and severe weather for outdoor facilities; and  
(4) a specified cardiac emergency response plan. All high school coaches are required to 
have completed a one-credit course in the prevention and care of athletic injuries. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Some public school systems, including Frederick County Public 
Schools, Montgomery County Public Schools, and Wicomico County Public Schools 
advise that they already maintain the injury data required by the bill and can implement the 
record retention and reporting requirements with existing resources. 
 
However, some local school systems may incur minimal additional training and technology 
costs beginning in FY 2027. Anne Arundel County Public Schools anticipates (1) increased 
training costs for personnel required to log and report on injuries incurred during school 
athletic activities and (2) increased pay for athletic trainers to compensate them for the 
increased workload. Saint Mary’s County Public Schools anticipates annual expenditures 
of about $7,500 to procure injury tracking technology. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County Public 
Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1097/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3