START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 1034 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1034 
(Delegate Stinnett, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Child Care Entities - Child Abuse and Neglect - Training and Reporting 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a “provider” (i.e., an individual who is employed by, contracts with, 
volunteers for, or otherwise works for a “child care entity”) to complete specified child 
abuse training under § 5-716 of the Family Law Article within six months after the initial 
date of employment and every two years thereafter. The bill also explicitly includes such a 
provider under the definition of “educator or human service worker” within Title 5,  
Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article, which generally governs the reporting and 
investigation of suspected child abuse and neglect. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Likely none, as all child care staff and providers are already required to 
complete child abuse and neglect training, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “child care entity” is an entity that (1) provides child care services and 
(2) is licensed or regulated by the Division of Early Childhood Development within the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). By July 1, 2027, and each July 1 
thereafter, a child care entity must certify to MSDE that each provider is in compliance 
with the training requirement. A provider who violates these requirements is subject to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
  
HB 1034/ Page 2 
(1) a corrective action plan; (2) suspension or termination of employment; or 
(3) suspension or revocation of the provider’s license. Likewise, a child care entity that 
violates the bill’s requirements is subject to the suspension or revocation of the entity’s 
license or registration. An individual who is a provider for a child care entity on the bill’s 
July 1, 2026 effective date must complete the required training by January 1, 2027. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Reporting of Abuse or Neglect  
 
Each health care practitioner, police officer, or educator or human service worker acting in 
a professional capacity in the State who has reason to believe that a child has been subjected 
to abuse or neglect (1) must notify the local department or appropriate law enforcement 
agency and (2) if acting as a staff member of a hospital, public health agency, child care 
institution, juvenile detention center, school, or similar institution, must immediately notify 
and give all information required to the head of the institution or the designee of the head.  
 
Online Course for Mandatory Reporter Training  
 
The Department of Human Services must post on its website a free online course on the 
identification, prevention, and reporting of child abuse. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that child abuse and neglect training is already 
required for all child care staff and providers through the Licensing Branch’s Basic Health 
and Safety (BHS) training. This training is required for all individuals working with 
children in licensed child care centers, family child care homes, large family child care 
homes, letters of compliance facilities, and other related programs. 
 
Child care staff and providers must generally complete the training within 90 days of 
employment and then annually thereafter. Under the bill, this timeline is altered such that 
the training must be completed within six months after initial employment and then every 
two years thereafter. Therefore, the bill establishes a reduced frequency of required 
training. 
 
MSDE notes that creating a separate abuse and neglect training course may result in 
additional costs. However, the department intends to continue its existing BHS training, as 
it already generally conforms to the bill’s requirements (including the proof of completion 
requirement). Moreover, MSDE already has protocols and regulations in place for 
enforcement actions against staff and providers who fail to complete the required training 
(including warning letters, compliance agreements, employment suspension, and 
suspension or revocation of provider licenses/registrations). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
  
HB 1034/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3