START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1045 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1045 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program - Data Disclosure to Federal Law 
Enforcement - Limitation 
 
 
This emergency bill restricts the circumstances under which prescription monitoring data 
must be disclosed to a federal law enforcement agency. The Prescription Drug Monitoring 
Program (PDMP) must disclose such data on issuance of a subpoena, for the purpose of 
furthering an existing bona fide individual investigation, unless the data has been 
determined by the Protected Health Care Commission (PHCC) to be sensitive health 
services information that has been determined by the Secretary of Health to be legally 
protected health care. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund 
expenditures increase by $25,000 in FY 2027 only for programming updates. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
25,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($25,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1045/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Legally Protected Health Care 
 
“Legally protected health care” means all reproductive health services, medications, and 
supplies related to the provision of abortion care and gender-affirming treatment and other 
sensitive health services as determined by the Secretary based on the recommendation of 
PHCC. “Sensitive health services” include gender-affirming care and reproductive health 
services other than abortion care. 
 
Protected Health Care Commission 
 
Chapters 248 and 249 of 2023 established PHCC under MDH to make specified 
recommendations to the Secretary of Health on what should be classified as legally 
protected health care. 
 
PHCC must identify sensitive health services information by diagnosis, procedural, 
medication, or related codes for which disclosure by a health information exchange (HIE) 
or electronic health network (EHN) to a treating provider, business entity, another HIE, or 
another EHN would create a substantial risk to patients or health care providers. PHCC 
may consult with organizations with expertise in (1) legal issues impacting providers of 
legally protected health care; (2) consumer health privacy; (3) health information 
technology; and (4) clinical, policy, or legal issues related to the work of PHCC. 
 
PHCC must (1) select a chair each year; (2) meet at least four times per year; and (3) issue 
semiannual reports to the Secretary on its recommendation, as specified, including an 
assessment of the potential risk to patients and health care providers that would result from 
the disclosure of the sensitive health services that are addressed in the reports. Within 
60 days of receiving a report, the Secretary must submit a written response to the report, 
including the findings and determinations of the Secretary, to PHCC and specified 
committees of the General Assembly. 
 
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program 
 
Chapter 166 of 2011 established PDMP to assist with the identification and 
prevention of prescription drug abuse and the identification and investigation of 
unlawful prescription drug diversion. PDMP must monitor the prescribing and 
dispensing of controlled dangerous substances schedules II through V and naloxone 
medication. In general, PDMP data (1) are confidential, privileged, and not subject 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1045/ Page 3 
to discovery, subpoena, or other means of legal compulsion in civil litigation; (2) are 
not public records; and (3) may not be disclosed to any person, subject to specified 
exceptions. 
 
One of the specified exceptions requires that PDMP disclose prescription monitoring 
data to a federal law enforcement agency or a State or local law enforcement agency, 
on issuance of a subpoena, for the purpose of furthering an existing bona fide 
individual investigation. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that, under the bill’s restrictions, it would need to 
implement a manual process for handling federal subpoenas, which can be handled with 
existing budgeted resources. MDH must also update its PDMP database to support 
compliance with the bill, which would incur a one-time expense. Although the bill is an 
emergency bill, these expenses are likely incurred in fiscal 2027. Therefore, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $25,000 in fiscal 2027 only for contractual services 
to update the database. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3