START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1026 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1026 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Regulation - Rounding Cash Transactions - Authorization 
 
   
This emergency bill authorizes a merchant to round certain cash transactions and the 
amount of change due to a customer up or down to the nearest cent divisible by five, as 
specified. The bill also authorizes an employer to round a wage that the employer pays 
using cash up or down to the nearest cent divisible by five, as specified. The bill preempts 
any existing regulations, rules, and ordinances that conflict with the Act. The Secretary of 
Labor may adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. The 
Maryland Department of Labor can handle any increase in wage payment claims and the 
preparation of compliance materials with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Cash” means United States coins and currency and does not include (1) a paper instrument 
other than a federal reserve note or (2) a gift card. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1026/ Page 2 
A “customer” means a purchaser of a good or service from a merchant. A “merchant” is a 
person engaged in the trade or business of that sale of goods and services. 
 
“Total Price” means the price a customer is responsible for paying for a good or service 
after a merchant (1) subtracts any discount or deduction; (2) applies any applicable tax or 
fee; and (3) rounds the transaction consistent with this bill. 
 
Cash Transactions 
 
The bill authorizes a merchant to determine the total price of a good or service (after 
applying applicable discounts or taxes) or the amount of change due to a customer in the 
following manner: 
 
 
if the price ends in 1, 2, 6, or 7 cents, by rounding the price down to the nearest cent 
divisible by five; or 
 
if the price ends in 3, 4, 8, or 9 cents, by rounding the price up to the nearest cent 
divisible by five. 
 
The provisions for cash transactions apply to (1) an in-person, cash transaction if the price 
totals at least 5 cents or (2) a telephone, mail, or internet transaction for which a customer 
pays using cash if the price totals at least 5 cents.  
 
For transactions totaling less than 5 cents, a merchant may round the total price up to 
5 cents. The bill does not apply to a cash transaction for a good and service in exchange 
for exact change. 
 
Employer Wage Rounding 
 
An employer may round a wage that the employer pays using cash consistent with the 
rounding methodology specified in the bill. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Each employer must set regular pay periods and must pay each employee at least once in 
every two weeks or twice per month. However, an employer may pay an administrative, 
executive, or professional employee less frequently. 
 
Whenever the Commissioner of Labor and Industry determines that the law under the 
Enforcement Article has been violated, they may attempt to resolve the issue through 
mediation or ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of an employee. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1026/ Page 3 
If a court finds that an employer withheld the wage in violation of the Article and not as a 
result of a bona fide dispute, the court may award the employee up to three times the unpaid 
wage, plus reasonable counsel fees and other costs. Any wages recovered under this Article 
must be paid to the employee without cost. 
 
Sales Taxes 
 
The State sales tax is imposed on (1) a retail sale in the State and (2) a use, in the State, of 
tangible personal property, a digital code, a digital product, or a taxable service. In general, 
the tax rate is 6 cents for each exact dollar and prorated amounts for each part of a dollar. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 893 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3