START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1147 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1147 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Public Service Commission – Administrative Operations and Personnel Matters 
(Public Service Commission Flexibility Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to establish a personnel 
management system for its employees that operates independently of the State Personnel 
Management System (SPMS). Instead of only for specified personnel, all employees’ 
compensation is to be determined by PSC and, if possible, in accordance with the State pay 
plan. The bill expands the Executive Secretary’s job responsibilities and exempts PSC from 
most State procurement law. The exercise of PSC’s authority is an essential government 
function, and PSC may take necessary actions to implement laws under its jurisdiction. 
PSC is subject to be audited by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) at any time and is 
exempt from State and local taxation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $100,600 in FY 2027, which reflects 
three additional PSC employees and cost savings from not using the Department of Budget 
and Management’s (DBM) shared services. DBM reimbursable revenues and expenditures 
decrease by $192,810 annually beginning in FY 2027. Future year expenditures reflect 
annualization and ongoing costs. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $325,892 
for the three new positions. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
ReimB. Rev. 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
SF Expenditure 
$100,600 
$154,500 
$170,500 
$186,900 
$203,400 
ReimB. Exp. 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
($192,800) 
Net Effect 
($100,600) 
($154,500) 
($170,500) 
($186,900) 
($203,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1147/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The personnel management system that PSC establishes must be based on 
merit and include fair and equitable procedures for redressing grievances and appointing, 
hiring, promoting, terminating, and removing employees. PSC employees are subject to 
Divisions II and III of the State Personnel and Pensions Article (pensions and other 
retirement and pension provisions). PSC employees that are subject to SPMS on  
July 1, 2026, must remain subject to SPMS until PSC adopts an independent personnel 
management system. PSC must adopt regulations to govern the personnel management 
system as specified. 
 
PSC permanent employees must:  (1) be considered permanent State employees for 
purposes of transferring to or from another State government position; (2) receive credit 
for service with PSC for any accrued leave and benefits; and (3) be granted the same 
compensation consideration that would be provided to an employee transferring within 
another division of State government. 
 
The bill specifies that the employee designated by the Executive Secretary of PSC to 
perform the duties of the Executive Secretary when the Executive Secretary is absent must 
serve as the Deputy Executive Secretary. The Executive Secretary must direct and 
supervise the administrative affairs and activities of PSC in accordance with its regulations 
and policies; approve all accounts for salaries, per diem payments, and all allowable 
expenses of PSC, its employees, and its consultants; and approve all expenses incidental to 
operating PSC. 
 
PSC must submit its operating program budget to DBM for inclusion in the State budget 
book for informational purposes, keep records using generally accepted accounting 
principles, and have an independent certified accountant audit the accounts and 
transactions of PSC at the end of each fiscal year. The bill repeals the requirement for PSC 
to submit changes in salary plans to DBM. 
 
Instead of being required to hire experts as PSC considers necessary under current law and 
retaining on a case by case basis additional experts as required for a particular matter, PSC 
may employ or retain as independent contractors, and set compensation for, consultants 
and other experts as specified. 
 
Current Law:  PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies subject to its 
jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of the public and (2) promote 
adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in the State without unjust 
discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, the economy of the State, 
the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected workers, the conservation of 
natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, the achievement of the State’s 
climate commitments for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and the protection of a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1147/ Page 3 
public service company’s infrastructure against cybersecurity threats. PSC must also 
enforce compliance with legal requirements by public service companies. “Public service 
company” means a common carrier company, electric company, gas company, sewage 
disposal company, telegraph company, telephone company, water company, or any 
combination of public service companies. 
 
PSC is a quasi-judicial independent agency under the Executive Branch that is 
special funded by the Public Utility Regulation Fund, which receives almost all of its 
revenues from assessments on public utilities. Except as otherwise provided in law, all 
PSC personnel are subject to the provisions of the State Personnel and Pensions Article. 
 
Procurement 
 
The Department of General Services has oversight over specified PSC procurements above 
a delegated threshold. Under § 13-117 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, PSC 
may conduct a competitive sealed bid higher than their small procurement threshold for 
any procurement of consultants for requirements that are legislatively mandated with 
specific time frames established in law that will address issues related only to climate 
change, the environment, energy, and greenhouse gas emissions. Before awarding a 
procurement contract under § 13-117, PSC is required to obtain the approval of the head 
of the PSC and the Chief Procurement Officer, or their designees. 
 
Procurement Exemptions 
 
More than 40 State entities are exempt, in whole or in part, from State procurement law. 
Subject to specified exceptions, an entity that is exempt from State procurement law must 
have written policies and procedures for its procurements; the written policies must be 
approved by the Board of Public Works. 
 
State Expenditures:  PSC anticipates needing to:  (1) establish a human resource team to 
oversee personnel issues; (2) establish policies for procurement; and (3) hire an 
independent certified public accountant to review records. The fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced includes $325,892 in special funds for three new positions for PSC, which PSC 
advises is sufficient to implement the bill. 
 
PSC currently participates in DBM’s human resources (HR) shared services program, and 
the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $192,810 of special funds for PSC. Under 
the bill, PSC does not need DBM’s HR shared services, so special fund expenditures for 
PSC decrease by $192,810 annually beginning in fiscal 2027, and DBM reimbursable 
revenues and expenditures correspondingly decrease. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by a net amount of $100,616 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 90-day implementation delay from the bill’s  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1147/ Page 4 
July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring an HR administrator, 
an HR director, and an HR officer to oversee and manage PSC’s independent personnel 
management system. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. It also includes cost savings of $192,810 from not 
participating in DBM’s HR shared services program. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced 
includes $325,892 of special funds for these positions. 
 
Positions 
3 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$266,004 
DBM HR Shared Services 
(192,810) 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$100,616 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Additionally, the bill gives PSC additional flexibility in terms of salary setting and 
procurement, which generates operational efficiencies and potential fiscal impact. 
However, PSC advises that it does not need additional resources beyond the  
three HR employees. 
 
OLA can audit PSC with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 842 (Senator Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of General Services; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Public 
Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4