START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1171 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1171 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Howard County Board of Education - Student Member - Voting  
Ho. Co. 7-26 
 
 
This bill expands the matters on which the student member of the Howard County Board 
of Education can vote on to include (1) geographical attendance areas; (2) acquisition and 
disposition of real property and matters relating to school construction; (3) donations; 
(4) condemnation; (5) consolidation of schools and transportation of students; 
(6) budgetary matters; and (7) student suspension and expulsion. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
Howard County school finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Howard County Board of Education consists of seven elected members 
and one student member. The school board is 1 of 20 elected boards in the State; there are 
also 4 hybrid boards. Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership shows the 
selection methods, terms of office, and membership of the 24 local boards of education. 
All 24 local school boards have either student members or student representatives who 
regularly present at board meetings; however, only 8 boards allow student members to 
vote, which generally excludes authority to vote on matters relating to collective bargaining 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1171/ Page 2 
and personnel. Three counties with voting student members (including Howard County) 
also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to operating and capital 
budgets. 
 
The student member of the Howard County Board of Education must be a county resident 
and an eleventh or twelfth grade student in the Howard County public school system. The 
student is elected by students in grades 6-11 in accordance with procedures established by 
the school board and serves a one-year term beginning on July 1 of each year. A student 
who finishes second in the election serves as the alternate student member. 
 
The student member may vote on all matters before the board except those relating to:   
 
 
geographical attendance areas; 
 
acquisition and disposition of real property and matters relating to school 
construction; 
 
employment of architects; 
 
donations; 
 
condemnations; 
 
consolidation of schools and student transportation; 
 
appointment and compensation for the county superintendent; 
 
employee discipline and certain appeals; 
 
budgetary matters; 
 
personnel (including appointment and promotion of staff and discipline of 
certificated staff); 
 
collective bargaining; and 
 
student suspension and expulsion. 
 
The student may attend a closed session of the board only if a majority of the voting 
members approve. Five affirmative votes are needed to pass a motion when the student 
member is voting; four votes are needed when the student member is not authorized to 
vote. 
 
Student Member Compensation 
 
A student member who completes a full term on the board is entitled to a $5,000 higher 
education scholarship which must be paid directly to the educational institution the student 
attends and is not considered compensation for purpose of calculating taxable income. A 
student member is limited to one scholarship, regardless of the number of terms served as 
the student member. The student member is also entitled to reimbursement for travel and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1171/ Page 3 
other expenses, on submission of expense vouchers. The student member is not entitled to 
any compensation or payment other than the scholarship and expense reimbursements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1171/ Page 4 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. All 24 boards have either student members 
or student representatives who regularly present at board meetings; however, only 8 boards 
allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority to vote on matters 
relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with voting student 
members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to operating and 
capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership 
of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2026 
 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Anne Arundel 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore City 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed by Governor from county at large 
7 elected from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed by Governor from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1171/ Page 5 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Harford 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed by County Executive from 
county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (1-year term) 
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Kent 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Prince George’s 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Somerset2 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1171/ Page 6 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Washington3 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Wicomico4 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
4 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed and elected board:  (1) in Baltimore County, members are 
appointed by the Governor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore County School Board 
Nominating Commission; (2) in Caroline County, members are appointed by the Governor with the advice 
and consent of the Senate; (3) in Baltimore City, members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names 
provided by the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel; and (4) in Harford County, 
members are appointed by the county executive with the advice and consent of the county council. 
2 Although not in statute, the Somerset County Board of Education reports that there are three nonvoting 
student representatives who give presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the 
three regular high schools in the county. 
3Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
4 Chapter 429 of 2025 codified at least one nonvoting student member on the Wicomico County Board of 
Education. The Wicomico County Board of Education includes four student representatives who give 
presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the four high schools in the county. 
At each meeting, one of the four student representatives sits with the regular board members on the dais for 
the full meeting, while other student board members come forward to speak as needed. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6