START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1113 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1113 
(Delegate Lewis) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Bus Obstruction Monitoring Systems and Bus Stop Zones 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle in a “bus stop 
zone” if a transit vehicle is present in the zone except under specified circumstances. The 
bill also makes a series of technical changes to allow automated enforcement systems that 
may be used to record violations related to dedicated bus lanes (renamed from “bus lane 
monitoring systems” to “bus obstruction monitoring systems”) to record and issue citations 
for violations of the new prohibition; existing requirements related to the automated 
enforcement systems continue to apply. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures may increase significantly 
for the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) to establish “bus stop zones,” as discussed 
below. General fund revenues increase minimally from the penalty provision applicable to 
the new offense and from additional contested bus obstruction monitoring system cases in 
District Court beginning in FY 2027. General fund expenditures are not anticipated to be 
materially affected, as discussed below. Enforcement of the new offense can be handled 
using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues increase from additional citations from bus 
obstruction monitoring systems that are prepaid. Expenditures for local jurisdictions may 
increase to establish “bus stop zones,” as discussed below. Potential additional local effects 
are discussed below; enforcement of the new offense can be handled using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1113/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a bus stop zone if a 
transit vehicle is present in the bus stop zone unless the person (1) is authorized by the local 
jurisdiction in which the bus stop zone is located or (2) is actively engaged in the loading 
or unloading of passengers and has activated the vehicle’s hazard warning lights. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Dedicated Bus Lanes – Generally 
 
A “dedicated bus lane” is a lane designated for use by mass transit vehicles owned, 
operated, or contracted by MTA, the Washinton Metropolitan Area Transit Authority 
(WMATA), or a local department of transportation. It includes transit bus stops located 
proximate to lanes designated for use by mass transit vehicles. 
 
Chapter 751 of 2024 made numerous changes to the permissions and prohibitions 
associated with dedicated bus lanes. Under the Act, a person may not drive, stand, or park 
a vehicle in a dedicated bus lane unless authorized by the local jurisdiction in which the 
dedicated bus lane is located. However, the following vehicles may be driven, allowed to 
stand, or, as appropriate, parked in a dedicated bus lane. 
 
 
a transit vehicle owned, operated, or contracted by MTA, WMATA, or a local 
department of transportation; 
 
a school bus; 
 
a bicycle; 
 
an emergency vehicle; and 
 
a vehicle making a right turn at the next immediate intersection. 
 
Bus Lane Monitoring Systems 
 
Chapter 751 also established a statewide authorization (previously only applicable in 
Baltimore City) for local jurisdictions to use bus lane monitoring systems to enforce the 
prohibitions related to dedicated bus lanes. Under the Act, a bus lane monitoring system 
may be used to record images of motor vehicles during the commission of a violation. 
Generally, an agency may issue warnings or citations to vehicle owners or drivers 
committing a violation; however, during the first 45 days of operation of the monitoring 
system, a warning notice must be mailed in place of a citation. 
 
The maximum fine for a violation recorded by a bus lane monitoring system is $75. 
Otherwise, a violation is a misdemeanor, subject to a maximum fine of $500. Unless a 
driver of a motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time of the 
violation, a person who receives a citation by mail may: 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1113/ Page 3 
 
pay the specified civil penalty directly to the local jurisdiction; or 
 
elect to stand trial in District Court, which is granted exclusive jurisdiction in 
proceedings for civil infractions; in a contested case, the penalty must be paid to the 
District Court. 
 
A citation issued by a bus lane monitoring system is not a moving violation for which 
points may be assessed and may not be placed on the driving record of the owner or driver 
of the vehicle. However, it may be treated as a parking violation for purposes of 
enforcement. In addition, the citation may not be considered in the provision of vehicle 
insurance. If the civil penalty is not paid and the violation is not contested, the  
Motor Vehicle Administration may refuse to register or reregister the motor vehicle. From 
the fines it collects, a political subdivision may recover the costs of implementing and 
administering the bus lane monitoring system; any remaining revenue balances must be 
spent for public safety purposes, including pedestrian safety programs. 
 
There are additional requirements in State law for bus lane monitoring systems related to 
training, record keeping, and retention of recorded images. 
 
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places 
 
The Maryland Vehicle Law expressly prohibits stopping, standing, or parking in specified 
places except as necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or 
the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. For example, a person is 
prohibited from stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle in front of a public driveway, on 
a sidewalk, in an intersection, on a crosswalk, and on any bridge or other elevated structure 
on a highway. 
 
Maryland Transit Administration 
 
MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit system throughout the Baltimore-Washington 
metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, 
such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter buses, MARC trains, and 
mobility/paratransit vehicles. Aside from the District of Columbia transit system, MDOT 
and MTA are generally the agencies responsible for the construction and operation of 
transit lines in the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
New Offense Enforceability – Bus Stop Zones  
 
The bill establishes a new prohibition under the Maryland Vehicle Law for stopping, 
standing, or parking a vehicle in a “bus stop zone” if a transit vehicle is present in the zone 
and authorizes the dedicated bus lane automated enforcement systems to be used to record 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1113/ Page 4 
violations of the new prohibition. However, because the bill does not define what 
constitutes a “bus stop zone,” the enforceability of the new prohibition is unclear. The 
Department of Legislative advises that, to ensure the new offense established by the bill is 
enforceable, MTA may be required to use signs to clearly delineate which areas count as a 
“bus stop zone.” To the extent this delineation is required, TTF expenditures may increase 
significantly to install the signs. 
 
Nevertheless, because the prohibition applies only when a transit vehicle is present in a 
“bus stop zone,” for purposes of this analysis it is assumed that the prohibition applies 
when a person is blocking a transit vehicle from stopping at, or moving away from, the 
appropriate location at a bus stop. Therefore, general fund revenues increase minimally 
from the penalty provision applicable to the new offense under the Maryland Vehicle Law 
(maximum $500 fine). Any such impact, however, cannot be reliably estimated without 
actual experience under the bill. 
 
Judiciary 
 
Due to the bill’s expansion of the type of violations enforceable using any new and existing 
bus obstruction monitoring systems, the total number of citations issued may increase 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027. As a result of this potential increase in citations, the 
number of individuals opting for a trial in District Court may increase. Accordingly, 
general fund revenues may increase minimally as fine revenues paid by individuals 
convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. 
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the 
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an information technology upgrade to 
automate the process at approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be 
incurred. 
 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1113/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Similar to the effect discussed above for MTA, local governments 
may incur signage costs to delineate bus stop zones along local roads. Additionally, local 
government revenues and expenditures may increase for local governments that have 
implemented bus lane monitoring systems as citations are issued for violations of the new 
prohibition, and the funds are used for authorized purposes. However, neither impact can 
be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill. 
 
Additionally, as noted above, local jurisdictions are already authorized to implement bus 
lane monitoring systems. It is unclear if the bill’s expanded authority related to bus stop 
zones will directly result in additional jurisdictions electing to implement (or expand) 
automated monitoring systems. Should this be the case: 
 
 
expenditures increase to install the systems and for other administrative expenses 
that may be incurred for the operation of the program (e.g., mailing or contractual 
costs); 
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the 
appropriate local jurisdiction; and 
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 206 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 936 (Senator West, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5