START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1196 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1196 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - Mobile Home Parks - Water Quality Testing 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) (1) develop and 
begin implementing a Mobile Home Park Water Quality Testing Program by 
January 1, 2027, and (2) develop a statewide action plan to address and improve water 
quality in mobile home parks by January 1, 2028. The bill establishes related water quality 
testing, remediation, and notice requirements for MDE and mobile home park owners. The 
bill also establishes related enforcement and penalty provisions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Known MDE general fund expenditures increase by $380,000 in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization, inflation, and known ongoing costs. MDE general fund 
expenditures increase significantly further beginning in FY 2028 for laboratory costs 
associated with water quality testing (which may include reimbursements to the Maryland 
Department of Health’s (MDH) Laboratories Administration if MDH conducts the 
additional testing, as discussed below); MDH general fund expenditures and revenues may 
be likewise affected. State revenues are otherwise not materially affected. (Water quality 
testing costs are not quantified in the table below.) 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$380,000 
$561,700 
$876,000 
$961,200 
$1,003,100 
Net Effect 
($380,000) 
($561,700) 
($876,000) 
($961,200) 
($1,003,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  It is assumed that affected local entities can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing resources and that local finances and operations are not materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.    
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1196/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDE must coordinate with housing, health, or related agencies of local 
jurisdictions to identify potential funding, including grant money, to (1) support 
remediation; (2) improve water quality; and (3) enforce the bill’s requirements. 
 
Mobile Home Park Water Quality Testing Program  
 
Required Program Components, Implementation Timeline, and Priorities:  By 
January 1, 2027, MDE must develop and begin implementing a Mobile Home Park Water 
Quality Testing Program. In developing the program, MDE must (1) ensure that materials, 
information, and communications shared with residents are available in English, Spanish, 
and any other language requested by residents; (2) interview residents to understand any 
concerns with water quality, as specified; and (3) determine and approve a specific 
sampling plan for each park that requires water quality testing necessary to assess the 
quality and safety of finished water and evaluate resident concerns, as specified.  
 
MDE must implement water quality testing under the program in accordance with the 
following timeline:  
 
 
by January 1, 2028, at 25% of the total number of parks;  
 
by January 1, 2029, at 50% of the total number of parks;  
 
by January 1, 2030, at 75% of the total number of parks; and  
 
by January 1, 2031, at 100% of the total number parks.  
 
MDE must prioritize the required water quality testing as specified under the bill. If the 
number of requests for water quality testing under the program exceeds MDE’s capacity to 
perform the testing, MDE must create a waiting list.  
 
Field Sampling, Testing, Analysis, and Response to Findings of Water Quality Issues:  
MDE must (1) require any field sampling and analysis performed under the program to be 
conducted by a qualified professional, as determined by MDE, and (2) consider alternate 
testing methods to avoid testing within a mobile home without the resident’s consent.  
 
MDE may (1) decline a request to test finished water for a specific contaminant if specified 
conditions are met and (2) contract with a third party to perform the required testing. Any 
testing conducted under the program is in addition to any other testing that MDE performs 
for mobile home parks.  
 
On a finding by MDE of a water quality issue, MDE must (1) perform or require the 
performance of additional testing, as specified; (2) provide notice of the water quality issue 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1196/ Page 3 
in accordance with the notification requirements established by the bill (discussed in more 
detail below) and to the local housing agency and local health department (LHD);  
(3) review and approve any remediation plan prepared in accordance with the bill 
(discussed in more detail below) or deny the plan with written explanations and corrective 
recommendations to the plan; and (4) notify the residents, the local housing agency, and 
the LHD upon completion of the remediation.  
 
Required Notification:  Within 10 days of receiving the water quality test results performed 
under the program, MDE must provide written notice to the resident who requested the test 
(if applicable), the park owner, the LHD in the county where the park is located, the 
municipality in which the park is located, and the water supplier. If the test results identify 
a water quality issue, MDE must include in the notice a summary of the test results (and 
related specified information), information on any violation of water quality standards, and 
specified guidance.  
 
Requirements for Park Owners:  On receiving a notice from MDE under the above 
provisions, the park owner must (1) notify residents within five days; (2) provide the 
information and guidance provided by MDE to residents; (3) make the notice available in 
English, Spanish, and any other language requested by residents; (4) make an interpreter 
available, as necessary; (5) certify compliance with these requirements to MDE; (6) post 
the test results, as specified, in a conspicuous place in the common areas of the park;  
(7) keep the notice posted for at least 120 days; and (8) use professional translation services, 
if necessary.  
 
On receiving a notice from MDE under the above provisions, the park owner must also: 
 
 
comply with any order issued by MDE; and 
 
within 120 days, in a manner required by MDE, (1) prepare and submit a 
remediation plan to MDE to address the water quality issue, including deadlines and 
status updates; (2) complete remediation based on a schedule set by MDE; and  
(3) consult with MDE and provide reasonable access to drinking water or approved 
filters, if necessary, to address acute health risks.  
 
A park owner may not impose the cost of complying with the bill on the park residents.  
 
MDE may issue an order to require park owner compliance with the above requirements. 
The park owner may appeal an order by requesting a hearing with MDE within 20 days of 
the receipt of an order.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1196/ Page 4 
Statewide Action Plan to Address and Improve Water Quality in Mobile Home Parks   
 
By January 1, 2028, MDE must develop a statewide action plan to address and improve 
water quality in mobile home parks. In developing the action plan, MDE must conduct 
outreach to park residents to, among other things, gather information, receive input about 
water quality concerns, coordinate with residents to identify opportunities for 
improvement, consult or coordinate with specified entities, consider the results of any 
water quality testing to date, and collect relevant data about finished water.  
 
The action plan must (1) include a status report of water quality testing to date; (2) develop 
a strategy for testing parks not yet tested; (3) identify opportunities to improve water 
quality, as specified; (4) include timelines for implementation; and (5) include a written 
description of how resident feedback was incorporated into the plan. 
 
Enforcement  
 
To enforce the bill, MDE must issue notices of violations, penalties, or enforcement orders. 
A park owner that fails to comply with the bill’s requirements is subject to an 
administrative penalty of up to $10,000 for each violation and $5,000 for each successive 
month of continued violations. It is a violation of the bill to evict or threaten to evict a 
resident based on an action taken under the bill.  
 
Nothing in the bill precludes a resident from taking legal action against a park owner.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and State Implementation 
 
MDE is responsible for the primary enforcement (primacy) of the federal Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) in Maryland. This means MDE is charged with ensuring that water 
quality and quantity at all public water systems meet the needs of the public and comply 
with federal and State regulations. According to MDE’s Safe Drinking Water Act 
Annual Compliance Report for Calendar Year 2024 to the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, routine compliance activities include regular on-site inspections of water systems 
to identify any sanitary defects, technical assistance, and a permitting process that helps 
ensure that systems obtain the best possible source of water. These standards generally do 
not apply to private drinking water wells. Rather, private well owners are responsible for 
the safety of their own wells after initial construction and certification is completed. 
 
Specific requirements for public water systems are included under COMAR 26.04.01. 
Among other things, before constructing a new public water system, or increasing the 
capacity or significantly modifying an existing public water system, a construction permit 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1196/ Page 5 
must be obtained from the approving authority. There are also several treatment 
requirements and maximum contaminant level standards. 
 
Public water systems are systems that provide the public water for human consumption 
through pipes or other constructed conveyances and have at least 15 service connections 
or regularly serve at least 25 individuals. 
 
Routine Monitoring and Sampling 
 
Public water systems are required to sample and monitor for a variety of contaminants on 
a routine basis depending on the population served, source type, and historical monitoring 
data of the water system. Generally, the larger the population served by a water system, the 
more frequent the monitoring and reporting requirements. Violations can occur (1) when 
contaminants are found at levels exceeding the federally established maximum 
contaminant level; (2) for failure to monitor and/or report as required; (3) for failure to use 
required treatment techniques; or (4) for failure to notify the public under certain 
circumstances. 
 
Notice Requirements for Drinking Water Violations, Generally  
 
A water supplier must give notice to MDE and people served by the water system and give 
written notice to noncollegiate educational institutions, public schools, family child care 
homes, and child care centers when the water system (1) fails to comply with an applicable 
maximum contaminant level, treatment technique requirement, or testing procedure 
prescribed by a drinking water regulation or fails to perform required monitoring; (2) is 
subject to a variance granted for an inability to meet a maximum contaminant level or an 
exemption; (3) fails to comply with the requirements set by a variance or exemption; or 
(4) has concentration levels of an unregulated contaminant for which the State may require 
notice due to the risk of public health. 
 
MDE is also in the process of promulgating related regulations to establish guidelines and 
requirements for public water systems when there are outages, flooded wells, and flooded 
springs. Among other things, the regulations and an anticipated guidance manual will 
(1) provide instructions to water systems on when and how to issue and lift a boil water 
advisory in response to an outage or flooded well or spring; (2) update public notice 
standards for when an outage or flooded well or spring occurs; (3) establish related 
disinfection procedures and standards; and (4) establish related water quality sampling 
standards that will dictate when a boil water advisory may be lifted. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1196/ Page 6 
Permitting and Water Supply Requirements for Mobile Home Parks  
 
MDH regulations under COMAR 10.16.02 establish construction, equipment, sanitation, 
operation, and maintenance requirements for mobile home parks in the State. Generally, a 
person must have a permit issued by an approving authority to operate a mobile home park. 
The approving authority is the Secretary of Health or the Secretary’s designee. MDH 
typically delegates permitting authority to LHDs. Among other things, regulations require 
a potable water supply to be provided for mobile home parks. If a private water supply is 
used, minimum treatment must be chlorinated by a method acceptable to the Secretary of 
the Environment or the Secretary’s designee, and the water supply may not be installed, 
altered, improved, or used without specified written permission.  
 
Mobile Home Park Owners – General Obligations  
 
A mobile home park owner must meet specified general obligations, including that the park 
owner must (at all times) (1) comply with all applicable building, housing, zoning, and 
health codes; (2) keep the leased site and all permanent fixtures that the park owner 
provides in good repair; (3) keep the common areas and buildings in a good state of 
appearance, repair, safety, and cleanliness; (4) provide residents access to common areas 
at reasonable times, including their buildings and improvements, as specified; and (5) keep 
each utility service in good repair.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
Known MDE general fund administrative costs increase by $380,017 in fiscal 2027, by 
$561,719 in fiscal 2028, and by $875,973 in fiscal 2029, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring two employees in 
fiscal 2027 (one natural resource planner and one regulatory and compliance engineer), 
five additional employees in fiscal 2028 (four natural resource planners and one regulatory 
and compliance engineer), and three additional employees in fiscal 2029 (two regulatory 
and compliance engineers and one natural resource planner) to (1) develop and implement 
the Mobile Home Park Water Quality Testing Program; (2) establish priority testing 
locations and conduct required water quality sampling; (3) conduct any necessary 
follow‑up actions based on water quality test results, including providing notice, reviewing 
remediation plans, and performing any additional sampling as necessary; (4) develop the 
statewide action plan to address and improve water quality in mobile home parks;  
(5) coordinate with other agencies to identify potential funding sources to support 
remediation, improve water quality, and enforce the bill; and (6) generally implement and 
enforce the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1196/ Page 7 
cost to develop a database), and ongoing operating expenses. The information and 
assumptions used in calculating the estimate are stated below: 
 
 
there are 314 known mobile home parks in the State, and 201 of these parks are not 
currently regulated as public water systems; because any testing performed under 
the bill is in addition to any other testing MDE already performs for mobile home 
parks, the drinking water quality oversight tasks under the bill substantially expand 
MDE’s regulatory purview; and  
 
because the bill’s requirements are outside the scope of the federal SDWA, and in 
the absence of any other identified funding source to support MDE’s enforcement 
activities under the bill, general funds are needed. 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Positions (New) 
2.0 
5.0 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$161,735 
$510,302 
$828,595 
Database Development Costs 
200,000 
0 
0 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
    51,417 
    47,378 
Known MDE Expenditures 
$380,017 
$561,719 
$875,973 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
This estimate does not include any costs for water quality testing, which is discussed below.  
 
Water Quality Testing Costs  
 
MDH’s Laboratories Administration provides analytical support services for State 
agencies and program offices throughout the State and is the primary laboratory in the State 
that conducts water testing for MDE and LHDs. The Laboratories Administration has a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) in place with MDE to recoup related water testing 
costs. The Laboratories Administration anticipates that it is likely responsible for a 
substantial portion of the increased water testing and analysis under the bill and that it will 
need to purchase additional equipment and hire staff to meet the additional testing needs 
resulting from the bill.  
 
In response to a request for information regarding the fiscal effect of the bill, MDH 
provided an estimate of costs to hire six public health laboratory scientists and purchase 
additional equipment and materials to conduct water quality testing under the bill – with 
estimated costs ranging from approximately $481,300 in fiscal 2027 to more than 
$1.0 million in fiscal 2031.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1196/ Page 8 
MDE also anticipates that it incurs water quality testing costs (estimated at 
$100,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2028) but MDE has not indicated if it plans to 
contract with a third party to conduct the additional water quality testing – as it is authorized 
to do under the bill – or if it plans to rely on MDH’s Laboratories Administration instead.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services concurs that (1) the bill requires a significant 
increase in water quality testing that must be conducted at mobile home parks in the State; 
(2) MDE likely incurs significant costs related to such water quality testing; and (3) as a 
result, there may be significant fiscal and operational impacts on MDH’s Laboratories 
Administration if MDH – and not a third party – conducts the additional water quality 
testing resulting from the bill.  
 
A reliable estimate of any increase in costs for water quality testing cannot be made at this 
time, as the impact ultimately depends on several unknown factors.  
 
Even so, general fund expenditures for MDE, and general fund expenditures and revenues 
(from reimbursement under the MOU) for MDH’s Laboratories Administration may 
increase, potentially significantly, beginning as early as fiscal 2028 to conduct additional 
water quality testing under the bill. Actual impacts on MDE general fund expenditures and 
MDH finances depend on the testing program developed under the bill and whether MDE 
contracts with a third party, rather than MDH, to conduct the required testing.  
 
Penalty Provisions  
 
The bill’s penalty provisions are not anticipated to materially affect State finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Compliance costs for mobile home park owners (who are 
prohibited from passing such costs on to park residents) are potentially significant for any 
park that is identified to have water quality issues. Park owners incur costs to notify 
residents, post required notices and information in multiple languages, comply with any 
orders issued by MDE, and prepare, submit, and implement remediation plans. They may 
also incur costs to conduct some water testing. To the extent that funding is identified to 
support remediation activities, some costs may be offset. Even so, it is likely that for at 
least some park owners, the costs to comply with the bill are substantial.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1196/ Page 9 
Designated Cross File:  SB 940 (Senator Henson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Association of County Health 
Officers; Maryland Environmental Service; Baltimore City; Prince George’s County;  
City of Annapolis; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9