START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1122 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1122 
(Delegate Simmons) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Employees’ Pension System – Sheriff of Anne Arundel County – Vesting 
 
 
This bill allows the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County to vest in the Employees’ Pension 
System (EPS) after accruing eight years of eligibility service, and allows an individual 
elected or appointed as Sheriff of Anne Arundel County on or after July 1, 2026, to retire 
with a normal service retirement upon (1) reaching age 65 with at least 8 years of eligibility 
service or (2) having at least 90 years of combined age and years of eligibility service. The 
bill applies only to a sheriff that is elected or appointed after the bill’s July 1, 2026 
effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is anticipated to apply in a limited number of cases, it results in 
only a negligible increase in State pension liabilities and no discernible effect on State 
pension contributions. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Employees’ Pension System Vesting and Benefits 
 
Most members of EPS that were hired on or before June 30, 2011, are eligible to receive a 
vested allowance if they have accrued at least 5 years of eligibility service. These members 
may retire with a normal service retirement allowance once they have accrued at least 
30 years of eligibility service (including any eligibility service from the Teachers’ Pension 
System, Employees’ Retirement System, or Teachers’ Retirement System) or have attained 
the age of (1) 62 with 5 years of eligibility service; (2) 63 with 4 years of eligibility service; 
(3) 64 with 3 years of eligibility service; or (4) 65 with 2 years of eligibility service. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1122/ Page 2 
Members hired on or after July 1, 2011, are eligible to receive a vested allowance only after 
accruing at least 10 years of eligibility service and are eligible to receive a normal service 
retirement allowance upon (1) attaining an age of at least 65 years with at least 10 years of 
eligibility service or (2) attaining at least 90 years of combined age and years of eligibility 
service. 
 
Constitutional officers as well as secretaries and agency heads of Executive Branch 
agencies are eligible for immediate vesting in the State system in which the individual is a 
member. 
 
Sheriff Membership in State Pension Systems 
 
Membership in EPS is optional for most sheriffs as elected officials of the State, but sheriffs 
representing counties that participate in the Law Enforcement Officials’ Pension System 
(LEOPS) may elect membership in LEOPS instead. The Baltimore City Sheriff may elect 
to participate in EPS but is otherwise required to participate in LEOPS as a condition of 
employment. Counties are responsible for paying the employer contribution for sheriffs 
(and other specified elected and appointed officials) participating in EPS or LEOPS. 
 
The State Retirement Agency says that nine sheriffs are active members of a pension 
system – four are members of EPS and five are members of LEOPS. An additional 
eight sheriffs are retirees of LEOPS or the State Police Retirement System. The remaining 
seven sheriffs do not participate in any State retirement or pension plan. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; State Retirement Agency; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2