START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1139 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1139 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Eligible Governmental Units 
 
 
This bill clarifies that, for an eligible governmental unit to participate in the 
Employees’ Pension System (EPS), Law Enforcement Officers’ Pensions System 
(LEOPS), or Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) as a participating 
governmental unit (PGU), all of the unit’s eligible employees must participate in the plan. 
It also requires the unit to certify to SRA that it has provided each of its employees who 
are eligible to elect optional membership in the State plan with the necessary 
documentation required by SRA to make that election. The necessary documentation 
includes election forms indicating affirmatively that an employee does or does not intend 
to participate in the plan. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying and procedural in nature and does not directly 
affect governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying and procedural in nature and does not directly 
affect local governmental finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Counties and municipal corporations are eligible to participate in EPS, 
LEOPS, and CORS, while special taxing areas and specially identified governmental units 
are also eligible to participate in EPS as PGUs. The legislative body of an eligible 
governmental unit may approve participation by its employees in one of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1139/ Page 2 
State Retirement and Pension Systems’ (SRPS) plans if the legislative body adopts a 
resolution in the form prescribed by the Board of Trustees of SRPS. For LEOPS, 
employees eligible to participate in the plan include law enforcement officers, firefighters, 
or emergency medical technicians, while local detention officers are eligible to participate 
in CORS. 
 
If the eligible governmental unit participates in a State system or operates a local plan, at 
least 60% of the eligible members of the local plan must petition to become members of 
the specified SRPS plan and the legislative body must approve participation in lieu of 
participation in the State system or local plan. Furthermore, the State system or local plan 
of the eligible governmental unit must require (1) member contributions of the same rate 
as the member contribution rate that would be applicable to members of the specified SRPS 
plan or (2) if the eligible governmental unit does not offer an employer pickup program for 
member contributions, it must certify that it will not use one following participation in the 
specified SRPS plan. According to the Internal Revenue Service, a pickup program refers 
to a retirement plan established by a governmental unit where the contributions of 
employing units are designated employee contributions, but the employer “picks up” the 
contributions so that they may be treated as employer contributions for tax purposes. 
 
If the eligible governmental unit approves participation in specified SRPS plan, the 
effective date of participation is the July 1 following the fiscal year in which the 
governmental unit elects to participate in the plan. If the unit does not provide  
the Board of Trustees with the necessary documentation to join the plan on or before the 
effective date, the effective date will be postponed until July 1 of the second year following 
the fiscal year in which the unit elects to participate.  
 
If an eligible governmental unit does not satisfy the requirements to participate in the 
specified SRPS plan, it may still submit a request to the Board of Trustees.  
The Board of Trustees must consider this request and determine whether any legislation is 
necessary to allow the governmental unit to participate in the plan. The Board of Trustees 
must subsequently make recommendations to the Joint Committee on Pension regarding 
any legislation that it determines is necessary to allow the eligible governmental unit to 
participate in the specified SRPS plan. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 734 (Senator Lewis Young)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1139/ Page 3 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; State Retirement Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3