START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1112 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1112 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance Coverage Protection Commission - Study on Individual and 
Group Health Insurance Market Stability 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Health Insurance Coverage Protection Commission to study 
and make recommendations for individual and group health insurance market stability, 
including procuring a specified actuarial analysis. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and 
terminates upon termination of the commission. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
increase by at least $250,000 as early as FY 2027 for the actuarial analysis. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
250,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The commission must (1) have an actuarial analysis conducted that 
compares Medicaid and commercial rates to estimate premium savings under a public 
option; (2) explore regulatory exemptions to allow managed care organizations to sell in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1112/ Page 2 
the individual market without meeting full insurer capital requirements; (3) explore 
merging the individual and small group markets; (4) explore pooling purchasing power 
across states; (5) consider ways to control prescription drug costs; (6) identify ways to 
sustain federally qualified health centers; (7) consider whether to establish a multiyear 
reinsurance stability fund; (8) consider whether to reinstate the Maryland Health Insurance 
Plan (MHIP); and (9) consider specified recommendations of the Commission to Study 
Health Insurance Pooling, as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Health Insurance Coverage Protection Commission 
 
Chapter 17 of 2017 established the Maryland Health Insurance Coverage Protection 
Commission. Section 2 of Chapters 37 and 38 of 2018 required the commission to study 
and make recommendations regarding individual and group health insurance market 
stability. Chapters 417 and 418 of 2019 extended the termination date of the commission 
to June 30, 2023, and required the commission to establish a workgroup to monitor actions 
relating to the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and determine 
the most effective manner of ensuring that Maryland consumers can obtain and retain 
quality health insurance, independent of any action or inaction on the part of the federal 
government or any changes to federal law or its interpretation. Chapters 597 and 598 of 
2019 required the commission to study and recommend whether the State Reinsurance 
Program should be extended after calendar 2023 and, if so, how it will be funded. The 
commission met throughout the 2017 through 2022 interims and issued six annual reports. 
The commission terminated June 30, 2023. 
 
Chapter 696 of 2025 reestablished the commission to (1) monitor potential and actual 
federal changes to the ACA, the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act, 
Medicaid, the Maryland Children’s Health Program, Medicare, and the Maryland 
All‑Payer Model; (2) assess the impact of such changes; and (3) provide recommendations 
for State and local action to protect access to affordable health coverage. By December 31 
each year, the commission must submit an annual report. DLS, the Maryland Department 
of Health, and the Maryland Insurance Administration jointly staff the commission. The 
commission terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
Commission to Study Health Insurance Pooling 
 
Chapter 741 of 2025 established the Commission to Study Health Insurance Pooling to 
study pooling public employee health insurance purchasing among the State, counties, 
municipal corporations, and local boards of education. The commission must study pooling 
of public employee health insurance purchasing using data collected by the Department of 
Budget and Management, including information provided by the Maryland Association of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1112/ Page 3 
Counties, the Maryland Municipal League, and the Maryland Association of Boards of 
Education. Based on the data collected, the commission must analyze the impacts of 
pooling public employee health insurance purchasing, including the fiscal impacts, and 
identify any barriers to successful implementation. The commission must make legislative 
or regulatory recommendations regarding pooling of public employee health insurance 
purchasing to maximize value and efficiency while maintaining a broad package of benefits 
and reasonable premiums for public employees. 
 
Maryland Health Insurance Plan 
 
MHIP served as the State’s insurer of last resort for medically uninsurable individuals 
beginning in 2003. Under the ACA, this population can buy private health insurance due 
to elimination of preexisting condition limitations. Therefore, MHIP ceased coverage. 
MHIP received premium support through the MHIP Fund, which was supported by an 
assessment of 0.3% of hospital revenue and paid by all payers.  
 
State Expenditures:  Among other things, the bill requires the commission to have an 
actuarial analysis conducted that compares Medicaid and commercial rates to estimate 
premium savings under a public option. Based on past similar analyses, the actuarial 
analysis likely increases DLS general fund expenditures by at least $250,000 as early as 
fiscal 2027. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management, Office of the Attorney 
General; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Legislative 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3