START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1192 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1192 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Sign Language Interpreters - Membership and Licensing 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the State Board of Sign Language Interpreters as well as 
related board provisions. The bill delays the requirement for the board to establish and 
publish licensing requirements for sign language interpreting in all settings from 
July 1, 2024, to July 1, 2027. The bill also delays the date, from January 1, 2025, to 
January 1, 2028, by which (1) an individual, with limited exception for educational 
settings, must be licensed by the board before providing sign language interpretation 
services in the State and (2) the members of the board required to be licensed may satisfy 
the license requirement. Beginning July 1, 2028, an individual who provides sign language 
interpretation services in an educational setting must meet licensure requirements. At least 
60 days before promulgating regulations regarding specialist areas, the board must consult 
with specified stakeholders and submit a report to the Governor and specified committees 
of the General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Receipt of special fund revenues from license fees is delayed until FY 2028, 
as are any minimal general fund revenues that may have been collected due to existing 
penalty provisions. Special fund expenditures for the board are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1192/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 269 and 270 of 2023 established a licensing and 
regulatory system for sign language interpreters in Maryland through the creation of the 
State Board of Sign Language Interpreters within the Office of the Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing (ODHH). The board must (1) license qualified individuals to provide  
sign language interpretation services; (2) by July 1, 2024, establish and publish licensing 
requirements for sign language interpreting in all settings; (3) provide technical assistance 
to license applicants and other interested persons; (4) promote the profession of  
sign language interpreting; and (5) perform any duties assigned by the Director of ODHH. 
An individual must be licensed by the board before providing sign language interpretation 
services in the State beginning January 1, 2025.  
 
The bill delays the requirement to establish and publish licensing requirements for  
sign language interpreting in all settings to July 1, 2027, and the date by which an individual 
must be licensed by the board before providing sign language interpretation services to 
January 1, 2028 (except for those in educational settings).  
 
Alterations to the Board  
 
Membership:  Under current law, the board consists of seven members:  one member of 
the Maryland Association of the Deaf; one deafblind individual; one member of the 
Potomac Chapter of the Registry of the Interpreters for the Deaf who holds a license from 
the board; and four determined by the board by regulation. Members must be appointed by 
the Governor from a list of names submitted by ODHH.  
 
The bill removes the member of the Potomac Chapter of the Registry of the Interpreters 
for the Deaf who holds a license from the board and the four members determined by the 
board by regulation. Instead, the bill increases board membership to 11 members through 
the addition of:   
 
 
one deaf individual;  
 
three interpreters for the deaf who are licensed by the board; 
 
one interpreter for the deaf who is licensed by the board and owns or is affiliated 
with an interpreter agency; 
 
two individuals affiliated with an entity that operates and implements deaf services 
in an educational, legal, or medical setting; 
 
the Secretary of Disabilities (or their designee) as an ex officio nonvoting member; 
and 
 
the Secretary of Labor (or their designee) as an ex officio nonvoting member. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1192/ Page 3 
Member Qualifications:  Chapters 269 and 270 specify that members of the board required 
to hold a license may satisfy the license requirement by holding a current nationally or 
regionally recognized certificate before January 1, 2025. The bill delays this date to 
January 1, 2028. 
 
Under current law, each member of the board must be proficient in American Sign 
Language (ASL). The bill specifies that the ex-officio nonvoting members and the members 
affiliated with an entity that operates and implements deaf services are exempt from this 
requirement.  
 
Nominations:  The bill requires the member nomination process to include outreach to 
underrepresented deaf, deafblind, and interpreter communities. 
 
Removal:  Under current law, the Governor may remove a member for incompetence, 
misconduct, neglect of duties, or other sufficient cause. The bill authorizes the Governor 
to also remove a member for two or more successive unexcused absences.  
 
Quorum:  Under current law, a majority of the members then serving on the board 
constitutes a quorum. The bill specifies that a majority of the voting members is a quorum.  
 
Licensure 
 
Under current law, an applicant for licensure must submit to the board (1) a completed 
application; (2) an application fee; (3) proof of a valid nationally or regionally recognized 
certification; and (4) documentation of satisfactory completion of any other qualifications 
established by the board. 
 
The bill specifies that an applicant may submit proof of a valid nationally or regionally 
recognized certification or documentation of satisfactory completion of any other 
qualifications established by the board. 
 
Waiver of Certification Requirements 
 
Under current law, the board may waive any requirement for an applicant who is licensed 
to provide sign language interpretation services in another state. The board may grant a 
waiver only if the applicant (1) pays the application and license fees and (2) provides 
satisfactory evidence that, at the time the applicant was licensed in the other state, the 
qualifications for licensure were substantially equivalent to those in Maryland. The board 
may grant a waiver only if the other state waives the qualifications of licensees from 
Maryland to a similar extent as Maryland waives the qualification requirements for 
individuals licensed in that state.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1192/ Page 4 
The bill requires the board to grant a waiver only if the applicant (1) pays the application 
and license fees and (2) provides satisfactory evidence that, at the time the applicant was 
licensed in the other state, the qualifications for licensure were substantially equivalent to 
those in Maryland. 
 
Required Regulations 
 
Under current law, the board must adopt regulations to (1) govern sign language 
interpretation services provided in a video remote interpreting setting; (2) establish 
licensing and certification standards of interpreting agencies that do business in the State; 
(3) allow deaf and hard of hearing individuals to determine whether they prefer sign 
language interpretation services being provided in a video remote interpreting setting or 
through in-person interpreting; and (4) provide sign language interpretation services in a 
video remote interpreting setting. 
 
The bill (1) specifies that regulations must allow deaf and hard of hearing individuals to 
indicate whether they prefer video remote or in-person interpreting and (2) requires the 
board to adopt regulations to require public entities to provide reasonable accommodations 
to support the preferences indicated by deaf and hard of hearing individuals, to the extent 
practicable and in compliance with specified federal law. 
 
Specialist Area Regulations 
 
Under current law, the board may establish criteria for the development of portfolios and 
requirements in the following specialist areas:  (1) legal settings; (2) medical settings; 
(3) behavioral health settings; (4) language pairs other than ASL and spoken English; 
(5) conference interpreting; (6) tactile and low-vision sign language interpretation services; 
(7) intralinguistic translations and sign language interpretation; and (8) any other areas 
determined to be necessary by the board. 
 
The bill adds educational settings as a specialist area. The bill requires that at least 60 days 
before the board promulgates regulations to establish criteria for the development of 
portfolios and requirements in specialist areas, the board must report to the Governor and 
specified committees of the General Assembly on (1) how national and regional 
certification standards define or limit specialist areas; (2) the number of interpreters in the 
State and neighboring states certified in specialist areas; (3) an evaluation of how separate 
requirements for specialist areas may impact access to interpreter services in each setting; 
and (4) recommendations on whether, and in what form, specialty licensure requirements 
should be implemented in the State. 
 
In completing the report, the board must consult with the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH), the Maryland Association of the Deaf, the Maryland Hospital Association, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1192/ Page 5 
interpreters and interpreter agencies, the Maryland Judiciary, the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE), the Maryland State Education Association, the Public 
School Superintendents’ Association of Maryland, the Maryland Association of Boards of 
Education, and the Maryland Department of Disabilities (MDOD). ODHH must provide 
staff to assist the board in completion of the report. 
 
Annual Report 
 
Under current law, each year, the Director of ODHH must submit a report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly on (1) the activities of the office; (2) the status of programs and 
services facilitated by the office; (3) the activities of the State Board of Sign Language 
Interpreters; (4) statistics on compliance with State and federal laws related to deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals; and (5) recommendations for improved delivery of services 
for deaf and hard of hearing individuals.  
 
The bill requires the report to include the number of licensed sign language interpreters in 
each county, determined by the licensee’s home address or county or region of planned 
employment, if known. 
 
Existing Penalties  
 
Under current law, an individual who violates any provision of Title 9, Subtitle 24, Part III 
(Sign Language Interpreters) of the State Government Article is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
On conviction, a first-time offender is subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment 
for up to 90 days; a repeat offender is subject to a fine of at least $500 and up to $1,000 
and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days.  
 
State Revenues:  The bill delays the date, from January 1, 2025, to January 1, 2028, by 
which an individual must be licensed by the board before providing sign language 
interpretation services in the State (except for those in educational settings, who must be 
licensed by July 1, 2028). Thus, special fund licensing revenues are not received by the 
board until fiscal 2028 And any minimal general fund revenues resulting from the 
imposition of existing penalties (noted above) on individuals providing sign language 
interpretation services in the State without a license are also delayed until fiscal 2028. 
Although licensure was to have been in place by fiscal 2025, as it has not yet been 
implemented, the earliest such revenues could be realized under current law is fiscal 2026.  
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires the board, at least 60 days before promulgating 
specified regulations, to consult with specified stakeholders and submit a specified report. 
The bill also delays the requirement for (1) the board to establish and publish licensing 
requirements for sign language interpreting in all settings to July 1, 2027, and (2) an 
individual to be licensed by the board before providing sign language interpretation 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1192/ Page 6 
services in the State to January 1, 2028 (those providing services in an educational setting 
have until July 1, 2028, to be licensed). ODHH advises that the board can implement the 
bill with existing budgeted resources. The board was authorized two new positions to 
support its operations, which have not yet been filled. The board advises that it anticipates 
that approximately 400 new licenses will be issued initially, in fiscal 2028 under the bill, 
with approximately 200 new licenses issued annually thereafter. This estimate reflects a 
smaller number of licensees than originally anticipated when the requirement for licensure 
was enacted. 
 
The Secretaries of Disabilities and Labor (or their designees) can serve as ex-officio 
members of the board with existing budgeted resources. 
 
MDH, the Judiciary, MSDE, and MDOD can consult with the board to complete the 
required report using existed budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that small businesses have employees that currently 
provide sign language interpretation services, those employees benefit from a reprieve in 
needing to become licensed. However, any additional delay in initial implementation of 
licensing by ODHH could disrupt the ability of these businesses to continue providing such 
services. 
 
Additional Comments:  In response to the 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report, ODHH reported 
on challenges associated with the delay in publishing licensing regulations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 645 (Senator King) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1192/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7