START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1149 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1149 
(Delegates Young and Hornberger) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Finance - Claims of the State - Settlement 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Comptroller to settle a State’s claim that is in arrears against a 
business entity that has permanently ceased operations, regardless of how long the claim 
has been in arrears, thereby eliminating the two-year waiting period for those businesses.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State tax revenues (general funds and special funds) annually increase, 
potentially by $250,000, beginning in FY 2027 from settling State’s claims sooner. 
General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by at least $74,100 in 
FY 2027 and by $98,500 in FY 2031. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures for 
local highway user revenue grants may increase beginning in FY 2027 to the extent 
corporate income tax claims are settled. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF/SF Rev. 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
GF Expenditure 
$74,100 
$86,200 
$90,200 
$94,300 
$98,500 
SF Expenditure 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$175,900 
$163,800 
$159,800 
$155,700 
$151,500  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues and local highway user revenues may increase 
by an indeterminate amount annually beginning in FY 2027 from increased settlement 
claims. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1149/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Comptroller may settle a State’s claim that has been in arrears for at 
least two years against a person who receives or collects State money, against the surety of 
that person, or against any other person. Under the Comptroller’s Offer in Compromise 
Program, for taxes owed by a business or the officers of the business, the business must be 
closed. Before settling a claim, the Comptroller must examine the claim thoroughly and 
must be satisfied that the State cannot collect the claim through the legal process. 
 
The Comptroller may abate, wholly or partly, the principal or interest that is due to the 
State so as to best serve the interests of the State. The Comptroller must discharge a person 
and the surety of the person when agreed sum is paid into the State Treasury. 
 
If a claim is settled without full payment, the Comptroller must keep a record within the 
Office of the Comptroller that states the facts on which the settlement was based. 
 
State Revenues:  As the Comptroller must be satisfied that the State cannot collect claims 
through the legal process in order to settle, the bill is anticipated to increase State tax 
revenues from no longer requiring claims to be in arrears for two years to be eligible for 
settlement for a business entity that has permanently ceased operations. Thus, State tax 
revenues (general funds and special funds) annually increase, potentially by $250,000, 
beginning in fiscal 2027. The actual amount of State tax revenues may vary and depend on 
how many additional claims become eligible when the two-year waiting period is removed 
for business entities that have permanently ceased operations, how the Comptroller settles 
the claims, and the value of the claims. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
$74,124 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one revenue administrator to process the anticipated 
increase in settlement claims from no longer requiring business entities that have 
permanently ceased operations to wait two years to settle a claim. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$64,983 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$74,124 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1149/ Page 3 
To the extent that corporate income tax claims are settle sooner, TTF expenditures for local 
highway user revenue grants increase by an indeterminate amount annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local income tax revenues and local highway user revenues may 
annually increase by an indeterminate amount due to an increase in tax settlements 
beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Under the Comptroller’s Offer in Compromise Program, the 
business is not required to be closed for two years but under current law, taxes owed by the 
business must be at least two years old. Thus, businesses that have closed and are in arrears 
with the State may be eligible to settle with the Comptroller’s Office without having to 
wait two years to settle. To the extent that this helps the business community, 
small businesses may benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3