START OF PAGE 1
HB1113/963025/1

BY: Environment and Transportation Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1113
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Lewis” and substitute
“Delegates Lewis, Boyce, and Healey”; strike beginning with “if” in line 5 down
through “exceptions” in line 6; after line 17, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 7–101(a) and (n), 21–1003(a), and 21–1133
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”;

and strike in their entirety lines 23 through 27, inclusive.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 3, after line 28, insert:

“7–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(n) (1) “Transit corridor” means a geographically bound set of two or more
contiguous subway, light rail, bus rapid transit, or bus transit stations.

(2) “Transit corridor” includes a geographically bound set of two or more
contiguous bus transit stations that have fixed–route bus service that operates on a
roadway dedicated to buses.”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1113/963025/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 1113
Page 2 of 2

On page 4, in line 8, after “(GG)” insert “(1) (I) IN THIS SUBSECTION,
“BUS STOP ZONE” MEANS THE PORTION OF ROADWAY DESIGNATED OR USED FOR
LOADING AND UNLOADING PASSENGERS FROM A BUS OR TRANSIT VEHICLE.

(II) “BUS STOP ZONE” INCLUDES:

1. AN AREA FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING
PASSENGERS FROM A BUS OR TRANSIT VEHICLE THAT IS DESIGNATED BY
SIGNAGE OR PAVEMENT MARKINGS OR IDENTIFIED IN A TRANSIT AGENCY’S
PUBLISHED SCHEDULE OR ROUTE MAP;

2. A BUS TRANSIT STATION; AND

3. A TRANSIT CORRIDOR, AS DEFINED IN § 7–101 OF
THIS ARTICLE, USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH A DESIGNATED BUS STOP.

(2)”;

and strike beginning with “IF” in line 9 down through “LIGHTS” in line 15.
END OF PAGE 2