START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1180 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1180 
(Delegate Qi) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
State Board of Architects - Grounds for Discipline - Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires (rather than authorizes) the State Board of Architects to deny or suspend 
a license or reprimand a licensee under specified circumstances. The bill also expands the 
circumstances under which the board may deny, reprimand, or suspend a license or permit 
to include situations in which an applicant or licensee misrepresents that the individual 
holds a license or a permit. The board must notify each county code official if a license is 
suspended or revoked and also requires a code official to verify a licensee’s credentials 
when reviewing and approving architectural documents. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Architects can likely implement the bill’s requirements 
with existing resources. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local code officials can complete the credential verification process with 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Board of Architects  
 
The State Board of Architects qualifies and licenses individuals seeking architectural 
licensure. The board also issues permits to businesses practicing architecture. In addition, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1180/ Page 2 
the board investigates complaints against licensees as well as complaints related to the 
unlicensed practice of architecture services.  
 
Enforcement Actions 
 
Subject to the hearing provisions under Section 3-313 of the Business Occupations and 
Professions Article, the board, on the affirmative vote of a majority of its authorized 
membership, may deny a license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, or suspend or 
revoke a license if: 
 
 
the applicant or licensee fraudulently or deceptively obtains or renews (or attempts 
to obtain or renew) a license or permit for the applicant or licensee or for another; 
 
the applicant or licensee fraudulently or deceptively uses a license (the bill expands 
this provision to include misrepresenting that the individual holds a license or a 
permit); 
 
the applicant or licensee is guilty of any fraud, gross negligence, incompetence, or 
misconduct while practicing architecture; 
 
the applicant or licensee violates any regulation adopted by the board;  
 
the applicant or licensee violates any provision of the Maryland Architects Act  
(i.e., Title 3 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article); 
 
the applicant or licensee aids or abets an unauthorized person to practice 
architecture; 
 
under the laws of the United States or of any state, the applicant or licensee is 
convicted of a felony or a relevant misdemeanor; or 
 
the applicant or licensee has had a license to practice architecture in another state 
revoked or suspended for grounds that would justify revocation or suspension of a 
license under Maryland law (excluding failure to pay a license fee). 
 
Under the bill, the board must deny a license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, or 
suspend or a revoke a license under any of the above circumstances (and if the applicant or 
licensee misrepresents that the individual holds a license or permit). 
 
Maintenance of List of Licensees and Notifications to Code Officials  
 
A “code official” is a public official responsible for the review of building permit 
documents or the issuance of building permits.  
 
Among other requirements, the board must (1) keep a list of the names and mailing 
addresses of all licensees; (2) provide each code official with a copy of the list annually; 
and (3) provide any other person who makes a request with a copy of the list at a reasonable 
fee set by the board. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1180/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 653 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3