START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1160 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1160 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Calvert County - CalvertHealth Medical Center 
 
   
This bill updates an obsolete reference to the Calvert Memorial Hospital in the Public Local 
Laws of Calvert County to be the CalvertHealth Medical Center, Inc., and its successors.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and will not affect Calvert County 
finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  By a date set by the Calvert County Commissioners, each county 
department, agency, or board receiving county funds must submit to the county 
commissioners and to the county finance and budget director, or the director’s designee, 
an itemized budget request for all funds requested for the next fiscal year. The county 
commissioners are authorized to appropriate a sum in an amount determined by them to 
the Calvert Memorial Hospital.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to Calvert County, in September 2017, Calvert 
Memorial Hospital was renamed the CalvertHealth Medical Center in records filed with 
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1160/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1161 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2