START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1105 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1105 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Statute of Limitations - Prosecution or Enforcement of Local Consumer 
Protection Codes 
 
 
This bill increases, from one year to three years, the statute of limitations for a prosecution 
or suit for enforcement of a local consumer protection code for which equitable relief, a 
fine, or a penalty is provided. The statute of limitations begins to run when the local 
authorities knew or reasonably should have known of the violation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues may increase from fines imposed in cases that are able to 
proceed under the bill. Local expenditures may be affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, under § 5‐106 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, 
unless otherwise specified, a prosecution for a misdemeanor must be initiated within 
one year after the offense was committed. Generally, under § 5‐107 of the Courts and 
Judicial Proceedings Article, unless otherwise specified, a prosecution or suit for a fine, 
penalty, or forfeiture must be initiated within one year after the offense was committed. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Municipal League advises that the bill will have a 
minimal to moderate effect on municipalities, with additional revenues offsetting any 
increase in administrative or enforcement costs. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1105/ Page 2 
With respect to identical legislation introduced in 2025, the Maryland Association of 
Counties (MACo) advised that the bill gives local governments two additional years to 
organize an enforcement action for a consumer protection case. According to MACo, this 
may (1) increase revenues, at least minimally, from additional fines levied and paid; 
(2) reduce expenditures in jurisdictions that incur overtime costs to bring enforcement 
actions within the current one-year statute of limitations; and (3) increase costs if the longer 
statute of limitations increases the number of cases brought for local consumer protection 
violations and these cases cannot be addressed with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 591 of 2025 and HB 549 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 979 (Senator McCray)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection 
Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2