START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1143 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Office of the Chief Medical Examiner - Perinatal Autopsies 
(Lung Float Test Ban) 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Chief Medical Examiner, a deputy chief medical officer, an assistant 
medical examiner, or a pathologist authorized by the Chief Medical Examiner from using 
a hydrostatic lung test (also known as a lung float test) when performing a perinatal autopsy 
to determine whether the death resulted in a stillbirth or occurred after a live birth. By 
December 1, 2027, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in consultation with the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
(OCME), must report to specified committees of the General Assembly on the usefulness 
and efficacy of the hydrostatic lung test and recommendations as to whether the test is 
needed as an autopsy tool. The bill terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $35,700 in FY 2027 and 
$18,000 in FY 2028 for staff, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
35,700 
18,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($35,700) 
($18,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1143/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  OCME is the statewide agency designated by law to investigate deaths 
from injury, homicide, suicide, under unusual or suspicious circumstances, or when a 
person is not attended by a physician.  
 
A medical examiner must investigate the death of a human fetus if (1) regardless of the 
duration of the pregnancy, the death occurs before the complete expulsion or extraction of 
the fetus from the mother and (2) the mother is not attended by a physician at or after the 
delivery.  
 
If the medical examiner who investigates a medical examiner’s case considers an autopsy 
necessary, the Chief Medical Examiner, a deputy chief medical examiner, an assistant 
medical examiner, or an authorized pathologist must perform the autopsy.  
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MDH, in consultation with OAG and OCME, to 
complete a specified report by December 1, 2027. MDH advises that current staff resources 
are not sufficient to complete the required report. Therefore, MDH general fund 
expenditures increase by $35,656 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time 
contractual health policy analyst to complete the required report. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. This analysis assumes 
the contractual position terminates on December 31, 2027, following the completion of the 
required report.  
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
-0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$27,557 
$17,336 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
       701 
Total State Expenditures 
$35,656 
$18,037 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the National Association of Medical Examiners, the 
hydrostatic lung test has been deemed unreliable as it is not a diagnostic tool able to stand 
on its own as the sole determinant of whether an infant is liveborn or stillborn.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1143/ Page 3 
OCME advises that the hydrostatic lung test is not generally used when performing a 
perinatal autopsy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3