START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1148 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1148 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Taxes - Tax Sales, Legacy Protection Program, and Tax Credits 
 
 
This bill alters eligibility for certain services and programs offered by the State Tax Sale 
Ombudsman to include the estate or personal representative of a deceased homeowner, or 
an heir or a legatee of a deceased homeowner. The bill also establishes the Legacy 
Protection Program within the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT), 
funded by an annual State appropriation of $250,000, and $500,000 paid annually by the 
counties. In addition, the bill requires that an heir who is not shown as the record title holder 
of a dwelling be granted the homeowners’ and homestead property tax credits for up to  
three taxable years if the heir meets eligibility and other requirements for the credit. Finally, 
SDAT may accept an application for the homeowners’ property tax credit from an heir for 
certain prior taxable years in which the heir was eligible for the credit. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2027, with the exception of the tax credit provisions, which take effect  
June 1, 2026, and apply to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually and special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase by $750,000 annually beginning in FY 2028, for the 
Legacy Protection Program. While not reflected in the table below, general fund 
expenditures may also increase, beginning in FY 2027, and Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) 
revenues may decrease, due to the bill’s tax credit provisions, as discussed below. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$0.25 
$0.25 
$0.25 
$0.25 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
Net Effect 
$0 
($0.25) 
($0.25) 
($0.25) 
($0.25) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1148/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  County expenditures increase, collectively, by $500,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2028. Local property tax revenues may decrease, beginning in FY 2027, as discussed 
below. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman Assistance 
 
Under provisions establishing the State Tax Sale Ombudsman in SDAT, and specified 
assistance provided by the ombudsman to homeowners with delinquent taxes, the bill 
specifies that “homeowner” includes (1) the estate of a deceased homeowner; (2) the 
personal representative of a deceased homeowner; or (3) an individual who is an heir or 
legatee of a deceased homeowner who is entitled to inherit the deceased homeowner’s 
dwelling. 
 
Legacy Protection Program 
 
The bill establishes a Legacy Protection Program administered by the State Tax Sale 
Ombudsman. The purpose of the program is to (1) allow heirs who inherit a dwelling to 
become the record title holder of the dwelling; (2) prevent tax sales of dwellings inherited 
by heirs; and (3) allow heirs to remain in their homes. 
 
When SDAT receives information that a homeowner who was granted the homeowners’ 
or homestead property tax credit has died, the State Tax Sale Ombudsman must mail a 
notice to the homeowner’s former dwelling, notifying any heir who may be residing in the 
dwelling: 
 
 
that the heir may be eligible for the homeowners’ or homestead property tax credits; 
 
how to apply for the tax credits by completing an application and filing an affidavit 
of heirship; 
 
why it is important for the heir to become the record title holder of the dwelling; 
 
that the heir should contact the ombudsman for information about how to become 
the record title holder; and 
 
that free legal services and grants may be available to assist the heir in becoming 
the record title holder. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1148/ Page 3 
The bill requires that the State Tax Sale Ombudsman, in collaboration with the registers of 
wills, (1) develop a brief, easy-to-understand, step-by-step guide to probating an estate and 
becoming the record title holder of a dwelling and (2) post the guide on the ombudsman’s 
website and provide it to heirs who contact the ombudsman. 
 
The ombudsman must provide grants to qualified legal services organizations for the 
purpose of providing free legal assistance to heirs to navigate the probate process and 
become the record title holder of their dwellings. The ombudsman must determine: 
 
 
the legal services organizations to receive grants; 
 
the amount of grants to individual legal services organizations; and 
 
the cumulative amount of grants to award in each fiscal year. 
 
An heir may qualify to receive free legal assistance from a legal services organization that 
receives a grant if the heir’s dwelling is valued at $450,000 or less, as shown in SDAT 
records. 
 
The State Tax Sale Ombudsman must also provide grants directly to heirs to pay all or part 
of probate fees, inheritance taxes, or any other tax or fee that an heir must pay to complete 
the probate process and become the record title holder of the heir’s dwelling. An heir may 
qualify to receive a grant if the heir’s dwelling is valued at $450,000 or less, as shown in 
SDAT records. The ombudsman must determine: 
 
 
the individual heirs to receive grants; 
 
the amount and purpose of grants to individual heirs; and 
 
the cumulative amount of grants to be awarded to all heirs in each fiscal year. 
 
The ombudsman may establish additional eligibility criteria for grants that prioritize  
low-income, elderly, and disabled heirs. 
 
The ombudsman must provide the name of each heir who contacts the ombudsman and the 
address of the heir’s dwelling to the county where the heir’s dwelling is located for 
inclusion on the county’s registry of properties to be withheld from tax sale. 
 
Legacy Protection Fund 
 
The bill establishes the Legacy Protection Fund to finance the program, administered by 
SDAT. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated to the fund; (2) money paid by county 
governments (discussed below); (3) interest earnings; and (4) any other money from any 
other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1148/ Page 4 
For each fiscal year, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation 
of $250,000 of the interest on overdue State property tax to the fund. Additionally, the 
county governments must collectively pay $500,000 to the fund each fiscal year that is  
(1) allocated among the counties based on the number of real property accounts in each 
county as a percentage of the total number of real property accounts statewide as of  
July 1 of the preceding fiscal year; (2) derived from interest on overdue county property 
tax; and (3) remitted to SDAT by each county by the first day of each fiscal year. 
 
The fund may be used only for any expenses associated with the program. The fund may 
not be used for any expenses of the office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman that are not 
directly related to the program. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in 
accordance with the State budget and the fund is the exclusive source of funding for the 
program. 
 
Homeowners’ and Homestead Tax Credits 
 
The bill establishes that an heir who is not shown as the record title holder of a dwelling in 
the land records of the county must be granted the homeowners’ and/or homestead property 
tax credits if the heir (1) files an application for the credit; (2) meets the eligibility 
requirements for a homeowner under the provisions governing the credit; and (3) meets all 
other requirements. An heir who is not the record title holder may be granted the tax 
credit(s) for a maximum of three taxable years. After that period, the heir may continue to 
receive the tax credit(s) only if the heir is shown as the record title holder of the dwelling 
in the county land records. 
 
For the heir to apply for either tax credit, the heir must (1) complete the required 
application; (2) complete, under oath, an affidavit on the form provided by SDAT attesting 
that the individual is an heir or legatee of a deceased homeowner and is entitled to inherit 
the deceased homeowner’s dwelling; and (3) attach to the application a copy of the death 
certificate of the deceased homeowner from whom the heir inherited the dwelling. 
 
The bill also establishes that, with respect to the homeowners’ property tax credit, SDAT 
may accept an application from a homeowner within three years after April 15 of the 
taxable year for which a credit is sought if the homeowner is an heir and was eligible for 
the credit for the taxable year for which the credit is sought. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman 
 
There is a State Tax Sale Ombudsman in SDAT, that must (1) assist homeowners to 
understand the process for collection of delinquent taxes; (2) actively assist homeowners 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1148/ Page 5 
to apply for tax credits, discount programs, and other public benefits that may assist the 
homeowners to pay delinquent taxes and improve their financial situation; (3) refer 
homeowners to legal services, housing counseling, and other social services that may assist 
the homeowners to pay delinquent taxes and improve their financial situation; (4) maintain 
a toll-free telephone number that a homeowner may call to obtain individualized personal 
assistance with delinquent taxes; and (5) maintain a website that functions as a 
clearinghouse for information concerning the process for collection of delinquent taxes and 
services and programs available to assist homeowners. The ombudsman must also contract 
with a vendor to operate a specified installment payment program for the payment of taxes, 
for homeowners. 
 
Registry for Properties Withheld from Tax Sale 
 
Chapter 231 of 2025 requires the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the 
governing body of a county to establish a registry for interested parties or the State Tax 
Sale Ombudsman to designate a property to be withheld from tax sale in accordance with 
provisions under § 14-811 of the Tax-Property Article authorizing or requiring properties 
to be withheld from tax sale under specified circumstances. 
 
Homeowner Protection Program 
 
Chapter 382 of 2021 established the Homeowner Protection Program, administered by the 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman, and the Homeowner Protection Fund to support the program. 
The program diverts vulnerable homeowners from the private tax lien sale process into an 
alternative program – through the purchase of a homeowners’ lien, whether before or after 
the lien is sold at a tax sale – in order to (1) minimize tax collection costs to homeowners; 
(2) assist homeowners to pay their taxes; and (3) allow homeowners to remain in their 
homes. To be eligible for the program, a homeowner must (1) reside in a dwelling that has 
an assessed value of $300,000 or less and (2) have a combined income of $60,000 or less. 
 
“Homeowner” includes, if a homeowner is deceased, (1) the estate of the homeowner;  
(2) the personal representative of the homeowner; or (3) an heir or legatee of the 
homeowner who is entitled to inherit the homeowner’s dwelling. 
 
Pursuant to changes made under Chapter 647 of 2025, (1) the Governor must annually 
appropriate $250,000 to the Homeowner Protection Fund and (2) county governments must 
collectively pay $500,000 to the fund each fiscal year (allocated proportionally among the 
counties based on the number of real property accounts in a county). 
 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program 
 
The homeowners’ property tax credit program is a State-funded program that provides 
credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who qualify based on 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1148/ Page 6 
a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. The fiscal 2027 State budget includes 
$56.0 million in funding for the program. Approximately 38,500 individuals are eligible to 
receive the property tax credit each year. 
 
Homeowners must apply to SDAT each year in order to be eligible for the property tax 
credit. The maximum assessment against which the credit may be granted is $300,000, less 
the amount of any homestead property tax credit received (the homestead property tax 
credit is discussed below). To be eligible for the property tax credit, a recipient’s net worth 
may not exceed $200,000 and the combined gross household income may not exceed 
$60,000. 
 
Under provisions governing the homeowners’ property tax credit, “homeowner” includes 
an individual who, on July 1 of the taxable year for which the tax credit is to be allowed, 
actually resides in a dwelling in which the individual has a legal interest. “Legal interest” 
includes an interest in a dwelling as a surviving family member who stands to inherit the 
dwelling of a deceased homeowner under the terms of (1) the deceased homeowner’s will 
or trust or a nonprobate instrument of writing or (2) under the laws of intestate succession. 
 
Homestead Property Tax Credit 
 
The homestead property tax credit program (assessment caps) provides tax credits against 
State, county, and municipal real property taxes for owner-occupied residential properties 
for the amount of real property taxes resulting from an annual assessment increase that 
exceeds a certain percentage or “cap” in any given year. The State requires the cap on 
assessment increases to be set at 10% for State property tax purposes; however, local 
governments have the authority to lower the cap. A majority of local subdivisions have 
assessment caps below 10%. 
 
Subject to submitting a specified application to SDAT and having the application approved, 
the department must authorize and the State, a county, or a municipality must grant a 
homestead property tax credit for a taxable year unless during the previous taxable year  
(1) the dwelling was transferred for consideration to new ownership; (2) the value of the 
dwelling was increased due to a change in the zoning classification of the dwelling initiated 
or requested by the homeowner or anyone having an interest in the property; (3) the use of 
the dwelling was changed substantially; or (4) the assessment of the dwelling was clearly 
erroneous due to an error in calculation or measurement of improvements on the real 
property. 
 
In addition, in order to qualify for the property tax credit, a homeowner must actually reside 
in the dwelling by July 1 of the taxable year for which the property tax credit is to be 
allowed. A homeowner may claim a property tax credit for only one dwelling. 
 
The homestead property tax credit program is administered as follows: 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1148/ Page 7 
 
Increases in property assessments are equally spread out over three years. For 
example, if a property’s assessment increased by $120,000, from $300,000 to 
$420,000, the increase would be phased in through increments of $40,000 annually 
for the next three years. 
 
If the assessment cap was set at 10%, however, the amount of assessment subject to 
taxes would increase by only $30,000 in the first year, $33,000 in the following 
year, and $36,300 in the third year. 
 
Since the assessment cap was set lower than the actual market increase, the 
homeowner does not have to pay taxes on the property’s full assessed value. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Legacy Protection Program:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually 
and special fund (Legacy Protection Fund) revenues and expenditures increase by  
$750,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2028. This analysis assumes: 
 
 
$250,000 in general funds is appropriated annually to fund the State’s debt service 
in place of State property tax interest revenues that are appropriated to the Legacy 
Protection Fund under the bill beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
The Legacy Protection Fund receives $500,000 from county payments, pursuant to 
the bill, each year beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
The full amount of funding received by the fund is spent each year under the Legacy 
Protection Program. 
 
Any additional staff or other resources needed by the State Tax Sale Ombudsman’s Office 
to administer the fund is assumed to be covered by the above special fund expenditures 
from the Legacy Protection Fund. 
 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit:  General fund expenditures for the homeowners’ 
property tax credit increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent that: 
 
 
heirs (as defined under the bill to include any person receiving property from the 
deceased person (a legatee)) who are not otherwise granted the credit under current 
law because they are not shown as the record title holder of the dwelling, are granted 
the credit under the bill; and 
 
heirs who are not otherwise able to submit an application for the credit for prior 
taxable years in which they were eligible (but did not apply), are able to submit the 
application and are granted a credit under the bill for a prior taxable year or years. 
 
The extent of any increase in expenditures cannot be reliably estimated but may only be a 
limited increase. As mentioned above, under the existing provisions governing the tax 
credit, an heir who is a surviving family member who stands to inherit the dwelling of a 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1148/ Page 8 
deceased homeowner and resides in the dwelling is currently considered, under existing 
law, to have a “legal interest” in the dwelling, and therefore is a “homeowner” if they reside 
in the dwelling and eligible for the tax credit. For other heirs who are not surviving family 
members, the bill affects their ability to be granted the credit for a limited time, only during 
the time that they are not yet a record title holder of the dwelling. 
 
For context, SDAT indicates that $55.5 million in total homeowners’ property tax credits 
were claimed in fiscal 2025. The average credit provided to each homeowner during that 
period was $1,572. 
 
State Revenues:  ABF revenues decrease to the extent that heirs who are not otherwise 
granted the homestead property tax credit, under current law, because they are not shown 
as the record title holder of the dwelling, are granted the credit under the bill. Unlike the 
homeowners’ property tax credit, the provisions governing the homestead property tax 
credit do not count the interest of a surviving family member who stands to inherit the 
dwelling as a legal interest. 
 
The extent of any decrease in revenues cannot be reliably estimated but may only be a 
limited decrease. The bill does not appear to substantively change the eligibility 
requirements for the homestead property tax credit aside from allowing, for a maximum of 
three taxable years, for an heir who otherwise meets the eligibility requirements, but is not 
yet shown as the record title holder of the property, to be granted the credit. 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s general obligation (GO) bonds are paid from ABF. 
Revenue sources for the fund include State property taxes, premium from bond sales, and 
repayments from certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General 
funds may be appropriated directly to ABF to make up any differences between the debt 
service payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. The  
fiscal 2027 budget assumes $1.3 billion in State property tax revenues to ABF. In addition, 
$177.7 million in general funds and $0.8 million in federal funds are budgeted to ABF, 
since the State property tax rate is not set high enough to cover the full cost of the debt 
service payments on the State’s GO bonds. 
 
To offset the reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could 
increase in an amount equal to the decrease in ABF revenues, or the State property  
tax rate would have to be increased to meet debt service payments. 
 
Local Expenditures:  County expenditures increase, collectively, by $500,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2028, to pay each county’s share of the $500,000 total that must be paid 
annually to the Legacy Protection Fund. The approximate county shares of the  
$500,000 total, based on counties’ shares of the statewide total of real property accounts 
(as of fiscal 2025), is shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1148/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 1 
Approximate County Share* of $500,000 Payment to the Legacy Protection Fund 
 
County 
Amount 
Allegany 
$8,609 
Anne Arundel 
46,815 
Baltimore City 
49,448 
Baltimore 
63,582 
Calvert 
8,988 
Caroline 
3,480 
Carroll 
14,386 
Cecil 
10,045 
Charles 
14,935 
Dorchester 
4,729 
Frederick 
22,992 
Garrett 
6,312 
Harford 
21,378 
Howard 
23,340 
Kent 
2,805 
Montgomery 
72,720 
Prince George’s 
64,798 
Queen Anne’s 
5,700 
St. Mary’s 
10,624 
Somerset 
3,531 
Talbot 
4,559 
Washington 
12,614 
Wicomico 
9,793 
Worcester 
13,816 
Total 
$500,000 
 
*Based on real property accounts as of fiscal 2025. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1148/ Page 10 
Local Revenues:  Local government revenues may decrease, beginning in fiscal 2027, to 
the extent that heirs who are not otherwise granted the homeowners’ and/or homestead 
property tax credits because they are not shown as the record title holder of the dwelling, 
are granted the credit under the bill. 
 
With respect to the homestead property tax credit, similar to the effect on State revenues, 
the extent of any decrease in revenues cannot be reliably estimated but may only be a 
limited decrease. The bill does not appear to substantively change the eligibility 
requirements for the homestead property tax credit aside from allowing, for a maximum of 
three taxable years, for an heir who otherwise meets the eligibility requirements, but is not 
yet shown as the record title holder of the property, to be granted the credit. 
 
With respect to the homeowners’ property tax credit, local government revenues may 
decrease to the extent that heirs (as defined under the bill to include any person receiving 
property from the deceased person (a legatee)) who are not otherwise granted the credit 
under current law (e.g., because they are not shown as the record title holder of the 
dwelling), are granted the credit under the bill. 
 
Local governments are authorized to grant a local supplement to the homeowners’ property 
tax credit program. While SDAT administers the local program, local governments are 
responsible for covering the cost of the local supplement. Currently, Baltimore City and  
13 counties (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Caroline, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, 
Garrett, Harford, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, and Washington) provide a local 
supplement to the State program. 
 
The overall impact on local revenues cannot be reliably estimated. However, to the extent 
that more homeowners become eligible for the homeowners’ property tax credit program, 
local governments that provide a supplement to the State homeowners’ property tax credit 
will realize a decrease in revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 765 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1148/ Page 11 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11