START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1164 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1164 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Water Companies, Sewage Disposal Companies, and Water and Sewage Disposal 
Companies – Rate Consolidation and Limited–Income Mechanisms 
 
   
This bill repeals an existing provision that allows the Public Service Commission (PSC) to 
authorize a rate consolidation of two or more water or sewage disposal systems, after 
providing notice and holding hearings, if they have common ownership and the rate 
consolidation is in the public interest. Instead, the bill requires PSC to authorize a rate 
consolidation proposed by a public service company in a base rate proceeding involving 
two or more water “systems” or sewage disposal “systems”; the bill establishes related 
requirements and conditions, including that PSC may not disapprove a rate consolidation 
proposal. “System” means an interconnected system of facilities used by a water company, 
sewage disposal company, or water and sewage disposal company to provide water or 
sewage disposal services. The bill also applies existing statutory provisions governing 
limited-income mechanisms to water companies, sewage disposal companies, and water 
and sewage disposal companies. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC and the Office of People’s Counsel can implement the bill’s changes 
using existing budgeted resources. Because it is assumed that most State agencies are not 
served by the affected companies, State expenditures for water and/or sewage disposal are 
likely not materially affected. No effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  The potential effect on rates for water and sewage disposal services is 
discussed in the Additional Comments below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. The potential effect on rates for water and 
sewage disposal services is discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1164/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Rate Consolidation 
 
PSC must authorize a rate consolidation proposed by a water company, a sewage disposal 
company, or a water and sewage disposal company in a base rate case proceeding involving 
two or more water systems or sewage disposal systems. 
 
When authorizing a rate consolidation under the bill, PSC (1) must allow the public service 
company to aggregate the revenues and costs of the water systems and sewage disposal 
systems for purposes of determining appropriate rates for their customers and (2) may order 
a gradual adjustment to the rates charged to a system over a period of up to three years until 
full rate consolidation is achieved.  
 
PSC may not disapprove a rate consolidation proposal. In addition, after PSC has 
authorized a rate consolidation proposal under the bill, PSC must continue to authorize and 
maintain the rate consolidation in subsequent rate orders on applications of the public 
service company pursuant to existing provisions regarding rate changes. 
 
The bill’s provisions related to rate consolidations only apply to public service companies 
that are water companies, sewage disposal companies, or water and sewage disposal 
companies. 
 
Applicability of Limited-Income Mechanism Provisions   
 
The bill expands the applicability of existing limited-income mechanism provisions (which 
currently apply to electric companies, gas companies, or gas and electric companies) by 
modifying the definition of “utility company” under § 4-309 of the Public Utilities Article 
to include a water company, a water and sewage disposal company, or a sewage disposal 
company. Broadly, these provisions establish requirements for proposals by utility 
companies to establish limited-income mechanisms to benefit eligible limited-income 
customers; they also establish related requirements for PSC. (See Current Law for more 
information.)  
  
Current Law:   
 
Relevant Definitions in the Public Utilities Article 
 
“Sewage disposal company” means a privately owned public service company that owns 
or maintains facilities for the disposal of sewage. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1164/ Page 3 
“Water company” means a public service company that owns a water plant and sells or 
distributes water for gain. 
 
Public Service Company Rates – Generally 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that:   
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article;  
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and  
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public. 
 
 
Notice of New and Changed Rates  
 
Under § 4-203 of the Public Utilities Article, unless otherwise ordered by PSC, a public 
service company may not establish a new rate or change in rate unless the public service 
company:   
 
 
provides notice of the new rate or change in rate to PSC at least 30 days before the 
new rate is established or current rate is changed; and 
 
publishes the new rate or change in rate, as specified, during the entire 30-day notice 
period in new schedules or plainly indicated amendments to existing schedules. 
 
Rate Consolidation of Two or More Water and Sewage Disposal Systems 
 
After notice to customers and holding a public hearing and an evidentiary hearing, PSC 
may authorize a rate consolidation of two or more water or sewage disposal systems if  
(1) the water or sewage disposal systems have common ownership and (2) the rate 
consolidation is in the public interest. 
 
“Rate consolidation” means the use of the same or similar rates or tariff schedules of rates 
for customers of the same class for two or more water or sewage disposal systems even if 
the systems are not physically interconnected.  
 
“System” is not defined in these provisions. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1164/ Page 4 
Limited-Income Mechanisms under § 4-309 of the Public Utilities Article 
 
Chapters 638 and 639 of 2021 authorized utility companies, after PSC approval, to adopt 
a limited-income mechanism to benefit eligible limited-income customers. The  
limited-income mechanism may take the form of a program, tariff provision, credit, rate, 
rider, or other means to assist an eligible limited-income customer to afford a utility 
service. “Utility company” means an electric company, a gas and electric company, or a 
gas company; the term does not include a small rural electric cooperative.  
 
A utility company that proposes a limited-income mechanism for PSC approval must 
include specified information in the proposal, including a detailed description of the 
proposed mechanism and the rationale supporting the utility company’s proposal for a 
mechanism to benefit the eligible limited-income customers in the utility company’s 
service territory. A proposal must allocate the prudently incurred costs of the  
limited-income mechanism across rate classes.  
 
In evaluating a limited-income mechanism, PSC must consider: 
 
 
the degree to which the mechanism promotes affordability of electricity or natural 
gas for limited-income customers; 
 
the public interest in allocating the costs of the mechanism between the utility 
company’s shareholders and rate payers; 
 
the impact on rates, utility operating costs, customer arrearages, customer 
disconnections, uncollectible costs, and successful completion of payment plans; 
 
the ability of a limited-income customer to continue to receive benefits when 
relocating within the same service territory; 
 
coordination of benefits under the mechanism with any other public or private 
assistance that may be available to the customer; 
 
a minimum level of support or assistance structure to provide equitable availability 
of limited-income assistance across the State; and  
 
any other information PSC considers appropriate. 
 
Small Business Effect:  According to PSC’s website, the commission currently regulates 
22 water and/or sewage disposal companies. To the extent that any affected water and/or 
sewage disposal companies are considered small businesses, they may benefit from rate 
consolidation proceedings established under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  Water and/or sewage disposal rates for services provided by 
water and/or sewage disposal companies are likely affected by the bill’s rate consolidation 
provisions. While the bill likely results in a rate decrease in some service areas as 
companies leverage economies of scale to distribute infrastructure costs across a larger 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1164/ Page 5 
base, rate increases may occur in some service areas to subsidize broader system 
improvements. Further, rates for most customers increase to the extent that water and/or 
sewage disposal companies adopt limited-income mechanisms under the bill (to fund the 
limited-income mechanism). 
 
The extent to which rates are affected for a particular customer or customer class cannot 
be reliably estimated at this time. In any event, customers of the affected companies, which 
are mostly residential but could include local governments and small businesses, are 
affected by any impact on rates resulting from the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 556 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5