START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1151 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1151 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Study on Maryland Medical Assistance 
Program Reimbursement of Hospice Room and Board Services 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) and the Maryland 
Medicaid Program to jointly study the impact of requiring Medicaid to provide 
reimbursement for room and board services provided by a hospice house. By 
September 30, 2026, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must report its findings 
to specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by $52,000 (50% general funds, 50% federal 
funds) in FY 2027 only to complete the required report. Federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$26,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
$52,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($26,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must (1) analyze overall Medicaid savings per enrollee death 
associated with hospice care utilization during the last six months of life compared with 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1151/ Page 2 
costs associated with other services provided to Medicaid recipients during the last 
six months of life, as specified; (2) analyze the projected fiscal impact of the provision of 
reimbursement for hospice house room and board services, including any potential offsets 
or net savings; (3) examine how reimbursement for room and board services would affect 
hospital readmission rates, improve hospice length of stay, improve early access to hospice 
services, result in a reduction in deaths in hospitals, and result in a reduction in emergency 
department utilization; and (4) include a comparison of other states that provide 
reimbursement for hospice house room and board services, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.07.22.02), “hospice house” 
means a residence operated by a Maryland licensed hospice care program that provides 
home‑based hospice services to hospice patients in a home-like environment and the care 
is not billed as general inpatient care. 
 
Maryland Medicaid covers hospice services for patients whose physicians have certified 
that their life expectancy is six months or less. Medicaid covers the following hospice 
services:  nursing care; medical social services; physicians’ services; counseling services; 
home health aide; medical appliances and supplies (including drugs and biologicals); and 
physical and occupational therapy. In general, the services must be related to the palliation 
or management of the recipient’s terminal illness, symptom control, or to enable the 
individual to maintain activities of daily living and basic functional skills. Short-term 
inpatient care is covered if it is provided in a participating hospice unit or a participating 
hospital or nursing facility that meets hospice standards. 
 
MDH only provides reimbursement for room and board to hospice participants residing in 
skilled nursing facilities. The per diem rate is 95% of the skilled nursing facility rate. This 
complies with federal law, which prohibits Medicaid from reimbursing for room and board 
except in certain medical institutions. A hospice house is not a skilled nursing facility and 
does not qualify for one of the limited exceptions to this prohibition. Thus, should Medicaid 
reimburse for room and board services provided by a hospice house, it would require 
100% State general funds. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Given the three-month timeframe to produce the report 
(due September 30, 2026), MDH advises that Medicaid expenditures increase by $52,000 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) in fiscal 2027 only for contractual services to 
prepare the report. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. MHCC advises it can 
participate in the study with existing resources, although the timeframe to do so presents 
operational challenges. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1151/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 611 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3