START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1100 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1100 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Telecommunications Infrastructure - Protections 
 
 
This bill (1) requires a junk dealer, scrap metal processor, or antique dealer residing in the 
State to register a complete description of purchased “telecommunications equipment” 
with local law enforcement; (2) restricts the authorized payment methods for purchases of 
telecommunications equipment by these dealers and processors; and (3) subjects violators 
of these prohibitions to business license revocation and criminal penalties. The bill also 
prohibits a person from recklessly or willfully and maliciously damaging 
“telecommunications infrastructure” and establishes a criminal penalty for a violation of 
this prohibition. Finally, the bill adds “telecommunications equipment” to the existing 
definition of “junk or scrap metal” used in provisions that address licensing, recordkeeping, 
and procedural requirements for junk dealers and scrap metal processors.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Purchase and Registration of Telecommunications Equipment 
 
Under the bill, each junk dealer, scrap metal processor, or antique dealer residing in the 
State must register a complete description of purchased telecommunications equipment, as 
specified, with the local sheriff or other designated law enforcement official. These dealers 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1100/ Page 2 
or processors may only purchase telecommunications equipment by issuing a check mailed 
to the seller’s address and are prohibited from selling or otherwise disposing of 
telecommunications equipment for 30 days from the date of purchase.  
 
In addition to revocation of any State junk license held by the person, a violator of these 
provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $2,000. 
 
“Telecommunications equipment” means an item that an individual knows, or reasonably 
should know, to be ordinarily used by, or belong to, a telephone, telegraph, internet, or 
other wireless communication company. 
 
Damaging, Defacing, or Destroying Telecommunications Infrastructure 
 
The bill prohibits a person from recklessly or willfully and maliciously defacing, 
damaging, or destroying telecommunications infrastructure. Violators are guilty of a felony 
and subject to imprisonment for up to six months and/or $5,000 fine.  
 
This prohibition does not apply to (1) an employee of a telecommunications company or a 
person acting under the authority of a telecommunications company or (2) the supervision 
and control of a telecommunications company and the company’s material, equipment, or 
facilities by a political subdivision within which the company is doing business. 
 
“Telecommunications company” means a company that provides broadband internet, cable 
television, telephone, or other wireless communication services. 
 
“Telecommunications infrastructure” means items used to provide broadband internet, 
cable television, telephone, or other wireless communication services. It includes 
(1) antennae; (2) fiber optic cables; (3) headends; (4) telephone poles; (5) radio 
transceivers; (6) radio towers; (7) wireless support structures; (8) small cell facilities; and 
(9) office facilities. 
 
Current Law:  “Junk” or “scrap metal” includes nonferrous metal articles made wholly or 
substantially of specified materials (e.g., light copper, heavy copper, aluminum, tin, and 
stainless steel) and specified used articles made of ferrous or nonferrous metals 
(e.g., catalytic converters, hard-drawn copper, propane tanks, cell tower batteries, and used 
articles owned by a public utility). “Junk” or “scrap metal” does not include food or 
beverage cans. 
 
In general, scrap metal processors and junk dealers must be licensed to operate in the State. 
For each of these professions, State law requires licensees to keep detailed records about 
junk or scrap metal purchases and specifies the circumstances under which these records 
must be submitted to a regulatory agency or a law enforcement officer.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1100/ Page 3 
For example, for each purchase of junk or scrap metal in the State, a junk dealer or scrap 
metal processor must keep a record in English that states (1) the date and time of purchase; 
(2) a description of the junk or scrap metal purchased; (3) the amount paid for the junk or 
scrap metal; (4) the registration plate number, make, and model of any vehicle used; (5) the 
name and address of the individual from whom the junk or scrap metal was acquired; 
(6) the signature of the individual from whom the junk or scrap metal was acquired and the 
person who accepted the material; and (7) personal identifying information of the 
individual from whom the junk or scrap metal was acquired. A junk dealer or scrap metal 
processor must submit a copy of the record to the appropriate primary law enforcement 
unit, by the end of the first business day following the date of the transaction.  
 
If a State or local law enforcement agency has reasonable cause to believe that junk or 
scrap metal that is in the possession of the vendor is stolen, the law enforcement agency 
may issue a written hold notice. A vendor is prohibited from removing items identified in 
the notice from their place of business for the duration of the hold period, which may not 
exceed 15 days.  
 
A violation of these requirements is a misdemeanor punishable by a $500 maximum fine 
for a first offense and imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $5,000 maximum fine for 
a subsequent offense. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on small business junk 
dealers, scrap metal processors, and antique dealers who are subject to additional 
requirements, license revocation, and criminal penalties under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 782 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Montgomery counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3