START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1169 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1169 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Howard County - Highways - Speed Limits  
Ho. Co. 8-26 
 
 
This bill authorizes Howard County to decrease the maximum speed limit to no less than 
15 miles per hour (MPH) on a highway after performing an engineering and traffic 
investigation; however, the county may not implement a new speed monitoring system to 
enforce speed limits on any portion of a highway for which the speed limit has been 
decreased pursuant to this authorization. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase minimally due to more citations for 
speeding, assuming Howard County uses the authorization granted by the bill to decrease 
speed limits in designated areas. The District Court can handle any additional caseload with 
existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Howard County expenditures increase to the extent that engineering and 
traffic investigations are performed to lower speed limits under the bill; county revenues 
may increase to the extent that speed limits are reduced, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Speed Limits – Generally 
 
Unless there is a special danger that requires a lower speed, the maximum lawful speeds 
on a State highway are (1) 15 MPH in alleys in Baltimore County; (2) 30 MPH on all 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1169/ Page 2 
highways in a business district and on undivided highways in a residential district; 
(3) 35 MPH on divided highways in a residential district; (4) 50 MPH on undivided 
highways in other locations; and (5) 55 MPH on divided highways in other locations. 
A maximum speed limit of more than 55 MPH may not be established on any highway in 
the State that is not an interstate highway or an expressway, and a maximum speed limit of 
more than 70 MPH may not be established on any highway in the State.  
 
If, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, a local authority determines that 
a maximum speed is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under existing conditions on 
any part of a highway in its jurisdiction, the local authority may establish a reasonable and 
safe maximum speed limit for that part of the highway, which may:   
 
 
decrease the limit at an intersection;  
 
increase the limit in an urban district to no more than 50 MPH;  
 
decrease the limit in an urban district; or  
 
decrease the limit outside an urban district to no less than 25 MPH.  
 
An engineering and traffic investigation is not required to conform a speed limit in effect 
on December 31, 1974, to one of the specified speed limits established by statute.  
 
Altered Speed Limits 
 
Anne Arundel and Montgomery counties and municipalities within those counties may 
decrease the maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH on a highway but only after 
performing an engineering and traffic investigation. However, a local authority may not 
implement a new speed monitoring system to enforce speed limits on any portion of a 
highway for which the speed limit has been decreased pursuant to this authorization.  
 
Calvert County is authorized to decrease the maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH 
on Lore Road and, except for Solomons Island Road, each highway south of Lore Road 
without performing an engineering and traffic investigation, regardless of whether the 
highway is inside an urban district. 
 
A municipality located in Queen Anne’s County may decrease the maximum speed limit 
to no less than 15 MPH on a highway without performing an engineering and traffic 
investigation. 
 
Also, Baltimore City may, without performing an engineering and traffic investigation, 
either decrease the maximum speed limit or increase – but only to a previously established 
level – the maximum speed limit on a highway in its jurisdiction. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1169/ Page 3 
Altered speed limits are effective when posted on appropriate signs giving notice of the 
limit. Any alteration by a local authority (except in Baltimore City) of a maximum speed 
limit on a part (or extension) of a State highway is not effective until approved by the 
State Highway Administration (SHA).  
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Generally  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed systems. Speed 
monitoring systems are authorized to be used by SHA, the Maryland Transportation 
Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in specified locations as prescribed by State 
law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized for use in school zones; however, the 
systems may also be used on other specified highways and roadways, including 
Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City and 
Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Citations and Fines  
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. Generally, pursuant to §21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person 
who receives a citation, may:  
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1169/ Page 4 
In general, citation revenues from speed monitoring systems used by a local jurisdiction 
(subject to limited exception) may be used to recover the costs of implementing and 
administering the program and any remaining balance may be used solely for public safety 
purposes, including pedestrian or highway safety programs. However, for any fiscal year 
in which the balance remaining after the costs of implementing and administering the 
systems is greater than 10% of the total revenues of the county for the fiscal year, the 
county must remit any funds that exceed 10% of the total revenues to the Comptroller. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Howard County expenditures increase to the extent that engineering 
and traffic investigations are performed to lower speed limits, pursuant to the bill’s 
authorization.  
 
Although Howard County is prohibited from installing new speed camera systems on any 
portion of a highway for which the speed limit has been decreased pursuant to the bill’s 
authority, the bill appears to allow any cameras that are already in operation to continue 
operation on such highways, even if the speed limits are reduced. Thus, to the extent that 
Howard County chooses to lower speed limits on highways with existing speed camera 
systems in place when the county would not have done so absent the bill, local revenues 
increase to the extent more automated enforcement citations are issued. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4