START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1152 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1152 
(Delegate Williams) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Department of State Police - Special Police Officers - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of State Police (DSP) to study and make 
recommendations on the employment and use of special police officers (SPOs), including 
(1) the commissioning process; (2) employment requirements; (3) SPO operations, 
training, and equipment; (4) the jurisdiction of SPOs; and (5) regulatory oversight to 
suspend or revoke the commission of SPOs. In conducting the study, DSP must survey and 
document the licensing of and regulatory requirements for SPOs and the equivalent in 
surrounding states and analyze best practices for the use of SPOs by public and private 
employers in the State and surrounding states by considering (1) the number of SPOs in 
the State and surrounding states; (2) mandated training for SPOs, including firearms 
training; (3) the impact of the use of SPOs on public safety; and (4) recorded complaints. 
In carrying out the study, DSP must consult with specified entities. By December 1, 2026, 
DSP must submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1152/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In carrying out the study, DSP must consult with (1) SPOs; (2) employers 
of SPOs, including local or county governments that employ SPOs; (3) a representative of 
the Maryland Chiefs of Police Association; (4) a representative of the Maryland Sheriffs’ 
Association; (5) a representative of the DSP Licensing Division; (6) a representative of the 
Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; (7) a representative of the Office of the Secretary 
of State; and (8) a representative of a security training academy that provides training for 
SPOs. 
 
Current Law:  The Governor may appoint and deputize an individual as a SPO; however, 
each SPO is deemed to be an employee of the entity that requested the appointment. Such 
a commission is granted arrest powers, but the scope of each commission is limited to the 
property cited in the commission, unless the SPO is in active pursuit for the purpose of 
immediate apprehension. An SPO appointed by the Governor may: 
 
 
arrest individuals who trespass or commit offenses on the property described in the 
application for the commission; 
 
exercise the powers of a police officer on that property; 
 
exercise the powers of a police officer in a county or municipality in connection 
with the care, custody, and protection of other property of the entity that requested 
the appointment of the SPO or other property, real or personal, for which the entity 
has assumed an obligation to maintain or protect; and 
 
direct and control traffic on public highways and roads in the immediate vicinity of 
the property in order to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic to and from the 
property, if approved in advance. 
 
An SPO may make an arrest or issue a traffic citation for a violation of the Maryland 
Vehicle Law or any other State or local traffic law or regulation only if the SPO (1) has a 
probationary or permanent appointment as a security officer or is a member of an industrial 
police force and (2) has completed the basic training course for police officers as 
established by the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC). With 
specified exceptions, an SPO applicant for an initial commission must complete a training 
course approved by the Secretary of State Police, in consultation with MPTSC, consisting 
of at least 80 hours of instruction, as specified. Before submitting an application for 
renewal, an SPO must complete 12 hours of in-service training approved by the Secretary 
in consultation with MPTSC. 
 
The application fee for an SPO commission is $100. An initial commission expires 
three years after the date of issuance and is renewable for a three-year term under specified 
conditions. The renewal fee is $60. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1152/ Page 3 
The following entities are authorized to apply for the appointment of SPO for the following 
purposes: 
 
 
a municipality, county, or other governmental body of the State, in order to protect 
property owned, leased, or regularly used by the governmental body or any of its 
units; 
 
another state, or subdivision or unit of another state, that has an interest in property 
located wholly or partly in this State, in order to protect the property; 
 
a college, university, or public school system in the State, in order to protect its 
property or students; 
 
a person that exists and functions for a legal business purpose, in order to protect its 
business property; or 
 
a person that holds a valid license as a security guard agency under Title 19, 
Subtitle 3 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article, in order to protect 
property owned or leased by its clients. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3