START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1184 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1184 
(Delegate Acevero, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Civil Actions - Nonprofit Organizations - Unauthorized Support of Israeli 
Settlement Activity (Not On Our Dime Act) 
 
 
This bill (1) prohibits certain nonprofit organizations from knowingly engaging in 
“unauthorized support of Israeli settlement activity”; (2) authorizes the Attorney General 
or a person harmed by a violation to bring an action against a nonprofit organization that 
violates this prohibition; and (3) requires the Secretary of State (SOS) to remove a 
nonprofit organization from the Registry of Charitable Solicitation following receipt of 
certain notice. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill has an operational impact on SOS, it is not anticipated to 
materially affect SOS expenditures. Depending on actual litigation experienced under the 
bill, general fund expenditures for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) may increase, 
as discussed below. Revenues may increase from damages awarded and collected in cases 
filed pursuant to the bill. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. Nonprofit organizations are not considered small 
businesses. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A nonprofit organization registered with SOS to solicit charitable 
donations in the State may not knowingly engage in “unauthorized support of Israeli 
settlement activity,” as defined under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1184/ Page 2 
The Attorney General may bring an action for injunctive relief and damages on behalf of 
the State or any of its political subdivisions against a director, an officer, a partner, a trustee, 
a manager, or any other agent of a nonprofit organization that violates this prohibition. The 
Attorney General may not seek less than $1.0 million in damages in such an action. 
A person harmed by a violation of this prohibition may bring an action for injunctive relief 
and actual damages against a director, an officer, a partner, a trustee, a manager, or any 
other agent of a nonprofit organization that violates the prohibition. In addition to 
injunctive relief and actual damages, a court may award attorney’s fees to a prevailing 
plaintiff. An action may be brought in any county in the State. The statute of limitations 
for this cause of action is 10 years after the date of the occurrence of the act on which the 
claim is based. 
 
On notice from the Attorney General or a prevailing plaintiff of a judgment entered against 
a nonprofit organization under the bill’s provisions, SOS must remove the nonprofit 
organization from the Registry of Charitable Solicitation. 
 
“Unauthorized support of Israeli settlement activity” means aiding and abetting activity of 
the government of Israel, or a citizen of Israel, that is banned under the 
Geneva Conventions signed August 12, 1949, as amended, and their additional Protocols, 
to which the United States is a party, including (1) the unlawful transfer of Israeli civilians 
into occupied territory; (2) acts of violence against protected persons by citizens of Israel 
living in occupied territories; (3) crimes against property; (4) the unilateral acquisition and 
annexation of land in occupied territory; (5) the forced transfer or eviction of protected 
persons within occupied territory, or the deportation of protected persons from occupied 
territory; and (6) the destruction of infrastructure within occupied territory. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Secretary of State 
 
Registration and Oversight of Charitable Organizations:  SOS registers and oversees 
charitable organizations in the State and maintains an online database of registered entities. 
 
A charitable organization is a person that: 
 
 
is or holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, eleemosynary, humane, 
patriotic, philanthropic, or religious organization; and 
 
either (1) solicits or receives charitable contributions from the public or (2) is an 
ambulance, firefighting, fraternal, rescue, or police or other law enforcement 
organization when it solicits charitable contributions from the public. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1184/ Page 3 
A charitable organization must register and receive a registration letter from SOS before it 
(1) solicits charitable contributions in the State; (2) has charitable contributions solicited 
on its behalf in the State; or (3) solicits charitable contributions outside the State if the 
organization is in the State. 
 
A registered charitable organization must submit an annual report to SOS, as specified. 
SOS may exempt an organization from registration and reporting requirements if the 
charitable organization (1) is organized under the laws of another state that has a statute 
similar to Maryland’s; (2) has been exempted from the submission of a registration 
statement by the other state; (3) has a principal place of business outside the State; and 
(4) gets its money principally from sources outside the State. 
 
Auditing Requirements:  In addition to other information and materials necessary to 
complete the registration statement, charitable organizations must submit an audit by a 
certified public accountant (CPA) if the gross income from contributions in the most recent 
fiscal year is at least $750,000, or a review by an independent CPA if the gross income 
from contributions from the last fiscal year is at least $300,000 but less than $750,000. 
SOS may accept other documentation in place of either the audit or the review but may 
also require an audit or review if the amount of gross income is less than $750,000. 
SOS retains the authority to require an audit or review under the bill. 
 
Enforcement:  SOS or the Attorney General may investigate an alleged violation of Title 6 
of the Business Regulation Article. SOS or the Attorney General are authorized to take 
specified actions if they find or have reasonable grounds to believe that a charitable 
organization, charitable representative, or public safety solicitor has violated Title 6, 
including issuing a cease and desist order to the violator, if either makes specified findings. 
If SOS or the Attorney General issues a cease and desist order to a person, the person may 
request a hearing from SOS; SOS must hold a hearing within 30 days after the request is 
submitted in accordance with specified provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act. 
 
The Attorney General may sue in the circuit court for the county in which the alleged 
violation occurred for an order that restrains further violation of Title 6; restrains the 
defendant from making further charitable or public safety solicitations in the State; 
recovers civil penalties for the State, as specified; enforces compliance with Title 6; or 
secures any other appropriate relief. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Secretary of State 
 
SOS advises that the bill requires the office to (1) list the relevant charities as no longer 
registered to solicit charitable contributions; (2) follow up or monitor these organizations 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1184/ Page 4 
to ensure that an organization that is no longer registered stops soliciting in Maryland; and 
(3) take enforcement action against organizations that are still soliciting without being 
registered. While SOS cannot estimate the number of organizations impacted by the bill 
and the bill’s overall impact on the agency, this estimate assumes that any 
potential expenditures associated with implementation and enforcement are minimal and 
do not materially affect SOS finances. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
OAG advises that it cannot measure the impact of the bill on caseloads, but expert witness 
fees of $500 or more per hour may be incurred. Based on previous information from OAG, 
examples of relevant experts include corporate governance and financial experts to assist 
with investigation and analysis and to serve as witnesses that have a specialized knowledge 
of the international laws that may be at issue in cases brought under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1394 of 2025 and HB 1124 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Secretary of State; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4