START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1165 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1165 
(Delegate Williams) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Apprenticeship Program Accountability and Completion 
 
   
This bill requires that any apprenticeship program that provides apprentices for specified 
contracts have a completion rate of at least 25%, as determined by the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MD Labor). Contractors that opt to make payments to a registered 
apprenticeship program in lieu of participating in an apprenticeship program under current 
law must make the payments to an apprenticeship program with a completion rate of at 
least 25%. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2027 to the extent that more 
contractors pay into the State Apprenticeship Training Fund (SATF) as an alternative to 
using an apprenticeship program, but a reliable estimate is not feasible. The bill may reduce 
the number of bidders and offerors on specified contracts, which may cause the cost of 
those projects to increase, but a reliable estimate of any such effect is not feasible. State 
agencies can implement the bill with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may reduce the number of bidders and offerors on local public work 
projects, which may cause the cost of the projects to increase, but a reliable estimate of any 
such effect is not feasible. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The following types of contracts that use apprentices from apprenticeship 
programs registered with and approved by either MD Labor or the U.S. Department of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1165/ Page 2 
Labor must use apprentices only from programs that have a completion rate of at least 25%, 
as determined by MD Labor: 
 
 
“covered procurements” that meet criteria established by the Chief Procurement 
Officer (CPO) and, for information technology (IT) contracts, the Secretary of 
Information Technology; 
 
public work contracts worth $250,000 or more that are subject to prevailing wage 
rates; 
 
public works projects that are valued at $500,000 or more; and 
 
capital construction projects that are valued at$500,000 or more that are funded with 
at least $1 million of funds in the State capital budget and are entered into by the 
recipient of the funding in the State capital budget and a contractor, or the contractor 
and a subcontractor. 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of registered apprenticeship programs in the State, please 
see the Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
State Apprenticeship Training Fund 
 
Chapter 687 of 2009 created the SATF and required contractors on covered public work 
contracts (those valued at $500,000 or more) and subcontractors with contracts worth at 
least $100,000 to either participate in an apprenticeship training program, make payments 
to a registered apprenticeship program or to an organization that operates registered 
programs, or contribute to SATF. Chapter 782 of 2017 extended virtually identical 
requirements to contracts with a value of at least $500,000 for capital construction projects 
that receive at least $1.0 million from the State’s capital budget (which are not considered 
public work projects). 
 
The purpose of SATF is to promote preapprenticeship programs and other workforce 
development programs in the State’s public secondary schools and community colleges 
and to cover the cost of implementing the bill’s provisions. The programs should prepare 
students to enter apprenticeship training programs. The fund’s revenues consist of 
payments made by contractors and penalties collected due to violations. 
 
Contractors and subcontractors that elect to contribute to SATF must pay, on a monthly 
basis, an amount determined by the Secretary of Labor, not to exceed 25 cents per hour  
per employee in a covered craft. Payments to the fund satisfy required apprenticeship 
program contributions under the prevailing wage determination and may be deducted from 
the prevailing wage rate required to be paid to each employee. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1165/ Page 3 
MD Labor is responsible for enforcing these requirements. Organizations that operate 
registered apprenticeship programs must certify to the Secretary of Labor that all funds 
received are used solely for those designated purposes. 
 
Contractors and subcontractors that do not comply must pay into SATF twice the amount 
of unpaid apprenticeship training contributions required. Willful misrepresentation of 
prevailing wage records is subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each employee and 
falsified record. The Secretary of Labor may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction 
to enforce these requirements; contractors or subcontractors must pay reasonable legal fees 
and court costs associated with a civil action filed by the Secretary. 
 
Covered Procurements 
 
Chapter 601 of 2025 defined a “covered procurement” as a procurement contract that  
(1) meets criteria required to be established in regulations by CPO, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Labor and, for specified IT contracts, the Secretary of Information Technology 
and (2) is not a public work contract. Contractors awarded a covered procurement must use 
a registered apprenticeship program. As of the printing of this fiscal and policy note, CPO 
has not promulgated regulations specifying what constitutes a covered procurement. 
 
A contractor that submits a bid or proposal for a covered procurement must provide a unit 
with written verification of (1) the number of apprentices that will be used throughout the 
contract term, including potential renewal options; (2) the work to be performed by 
apprentices in their respective programs; and (3) the duration of the apprenticeship. This 
verification must be provided before a contractor can be awarded a contract for a covered 
procurement. The Secretary of Labor (1) is responsible for compliance with these 
requirements; (2) must establish criteria to help units ensure compliance by their 
contractors; and (3) may file suit to enforce these requirements. A contractor that fails to 
use apprentices under a covered procurement is subject to a fine to be determined according 
to criteria established by the Secretary of Labor. Penalties collected are payable to SATF. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MD Labor advises that it does not currently calculate completion rates 
for registered apprenticeship programs, but that it can do so with existing resources. 
 
State Apprenticeship Training Fund 
 
The requirement that apprenticeship training programs have a 25% completion rate likely 
limits the number of such programs that can provide apprentices to, or receive payments 
from, affected State contracts. As a result, contractors on prevailing wage projects that 
would otherwise use an apprenticeship program or make a payment to a registered 
apprenticeship program may instead contribute to SATF. Therefore, SATF revenues 
increase beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent that contractors decide to pay into the fund 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1165/ Page 4 
as an alternative to using an apprenticeship program or making payments to an 
apprenticeship program. A reliable estimate of this effect is not feasible without knowing 
what choice contractors might make in response to the bill. 
 
Project Costs 
 
Requirements on which apprenticeship programs contractors can use may result in some 
contractors deciding not to bid on a contract if the apprenticeship program they have used 
in the past does not meet the requirements. This could limit competition, which may lead 
to higher costs for projects for the State beginning in fiscal 2027. However, the option for 
contractors to make payments to an apprenticeship program or pay into SATF as an 
alternative to using an apprenticeship program likely mitigates this effect. A reliable 
estimate of this effect is not feasible without knowing what choice contractors might make 
in response to the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local governments that manage public work projects can likely 
implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. As with the State, the bill may 
reduce competition for local public work projects, potentially increasing their costs, but the 
alternative options of making payments to an apprenticeship program or SATF mitigate 
this effect. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 673 (Senator A. Washington) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1165/ Page 5 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a  
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship 
programs. More specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as 
changes to current programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. 
The approval process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program 
in a proposed industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current 
staffing level of the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate 
supervision can be provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations 
of the entity. The Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory 
role for legislation and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
Additionally, Chapter 2 of 2025 (discussed further below) established the Maryland Office 
of Registered Apprenticeship Development (MORAD) within DWDAL’s Maryland 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1165/ Page 6 
Apprenticeship and Training Program (MATP) for the purpose of scaling registered 
apprenticeships across industries and occupations to meet the needs of the State’s economy. 
 
According to MD Labor and as of September 2025, the total number of registered 
apprenticeships in Maryland is over 13,000, with over 1,400 apprentices graduating from 
their programs during 2025. 
 
In addition to registered apprenticeship, MD Labor, in collaboration with the Maryland 
State Department of Education, also operates a parallel youth apprenticeship program 
aimed at connecting students to paid employment and training opportunities called the 
Apprenticeship Maryland Program. As of May 2024, there were 1,045 active youth 
apprenticeships participating in the program. 
 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission 
 
Chapter 168 of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. The purpose of the 
commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill shortages in  
high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways for young 
people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and 
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023, ten times in 2024, and once 
in 2025 and published interim and final reports January 2024 and March 2025, respectively. 
Additionally, the University of Baltimore Schafer Center, as part of its contract to provide 
support staff to the commission, undertook a Survey of Employers and Labor Unions and 
published findings on the prevalence of, barriers to, and benefits of apprenticeships in 
February 2025. 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy (RAISE) Act 
 
Chapter 2, the RAISE Act, operationalized multiple recommendations from the 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission’s interim and final reports. Specifically, Chapter 2 
establishes (1) MORAD within MATP to scale registered apprenticeships across industries 
to meet the needs of the State’s economy; (2) the Registered Apprenticeship Qualified 
Intermediary Program within MATP to increase apprenticeship awareness, connect 
employers and labor organizations with partners, and provide technical assistance to launch 
and expand apprenticeships; (3) the Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory 
Board to advise MORAD on the strategy to achieve its mission of expanding registered 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1165/ Page 7 
apprenticeship opportunities in the State; and (4) the Maryland Pay Per Apprentice 
Program and associated special fund to provide grants to employers and sponsors to 
develop a well-trained, productive workforce that meets the needs of the State’s economy 
and help offset apprenticeship costs. 
 
Recent Reports and Publications 
 
In response to Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024, MD Labor released a report on analyzing the 
apprenticeship mentoring ratio for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the 
State. The report indicates that, for fiscal 2024, there were approximately 694 apprentices 
employed by 119 employers in nontraditional apprenticeships (those outside the traditional 
building trades). 
 
The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) outlined concerns with workforce shortages 
among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation sectors. The 
report directed MD Labor to convene workgroups to study and report on the short-term 
and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. Pursuant to the 2022 JCR, 
MD Labor released reports from a Healthcare Apprenticeship Workgroup, Transportation 
Apprenticeship Workgroup, and Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup. 
 
The 2024 and 2025 JCR directed multiple agencies to collect data relevant to 
apprenticeship in the State in accordance with the interim and final recommendations of 
the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. This included reports from: 
 
 
the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Department of Juvenile Services on 
Public Safety Apprenticeship; 
 
the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission on Apprenticeships in 
Maryland Hospitals; 
 
the Maryland Insurance Administration on Efforts to Support Insurance Industry 
Apprenticeships; 
 
the Maryland Department of Health on a Registered Nurse Degree Apprenticeship 
Program Study; 
 
the Public Service Commission of Maryland on Apprenticeships Within Public 
Service Companies; and 
 
the Maryland Department of Budget and Management on Public Service Registered 
Apprenticeships within State Government. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7