START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1183 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1183 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - Manufacturer's Limited Beer, Wine, 
and Liquor Permit 
 
 
This bill establishes a manufacturer’s limited beer, wine, and liquor permit in 
Baltimore County and authorizes the Baltimore County Board of License Commissioners 
to issue the permit to a holder of a Class 5 brewery license with a local on-site consumption 
permit. The permit authorizes the holder to allow a licensed caterer or other contracted 
party to provide sealed beer, wine, and liquor products not manufactured by the permit 
holder during private events for on-premises consumption at the licensed premises. The 
permit holder may not be an affiliate of the licensed caterer or other contracted party. The 
permit holder may not allow patrons who are visiting any part of the manufacturer’s 
licensed premises that is open to the public to enter the private event area while the private 
event is being held. The permit holder must request approval from the board before each 
event. The board must adopt regulations including criteria for approving events and setting 
the annual fee. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2027 
from the issuance of manufacturer’s limited beer, wine, and liquor permits, as discussed 
below. Baltimore County can likely handle any additional enforcement using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1183/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The holder of a Class 5 brewery license may (1) establish and operate a 
plant for brewing and bottling malt beverages at the location described in the license; 
(2) import beer from a holder of a nonresident dealer’s permit; (3) contract to brew and 
bottle beer with and on behalf of certain other license holders; (4) sell and deliver beer to 
a holder of a beer wholesaler’s license or a person outside the State that is authorized to 
acquire beer. The annual license fee is $1,500. 
 
A local licensing board may issue an on-premises consumption permit to an applicant that 
holds a Class 5 brewery license. A local licensing board that does not issue a  
Class 5 brewery license must establish an equivalent license and require the applicant to 
obtain that license before issuing a permit for on-premises consumption. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore County advises there are currently five license holders that 
might seek manufacturer’s limited beer, wine, and liquor permits under the bill; however, 
the board has not yet determined the annual fee for the permit. Therefore, Baltimore County 
revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent license holders are issued permits 
under the bill at the annual fee established by the board. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 855 (Senator Sydnor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2