START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1118 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1118 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health, Health Insurance, and Health Occupations - Perinatal Behavioral Health 
Conditions 
 
 
This bill requires certain health care providers to screen for a “perinatal behavioral health 
condition.” Certain insurers, nonprofit health services plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively carriers), as well as Medicaid, must provide coverage for such 
screenings. The bill alters existing requirements on the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) to identify written information about perinatal mood and anxiety disorders and 
requires certain health care providers and hospitals to provide certain information to 
patients. MDH must identify and develop training programs that improve early 
identification of perinatal behavioral health conditions. The bill also (1) requires a carrier 
to provide a certain standing referral; (2) requires certain health occupations boards to grant 
continuing education credits for perinatal behavioral health condition training; and 
(3) imposes a study and reporting requirement on the Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC). The bill’s study and reporting requirement takes effect July 1, 2026, and 
insurance provisions take effect January 1, 2027, and apply to all policies, contracts, 
and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that 
date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Any 
additional workload on MIA can be handled with existing resources. MDH, including the 
health occupations boards and MHCC, can implement the bill’s requirements using 
existing budgeted resources. State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program (State plan) expenditures may increase by a significant amount beginning in 
FY 2027, as discussed below. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1118/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in health care expenditures for local governments 
that purchase fully insured plans. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Perinatal behavioral health condition” means a behavioral health 
condition occurring during pregnancy or within one year after the conclusion of a 
pregnancy, including a pregnancy that does not result in a live birth. “Perinatal behavioral 
health condition” includes postpartum depression. 
 
Perinatal Behavioral Health Screening  
 
A health care provider who evaluates and manages pregnancy or postpartum care must 
conduct a screening for perinatal behavioral health conditions at the one-month, 
two-month, four-month, and six-month well child visits within the first year of the child’s 
life. 
 
MDH must identify acceptable screening tools, which must be validated, routinely used, 
free, easy to administer and score, and available in multiple languages. MDH must assist 
health care providers with accessing resources and referral services through the Maryland 
Behavioral Health Integration in Pediatric Primary Care, the Maternal Health Innovation 
Program, and Postpartum Support International to assist providers in finding timely and 
effective care for individuals identified as at risk for a perinatal behavioral health condition. 
 
Coverage for Screening for Perinatal Behavioral Health Conditions 
 
A carrier and Medicaid, effective January 1, 2027, must provide coverage for screening for 
perinatal behavioral health conditions at the one-month, two-month, four-month, and 
six-month well child visits within the first year of the child’s life. 
 
Information about Perinatal Behavioral Health Conditions 
 
MDH must identify specified written information about perinatal behavioral health 
conditions (rather than mood and anxiety disorders under current law). In addition to 
current recipients of this information, MDH must provide the information to each local 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) agency in the 
State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1118/ Page 3 
This information must also be provided by a hospital to a birthing parent on discharge from 
the birthing hospital. A health care provider who evaluates and manages perinatal care must 
provide this information (or other appropriate information on perinatal behavioral health 
conditions) to a patient at least once during each trimester. 
 
Identification and Development of Training Programs 
 
MDH, in consultation with the State Board of Physicians, the State Board of Nursing, and 
Postpartum Support International, must identify and develop training programs that 
improve early identification of perinatal behavioral health conditions (rather than 
postpartum depression and perinatal mood and anxiety disorders as under current law). 
MDH must provide a list of training programs on request. 
 
Health Occupations Continuing Education Requirements 
 
Each health occupations board that requires a licensee or certificate holder to complete 
continuing education as a condition of license or certificate renewal must grant at least 
two hours of continuing education credits for every one hour of continuing education on 
perinatal behavioral health conditions identified by MDH. 
 
Each health occupations board may adopt regulations to carry out this requirement, 
including regulations establishing the maximum number of continuing education credits 
that may be granted. 
 
Standing Referral to a Behavioral Health Care Provider 
 
An individual entitled to health care benefits under a policy or plan issue or delivered in 
Maryland by a carrier (a member) must receive a standing referral to a behavioral health 
care provider acting within the scope of the provider’s license (including a psychiatrist, 
psychologist, licensed social worker-clinical, or licensed professional counselor) for (1) the 
behavioral health services recognized by the U.S Preventive Services Task Force as 
preventive benefits and (2) the duration of the member’s pregnancy and one year after the 
conclusion of the pregnancy. A written treatment plan may not be required for this standing 
referral. 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission Study 
 
By December 1, 2026, MHCC must conduct an analysis on the impact of (1) requiring 
Medicaid, the State plan, and carriers to provide coverage for screening for perinatal mental 
health conditions at each prenatal visit, at least once every six weeks after giving birth, and 
at each well child visit within the first year of the child’s life and (2) prohibiting these 
entities from either imposing a copayment or coinsurance requirement or deductible that is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1118/ Page 4 
greater than that for similar coverages or imposing any copayment, coinsurance, or 
deductible. MHCC must report on its findings and recommendations to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health Committee. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Information about Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders 
 
MDH (in consultation with stakeholders) must identify up-to-date, evidence-based, written 
information about perinatal mood and anxiety disorders that (1) has been reviewed by 
medical experts and national/local organizations specializing in maternal mental health; 
(2) is designed for use by health care providers, pregnant/postpartum women, and the 
families of pregnant/postpartum women; (3) is culturally and linguistically appropriate for 
potential recipients of the information; (4) includes contact information for national/local 
maternal mental health programs; and (5) includes information addressing: 
 
 
the signs and symptoms of perinatal mood and anxiety disorders; 
 
perinatal medication usage; 
 
risk factors of perinatal mood and anxiety disorders (including perinatal loss and 
high-risk pregnancy); 
 
how and when to screen for symptoms of perinatal mood and anxiety disorders; 
 
brief intervention strategies; and 
 
evidence-based psychosocial treatments. 
 
MDH must provide the information identified to health care facilities and providers that 
provide prenatal care, labor and delivery services, and postnatal care to expectant parents 
and make the information available on the MDH website. 
 
Identification and Development of Training Programs 
 
MDH (in collaboration with specified stakeholders) must identify and develop training 
programs that improve early identification of postpartum depression and perinatal mood 
and anxiety disorders. Any training programs developed by MDH must include continuing 
medical education programs developed by organizations that are accredited by the 
Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education. 
 
Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1118/ Page 5 
health benefits (EHBs), which include mental health and substance use disorder services, 
including behavioral health treatment, as well as preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management. 
 
Under the ACA, most health plans must cover preventive services with no cost sharing. 
This includes depression screening for adults and adolescents ages 12 and older and 
maternal depression screenings for mothers at well-baby visits. The U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force recommends screening for depression and anxiety disorders in adults 
(including pregnant and postpartum persons). 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 
For additional information on mandated health insurance benefits in Maryland, please see 
the Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits. 
 
Standing Referrals 
 
Each carrier that does not allow direct access to specialists must establish and implement 
a procedure by which a member may receive a standing referral to a specialist. The 
procedure must provide for a standing referral if (1) the primary care physician, in 
consultation with the specialist, determines that the member needs continuing care from 
the specialist; (2) the member has a condition or disease that is life threatening, 
degenerative, chronic, or disabling and requires specialized medical care; and (3) the 
specialist has the appropriate expertise and is part of the carrier’s provider panel. A 
treatment plan may limit the number of visits, limit the period of time in which the visits 
are authorized, and require the specialist to communicate regularly with the primary care 
physician regarding the treatment and health status of the member. 
 
A carrier must provide a member who is pregnant with a standing referral to an obstetrician. 
After the member receives the standing referral, the obstetrician is responsible for the 
primary management of the member’s pregnancy, including the issuance of referrals 
through the postpartum period. A written treatment plan may not be required when a 
standing referral is to an obstetrician. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1118/ Page 6 
State Expenditures: 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
Under the bill, MDH, in consultation with stakeholders, must identify specified screening 
tools for conducting the perinatal behavioral health screenings required under the bill, assist 
health care providers with accessing specified resources and referral services, and identify 
and develop training programs that improve early identification of perinatal behavioral 
health conditions that may be used by health occupations licensees and certificate holders 
for continuing education. MDH must also provide specified written information about 
perinatal behavioral health conditions to each local WIC agency in the State. MDH advises 
that the Prevention and Health Promotion Administration can collaborate with stakeholders 
to identify or develop provider training programs and disseminate information using 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
Also under the bill, each health occupations board may adopt regulations regarding 
continuing education credit hours on perinatal behavioral health conditions. MDH advises 
that the health occupations boards can adopt regulations using existing budgeted resources. 
 
MHCC must conduct an analysis on the impact of (1) requiring Medicaid, the State plan, 
and carriers to provide coverage for screening for perinatal mental health conditions at each 
prenatal visit, at least once every six weeks after giving birth, and at each well child visit 
within the first year of the child’s life and (2) prohibiting these entities from either imposing 
a copayment or coinsurance requirement or deductible that is greater than that for similar 
coverages or imposing any copayment, coinsurance, or deductible. MHCC must report on 
its findings and recommendations by December 1, 2026. MHCC advises that it can 
complete this analysis using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Department of Budget and Management 
 
The State plan is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, except for the 
one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is exempt from most State 
health insurance mandates. However, the program generally provides coverage as 
otherwise required under State law. 
 
Under the bill, a carrier must provide coverage for screening for perinatal behavioral health 
conditions at the one-month, two-month, four-month, and six-month well child visits 
within the first year of the child’s life. According to program data, approximately 
1,600 babies are born to State plan enrollees each year. As a result, the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM) advises that it must provide separate reimbursement for 
screenings for perinatal behavioral health conditions for at least four well-baby visits for 
each pregnancy/birth covered by the plan. DBM advises that the estimated additional cost 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1118/ Page 7 
to the program is likely at least $800,000 per year and as much as $2.9 million (which 
accounts for the possibility of out-of-network referrals and an extra visit or two). Thus, if 
separate reimbursement is required, DBM expenditures (general, special, and federal 
funds) increase by at least $400,000 in fiscal 2027 and by at least $800,000 annually 
thereafter to reimburse providers for perinatal mental health condition screenings. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill requires providers to screen beginning October 1, 2026, 
but reimbursement is not required for such screenings until January 1, 2027. 
 
MIA advises that the bill does not apply to the nongrandfathered individual and small 
employer markets. Should the bill be amended to apply to all markets, the State would be 
required to defray the cost of the new mandate to the extent it applies to the individual and 
small group ACA plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 891 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 31, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1118/ Page 8 
Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
 
Overview 
 
Fully insured, large group plans and certain individual plans must cover Maryland’s 
mandated health insurance benefits. These mandates do not apply to most individual or 
small group plans, public health insurance, or plans issued outside of Maryland. However, 
individual and small group plans and plans sold through the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) must cover federal essential health benefits (EHBs). Thus, the type of 
plan an individual is enrolled in generally determines which benefits must be provided. 
 
Most Marylanders Are Insured by Employment-based Coverage 
 
Maryland residents generally obtain health insurance from one of three sources:  
(1) employment-based coverage; (2) private coverage in the individual market; or 
(3) public health insurance provided by the State and/or federal government (i.e., Medicaid, 
the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and military-related 
coverage). In calendar 2023 (the most recent data available), more than one-half (53.9%) 
of the State’s population had employment-based coverage, more than one-third (34.1%) 
were covered by public health insurance programs, and 5.7% purchased coverage in the 
individual market. The remaining 6.5% of Marylanders were uninsured. 
 
State Regulation of Insurance Applies Only to Certain Plans 
 
Employment-based coverage is either fully insured or self-insured. A fully insured plan is 
a traditional model for health insurance under which an employer pays a fixed premium to 
an insurer and the insurer assumes all financial risk and responsibility for paying claims. 
Fully insured plans are most common among small to mid-sized businesses as they offer 
more predictable costs and less administrative burden. In a self-insured plan, the employer 
assumes all financial risk and pays claims directly, usually through a third‑party 
administrator. Self-insured plans are more common among larger employers with the 
resources to assume the financial risk. 
 
The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act preempts states’ ability to require 
private employers to offer health insurance coverage and exempts self-insured plans from 
state insurance regulation. As a result, only fully insured plans are regulated by state 
insurance regulators. Thus, in Maryland, self-insured plans are not regulated by the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and are not subject to Maryland law. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1118/ Page 9 
In calendar 2024, 2.58 million Maryland residents younger than age 65 were insured 
through commercial health benefit plans, of which 890,245 were covered by a fully insured 
plan and 1.69 million were covered by a self-insured plan. Thus, only about one‑third 
(34.5%) of those covered through commercial plans were in fully insured plans subject to 
State regulation. Overall, only 17.4% of the State’s nonelderly population was covered by 
a plan subject to State regulation. 
 
Mandated Benefits Apply Only to Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
Maryland law requires insurers, health maintenance organizations, and nonprofit health 
service plans to cover more than 50 specific benefits. These “mandated benefits” apply to 
expense‑incurred contracts that provide “hospital, medical, and surgical benefits,” which 
include non-major medical products and federally excepted benefits (benefits outside of 
primary medical coverage that are not subject to certain federal requirements). These 
include fully insured, large group plans (≥50 employees), individual grandfathered plans 
in effect on or before March 23, 2010, when the federal Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) was enacted, and limited or specialty plans such as fixed-indemnity plans. 
Maryland’s State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
predominately self-insured and thus largely exempt from mandated benefits. However, the 
program generally provides coverage for these benefits as otherwise required under State 
law. 
 
Mandated benefits could apply to individual and small group policies. However, if the 
benefits go beyond those in the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that defines the 
minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group markets in 
Maryland), the State must cover the cost. Thus, mandated benefits are not typically applied 
to those policies. 
 
Mandated benefits do not apply to Medicaid/MCHP, Medicare, the Federal Employees 
Health Benefits Program, or military/Veterans Administration coverage. Mandated 
benefits also do not apply to health benefit plans issued outside of Maryland – such as when 
a Maryland resident works for an employer based in another state and the plan is issued in 
that state. In that instance, the plan is subject to the requirements (and mandated benefits) 
of the state in which it is issued. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes mandated benefits for large group and grandfathered plans. For 
further specifics on mandated benefits, see Title 15, Subtitle 8 of the Insurance Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1118/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland’s Mandated Health Insurance Benefits for 
Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
 Amino-acid elemental formula 
 Anesthesia for dental care 
 Biomarker testing 
 Blood products 
 Breast cancer screening 
 Breast prosthesis following a mastectomy 
 Child well visits and immunizations 
 Chlamydia screening 
 Cleft lip/palate treatment/management 
 Clinical trials 
 Colorectal cancer screening 
 Contraceptive drugs or devices 
 Diabetic equipment or supplies 
 Emergency room services 
 Fertility awareness-based methods 
 Fertility preservation due to medical 
treatment that may cause infertility 
 Gynecological care 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Human papilloma virus screening 
 Infertility benefits (including IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Laboratory services 
 Lung cancer screening 
 Lymphedema diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment 
 Male sterilization 
 Mastectomies 
 Medical foods 
 Mental health and substance use 
treatment 
 Morbid obesity surgical treatment 
 Osteoporosis prevention and treatment 
 Ostomy equipment and supplies 
 Physician services 
 Pregnancy and maternity benefits 
 Prescription benefits 
 Preventive services 
 Prosthetic devices 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Reconstructive breast surgery 
 Referrals to specialists 
 Second opinions and coverage of 
outpatient services 
 Smoking cessation 
 Surgical removal of testicles 
 Temporo-Mandibular Joint Syndrome 
treatment 
 X-rays 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Mandated benefits as of January 2025. Coverage of calcium score testing is required beginning 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1118/ Page 11 
Application of Mandated Benefits in Practice 
 
Legislation is frequently introduced to add new mandated benefits. For example, 
Senate Bill 518 of 2025 would have required coverage for preventive screenings for 
ovarian cancer for individuals aged 45 and older. The bill would have applied only to 
commercial health insurance, specifically fully insured large group plans and individual 
grandfathered plans. Coverage would not have applied to self-insured plans, 
nongrandfathered individual or small group plans, plans issued in another state to a 
Maryland resident, or any public health insurance program (in the same way that current 
mandated benefits do not apply to these plans). 
 
Essential Health Benefits Apply to Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Maryland law requires that EHBs be included in the State benchmark plan and in all 
qualified health plans offered through MHBE. Exhibit 2 summarizes the EHBs required 
as of September 2025. For further specifics, see MIA’s Essential Health Benefits Chart:  
Individual and Small Group Plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1118/ Page 12 
 
Exhibit 2 
Essential Health Benefits for Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
 Allergy serum 
 Ambulance service 
 Bariatric surgery 
 Blood and blood products 
 Breast reconstructive surgery/prosthesis 
 Cardiac rehabilitation 
 Care in office for illness or injury 
 Case management 
 Chiropractic services 
 Controlled clinical trials 
 Diabetic treatment/equipment/supplies 
 Durable medical equipment 
 Emergency services 
 Family planning services 
 General anesthesia/associated care for 
dental care for children 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Hospice 
 Infertility services (excludes IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Medical food 
 Mental health and substance use 
benefits 
 Nutritional services 
 Outpatient hospital services 
 Outpatient laboratory/diagnostic 
services 
 Outpatient short-term rehabilitation 
 Patient centered medical homes 
 Pediatric dental 
 Pediatric vision 
 Pregnancy and maternity 
 Prescription drugs 
 Preventive services 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Pulmonary rehabilitation 
 Skilled nursing facility 
 Transplants 
 Wellness benefits
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Essential health benefits as of September 2025. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12