START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1158 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1158 
(Delegate Fisher) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Calvert County - Contracts for Infrastructure or Asset Management - Contract 
Duration 
 
 
This bill authorizes Calvert County to enter into a contract for infrastructure or an asset 
management program if the infrastructure or asset (1) has a life cycle of at least 15 years 
(including water towers, flow meters, and other water and sewer assets) and (2) the contract 
has an initial term of up to 20 years. A contract for infrastructure or an asset management 
program under this bill may include planning, design, construction, operations, 
maintenance, modification, revitalization, and decommissioning of the infrastructure or 
asset. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only Calvert County. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Calvert County government finances, but 
may result in operational efficiencies for the county. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Calvert County may contract to purchase supplies or services for a period 
of more than one year if it is advantageous for the county to do so and if (1) funds for the 
total cost of the contract are available at the time the contract is executed, or (2) a contract 
requiring the payment of funds from appropriations of more than one fiscal year is 
approved by resolution of the Calvert County Commissioners. An approved contract 
requiring the payment of funds from appropriations of more than one fiscal year must be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1158/ Page 2 
awarded as (1) a multiyear contract for a period of no more than 20 years, including the 
initial contract term and all options, if the contract is for banking and investment services, 
retirement and pension system management, health insurance, or information technology, 
as specified, or (2) a one-year contract with the option to renew for no more than  
four one-year terms for all other contracts. 
 
Notwithstanding these provisions, the county may enter into a contract for solid waste 
disposal that may include transportation, may require payment of funds from 
appropriations of the county or receipt of payment to the county, and is not for more than 
a 20-year initial term. The county may also enter into a contract for a cellular tower lease 
(including a cellular tower lease on a water tower) if the initial term is no more than 
20 years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1482 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2