START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1198 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1198 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Civil Actions - Coerced Debt - Debtor Protections 
 
 
This bill authorizes a debtor who alleges that a debt is “coerced debt” to bring an action 
against the creditor of the alleged coerced debt seeking equitable relief, including (1) a 
declaratory judgment that a debt is a coerced debt and (2) injunctions and orders to protect 
the debtor from further debt collection efforts and liability for the coerced debt. The bill 
may not be construed to prohibit a creditor from pursuing an action against an individual 
alleged to have caused a debtor to incur coerced debt. If a debtor receives a declaratory 
judgment that a debt is a coerced debt, a debtor may seek relief in a court of competent 
jurisdiction against an individual alleged to have caused a coerced debt, including damages, 
attorney’s fees, and court costs. In an action against a debtor to satisfy a debt, it is an 
affirmative defense that the debt is a coerced debt. An agreement between a debtor and any 
other person to waive or modify a right conferred or cause of action created under the bill 
is void as contrary to public policy. The bill contains a severability provision. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Coerced debt” means all or a part of a debt (excluding debt secured by 
real property) in the debtor’s name incurred as a result of fraud, duress, intimidation, threat, 
force, coercion, manipulation, undue influence, misinformation, or the nonconsensual use 
of the debtor’s personal identifying information, that occurs within the context of: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1198/ Page 2 
 
abuse, as defined in § 4‐501 of the Family Law Article; 
 
exploitation of children in an out‐of‐home placement, as defined in § 5‐501 of the 
Family Law Article; 
 
financial exploitation, as defined in § 13‐601 of the Estates and Trusts Article; 
 
harassment under § 3‐803 of the Criminal Law Article; 
 
human trafficking under Title 3, Subtitle 11 of the Criminal Law Article; or 
 
labor trafficking under § 3‐1202 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
Required Notice 
 
Before filing the civil action established under the bill, a debtor must notify a creditor that 
a debt on which the creditor demands payment is coerced debt and request that the creditor 
cease all debt collection activity on the coerced debt. The notice must comply with 
specified requirements, and a creditor must make information on how a debtor can submit 
a notice publicly available online and on request via any publicly available method of 
communication. On receipt of notice, a creditor must (1) confirm in writing to the debtor 
that they received the notice and the date of receipt; (2) inform the debtor of any missing 
documentation required to review the notice, if applicable; and (3) inform a consumer 
reporting agency that the debt is disputed. 
 
Within 30 days after receiving notice, a creditor must provide written notice to the debtor 
of the creditor’s decision to continue or cease debt collection activity relating to the coerced 
debt. If the creditor notifies the debtor that collection of the debt will resume, the creditor 
must state the date on which the creditor will resume debt collection activity, which may 
not be earlier than 40 days after the creditor received notice. 
 
Following notice of a decision to cease debt collection activity, a creditor must cease all 
debt collection activity, including wage garnishment; report to a consumer reporting 
agency the deletion of the coerced debt; and move to dismiss any action in a court to 
enforce collection activity on the coerced debt. The creditor may resume debt collection 
activity on the coerced debt only after providing written notice to the debtor at least  
10 days before resuming debt collection activity. A creditor ceasing debt collection activity 
on a debt that a debtor has asserted is a coerced debt does not create a presumption 
regarding the validity or invalidity of the debt for which the debtor may be liable. 
 
A creditor may sell or assign to another party a debt that a debtor has asserted is coerced 
debt if the creditor selling or assigning the debt notifies the buyer or assignee that the debtor 
has asserted the debt is coerced debt. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1198/ Page 3 
Civil Action for Coerced Debt 
 
No earlier than 30 days after a creditor received the required notice from the debtor, a 
debtor may file a petition for equitable relief, which must contain specified information 
and evidence, unless an exception related to abuse or harm to the petitioner applies. If that 
exception applies, the court is required to take appropriate measures to protect the debtor, 
the debtor’s family, and the debtor’s pets. 
 
A debtor alleging a debt is coerced debt may seek equitable relief in a court of competent 
jurisdiction, including (1) a declaratory judgment that a debt is a coerced debt; (2) an 
injunction prohibiting a creditor from holding the debtor liable for the coerced debt, 
enforcing a judgment related to the coerced debt, or reporting the coerced debt to a 
consumer reporting agency; (3) an order dismissing with prejudice any cause of action 
brought by a creditor to enforce or collect the coerced debt from the debtor; and (4) an 
order requiring a creditor to report to a consumer reporting agency the deletion of the 
coerced debt. 
 
A debtor has the burden of proof to show that the required notice was provided to the 
creditor. Once a debtor meets this burden of proof, a creditor has the burden of proof to 
show that the debtor did not allege in good faith that the debt was coerced. 
 
If a debtor receives a declaratory judgment that a debt is a coerced debt, a debtor may seek 
relief in a court of competent jurisdiction against an individual alleged to have caused a 
coerced debt, including damages in the amount of payments made or costs incurred related 
to the coerced debt, attorney’s fees, and court costs. 
 
Current Law:  While there are criminal statutes that prohibit specified types of fraudulent 
activity and financial abuse, the bill creates a new and unique process for an individual 
who incurs debt due to fraud, intimidation, and related behavior that occurs within the 
context of specified acts or crimes to challenge the debt, obtain injunctive relief from debt 
collection efforts, and recover damages related to the debt. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1198/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4