START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1116 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1116 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Howard County - Illegal Dumping - Surveillance System Pilot Program  
Ho. Co. 6-26 
 
 
This bill expands application of existing statutory provisions (currently only applicable to 
Baltimore City) to authorize the Howard County Police Department or other department 
designated by the Howard County Executive to install surveillance systems at “dumping 
sites” and use surveillance images to enforce the State Illegal Dumping and Litter Control 
Law or local laws relating to the unlawful disposal of litter. The bill establishes procedures 
for issuing citations and collecting civil penalties for violations recorded by a surveillance 
system. Finally, the bill (1) alters provisions under the Public Information Act (PIA) to 
require a custodian of a surveillance image to allow employees or agents of the designated 
Howard County department to inspect surveillance images of illegal dumping in 
Howard County; (2) authorizes the designated Howard County department to publicly 
disseminate surveillance images of illegal dumping in Howard County as part of an 
investigation; and (3) makes other conforming and technical changes. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2031. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $10,300 in FY 2027 
only for one‐time computer programming. Beginning in FY 2028 at the earliest, 
Transportation Trust Fund expenditures for the State Highway Administration (SHA) 
decrease if the bill reduces littering and illegal dumping on State highways in Howard 
County, as discussed below. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially affect State 
finances or operations, including District Court caseloads.  
 
Local Effect:  Overall, Howard County revenues increase from illegal dumping fines once 
surveillance systems are operational, as discussed below. Howard County expenditures for 
litter removal may decrease if the bill reduces illegal dumping in Howard County or 
violators of illegal dumping laws reimburse the county for litter removal costs. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1116/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Surveillance Systems:  Section 10-112 of the Criminal Law Article currently authorizes the 
Baltimore City Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) or another 
department designated by the Mayor of Baltimore City to place surveillance systems at 
dumping sites and use surveillance images to enforce the State Illegal Dumping and Litter 
Control Law (discussed below) or local laws relating to the unlawful disposal of litter. A 
“dumping site” is a location in Baltimore City that is (1) owned by Baltimore City or the 
State and (2) identified by the department as property that has been repeatedly used for the 
disposal of litter in violation of State law or a local law or ordinance. The bill adds the 
Howard County Police Department or other department designated by the Howard County 
Executive to these provisions and makes conforming changes to account for dumping sites 
in Howard County. 
 
A “surveillance system” is a collection of one or more cameras located at a dumping site 
that produces a surveillance image. A “surveillance image” means an image recorded by a 
surveillance system on a photograph, a micrograph, an electronic image, videotape, or any 
other medium showing (1) the front or rear of a motor vehicle, and, on at least one image 
or portion of the tape, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle 
and (2) an individual committing a violation of the State illegal dumping and litter control 
law or a local law or ordinance relating to the unlawful disposal of litter. The bill does not 
alter these provisions. 
 
Enforcement/Penalties:  Under current law, a person who violates the State Illegal 
Dumping and Litter Control Law (discussed below) or a local law or ordinance relating to 
the unlawful disposal of litter that occurs at a dumping site monitored by a surveillance 
system is subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000. Unless the person committing a 
violation received a citation from a police officer at the time of the violation, the owner of 
the vehicle used to commit the violation is subject to the civil penalty. The bill does not 
alter these provisions. 
 
Under current law, the Baltimore City DHCD (or a designated department) must mail the 
owner a citation that includes the (1) name and address of the registered owner of the 
vehicle; (2) the registration number of the vehicle; (3) the violation charged; (4) the 
location where the violation occurred; (5) the date and time of the violation; (6) a copy of 
the surveillance image; (7) the amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by it must 
be paid; and (8) other specified information. The citation must be mailed no later than 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1116/ Page 3 
two weeks after the alleged violation occurred, except as specified. A person who receives 
a citation may pay the civil penalty directly to Baltimore City or elect to stand trial in the 
District Court for the alleged violation. The bill’s alteration of the definition of 
“department” incorporates Howard County into these provisions; a person who receives a 
citation may pay the civil penalty directly to Howard County.  
 
Under current law (and unchanged by the bill), the District Court may consider in defense 
of a violation the fact that the vehicle or its registration plates were stolen prior to the 
violation and that they were not in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation. 
Additionally, the District Court may consider in defense of a violation evidence that the 
person named in the citation was not the person in the surveillance image committing the 
violation. 
 
Failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of 
liability; the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is required to suspend and refuse to 
transfer the registration of a vehicle involved in a violation under these circumstances if it 
receives the appropriate notification or if the District Court notifies MVA that the alleged 
violator elected to stand trial and failed to appear in court. These provisions currently 
reflect Baltimore City’s illegal dumping enforcement authority; the bill makes a 
conforming change to incorporate Howard County.  
 
Inspections of Surveillance Images:  Under current law, § 4-322 of the General Provisions 
Article, part of the PIA, generally requires a “custodian” of a “surveillance image,” as 
defined in § 10-112 of the Criminal Law Article, to deny inspection of the surveillance 
image. However, a custodian must permit inspection of a surveillance image (1) by any 
person issued a citation under § 10-112 or by an attorney of record for the person or (2) by 
an employee or agent of the Baltimore City DHCD in an investigation or a proceeding 
relating to the imposition or indemnification from civil liability under § 10-112. Under the 
PIA, a “custodian” means (1) the official custodian or (2) any other authorized individual 
who has physical custody and control of a public record. The bill adds an employee or 
agent of the designated department in Howard County to these provisions. 
 
Under current law, notwithstanding the general requirement that a custodian of a 
surveillance image deny inspection of the image, Baltimore City DHCD is authorized to 
publicly disseminate a surveillance image of illegal dumping in Baltimore City as part of 
an investigation. The bill adds the designated department in Howard County to this 
provision. 
 
State Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law – § 10-110 of the Criminal Law Article 
(unchanged by the bill) 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1116/ Page 4 
Under § 10-110 of the Criminal Law Article, a person is prohibited from (1) disposing of 
litter on a highway or performing an act that violates the State Vehicle Laws regarding 
disposal of litter, glass, and other prohibited substances on highways or (2) disposing or 
causing or allowing the disposal of litter on public or private property unless authorized or 
the litter is placed into a proper receptacle.  
 
An individual who violates § 10-110 is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the 
following penalties, depending on the weight or volume of the disposed litter:   
 
 
up to 100 pounds or 27 cubic feet (not for commercial gain) – imprisonment for up 
to 30 days and/or a $1,500 maximum fine; 
 
more than 100 pounds or 27 cubic feet and up to 500 pounds or 216 cubic feet (not 
for commercial gain) – imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $12,500 maximum 
fine; and  
 
more than 500 pounds or 216 cubic feet (not for commercial gain) or any amount 
for commercial gain – imprisonment for up to five years and/or a $30,000 maximum 
fine. 
 
The court may also require cleanup of the disposed litter, repair or restoration of damaged 
property, payment of damages for the disposal of the litter, community service, or 
reimbursement of the appropriate governmental entity for specified costs incurred. If the 
violator used a motor vehicle to commit the violation, the court must notify MVA; 
violations are subject to the assessment of points. MVA is required to suspend and refuse 
to transfer the registration of a vehicle involved in a violation if it receives the appropriate 
notification that a person cited for a violation failed to pay the fine or elect to stand trial or 
if the District Court notifies MVA that the cited person elected to stand trial and failed to 
appear in court. 
 
Fines collected for violations of the State Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law must be 
disbursed to the county or municipality where the violation occurred or, under specified 
circumstances, to the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission or the 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission. Disbursed fines must be used for specified 
litter‑related purposes.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $10,267 for 
one‐time computer programming to facilitate transfers of contested fines to 
Howard County. This estimate assumes these expenditures are incurred in fiscal 2027 in 
anticipation of deployment of a litter surveillance program in Howard County, whenever 
that occurs. 
 
SHA litter removal costs may decrease should Howard County place surveillance cameras 
near State highways or if the bill has an overall deterrent effect on littering/illegal dumping 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1116/ Page 5 
in the county, including on State highways. The placement of surveillance cameras under 
the bill is at the discretion of the county, and it is unclear at this time if any cameras will 
be placed near State highways. 
 
SHA advises that it spent $18.5 million in 2024 on routine litter removal and remediation 
of illegal dumping (disposal of larger, bulkier items); most of this work is accomplished 
through contracts. According to SHA, State highways are a common place for dumping 
and litter, especially in Howard County. Based on five State highway “hot spots” for 
litter/illegal dumping in the county, SHA estimates that its annual costs for litter removal 
may decrease by as much as $250,000 per year. SHA assumes that cost savings under the 
bill will not commence until fiscal 2028 to allow time for Howard County to establish its 
litter surveillance program.   
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Howard County did not respond to a request for information on 
the fiscal and operational impact of the bill. While Howard County may incur costs for 
initial set up of illegal dumping surveillance systems, this estimate assumes that county 
revenues from illegal dumping fines exceed those costs when cameras are operational. 
Information is not readily available on the extent of littering and illegal dumping in other 
areas of Howard County or the county’s timeline or plans for installation of surveillance 
cameras.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5