START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1108 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1108 
(Delegates Stewart and Hornberger) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Labor and Employment - Greenhouse Workers - Collective Bargaining and Heat 
Protection 
 
 
This bill establishes collective bargaining rights to greenhouse employees (employees in a 
controlled-environment agricultural operation). The Secretary of Labor must adopt 
regulations and may investigate and enforce an alleged violation. Additionally, each 
employer who operates a controlled-environment agricultural operation must provide 
employees with paid rest breaks of at least five minutes for each hour that the heat index 
inside a controlled-environment agricultural operation reaches and maintains at least 
90 degrees Fahrenheit. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $227,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2027. Out years reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
227,000 
264,800 
277,100 
289,400 
301,800 
Net Effect 
($227,000) 
($264,800) 
($277,100) 
($289,400) 
($301,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments are not materially impacted. To the extent 
local governments operate greenhouses, they must provide employees with a  
five-minute break every hour while working inside a greenhouse with a temperature of at 
least 90 degrees Fahrenheit. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1108/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Collective Bargaining for Greenhouse Employees 
 
Collective bargaining must include all matters relating to wages, hours, and other terms 
and conditions of employment. The employer and the employee organization certified as 
the exclusive representative of greenhouse employees must meet at reasonable times, 
engage in collective bargaining in good faith, make reasonable efforts to conclude 
negotiations with a final written agreement, and reduce to writing all matters agreed on 
from negotiations. An employer may not interfere with, intimidate, restrain, or coerce an 
employee for exercising collective bargaining rights under the bill. The Secretary of Labor 
may not assess a monetary penalty when enforcing a violation relating to collective 
bargaining of greenhouse workers. 
 
Rest Breaks for Greenhouse Workers 
 
A rest period provided in accordance with the bill must be compensated as working time 
at the employee’s regular pay rate unless the break coincides with an otherwise unpaid 
meal period. The rest break may be provided concurrently with any other rest break 
required under any other federal or State law. If a requirement established under the bill 
conflicts with a requirement established by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry under 
regulations for heat-stress, the requirement providing greater protections to an employee 
prevails. 
 
Current Law:  It is the policy of the State that negotiation of terms and conditions of 
employment should result from a voluntary agreement between employees and the 
employer and, thus, each individual worker must be fully free to associate, organize, and 
designate a representative for negotiation of terms and conditions of employment. This 
process must be free from coercion, interference, or restraint by an employer in 
(1) designation of a representative; (2) self-organization; and (3) other concerted activity 
for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection. State law 
establishes a procedure for certifying a labor organization as the bargaining representative 
for a workplace, and a majority of employees must vote in favor of joining a union in order 
for a workplace to unionize. 
 
National Labor Relations Act 
 
In 1935, the U.S. Congress passed the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), commonly 
known as the “Wagner Act,” which set forth employees’ rights to join unions and required 
employers to bargain collectively with unions selected by a majority of workers in an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1108/ Page 3 
appropriate bargaining unit. Under Section 7 of NLRA, employees have the right to 
self‑organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively 
through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities 
for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, and also have the 
right to refrain from any or all such activities. The NLRA generally applies to all employers 
involved in interstate commerce other than airlines, railroads, agriculture, and government. 
 
The NLRA also established the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), an independent 
federal agency, to enforce its provisions. The NLRB also acts to prevent and remedy unfair 
labor practices committed by private sector employers and unions, as well as conducts 
secret-ballot elections regarding union representation.  
 
Maryland Occupational Safety and Health and Heat Stress Standards 
 
The Division of Labor and Industry within Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) 
administers the Maryland Occupational Safety and Health (MOSH) program. The 
requirements of the MOSH program are codified by the MOSH Act. In general, these 
requirements parallel the safety standards established by the federal Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (OSHA) within the U.S. Department of Labor. OSHA specifies 
that states may elect to assume the responsibility for development and management of a 
state occupational safety and health program as long as the standards under the state 
program are “at least as effective as” OSHA standards. Employers must provide each 
employee with a place of employment that is safe and healthful and free from each 
recognized hazard that is causing or likely to cause death or serious physical harm to the 
employee. The cost of administering the MOSH program is covered through an 
appropriation from the Workers’ Compensation Commission. 
 
Chapter 308 of 2020 required the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to adopt regulations 
that require employers to protect employers from heat-related illness caused by heat stress. 
MD Labor adopted regulations that generally apply to an employer whose employment 
activities, indoor or outdoor, expose employees to a heat index in the area where the 
employee is working that equals or exceeds 80 degrees Fahrenheit. An employer must 
develop, implement, and maintain an effective heat-related illness prevention and 
management plan in writing.  
 
Additionally, an employer must implement high-heat procedures when the heat index 
reaches or exceeds 90 degrees Fahrenheit in the area where the work is being performed, 
which must include a work and rest schedule. The high-heat procedures must include:  (1) a 
minimum rest of 10 minutes for every 2 hours worked where employees are exposed to a 
heat index between 90 and 100 degrees Fahrenheit and a minimum rest period of 
15 minutes for every hour worked where employees are exposed to a heat index above 
100 degrees Fahrenheit; or (2) a rest period as provided for in the current National Institute 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1108/ Page 4 
for Occupational Safety and Health recommendations for work and rest schedules to 
manage heat exposures. 
 
State Expenditures:  NLRB generally administers and enforces private-sector collective 
bargaining, but agricultural workers, which are assumed to include greenhouse workers, 
are not under their jurisdiction. Under the bill, the Secretary of Labor must adopt 
regulations and may investigate and enforce violations regarding collective bargaining for 
greenhouse employees. MD Labor anticipates overseeing 9 or 10 elections under the bill 
and advises that it cannot implement the bill with existing resources. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures for MD Labor increase by $227,005 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one administrator to hear and resolve disputes, one administrative officer to 
investigate disputes and assist with the administration of the program, and  
one part-time assistant Attorney General to draft regulations and provide legal advice. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$194,155 
Operating Expenses 
    32,850 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$227,005 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that fewer than 
nine elections occur, MD Labor may be able to implement the bill with fewer resources. 
 
To the extent that State agencies employ greenhouse employees, they must provide those 
employees with a five-minute break every hour while working inside a greenhouse of at 
least 90 degrees Fahrenheit. As these employees are already entitled to a 10 minute break 
every two hours, this requirement of the bill is not anticipated to have a material effect on 
the State, and MD Labor can enforce this provision with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that small businesses employ greenhouse workers, 
they may be affected if those greenhouse workers opt to unionize. If greenhouse employees 
unionize, their employers may incur legal expenses and other operational costs in 
connection with negotiations and, to the extent that collective bargaining leads to higher 
wages, increased labor costs.  
 
Providing a five minute break to greenhouse employees every hour does not have a material 
impact on small businesses as greenhouse employees are already entitled to a  
10 minute break every two hours; the bill does not increase the total break time entitlement. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1108/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 887 (Senators Lam and McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; National Labor Relations Board; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5