START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1163 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1163 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Howard County - Voting Age - Board of Education Elections  
Ho. Co. 5-26 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, gives the General Assembly the power to lower the age at which an 
individual may vote in an election for the members of the Howard County Board of 
Education. Contingent on the passage of the proposed amendment, and its ratification by 
the voters, the bill authorizes an individual who is at least age 16 to vote in an election for 
members of the Howard County Board of Education. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the constitutional amendment is approved, general fund expenditures 
increase by $149,000 in FY 2027 and are expected to increase, at least minimally, in 
future years, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  If the constitutional amendment is approved, Howard County expenditures 
increase by $149,000 in FY 2027 and are expected to increase in future years, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Voter Qualifications 
 
Pursuant to Article I of the Maryland Constitution, every citizen of the United States, at 
least age 18, who is a resident of the State is eligible to vote in the ward or election district 
in which they reside. The General Assembly is authorized to regulate or prohibit the right 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1163/ Page 2 
to vote of a person convicted of a serious crime or under care or guardianship for mental 
disability. The constitution requires individuals to be registered in order to vote. 
 
Under State law, with certain exceptions, an individual may register to vote if the individual 
is a citizen of the United States, is at least age 16, and is a resident of the State as of the 
day the individual seeks to register. An individual younger than age 18, (1) may vote in a 
primary election in which candidates are nominated for a general or special election that 
will occur when the individual is at least age 18 and (2) may not vote in any other election. 
 
Howard County Board of Education 
 
The Howard County Board of Education consists of seven elected members and 
one student member. The board is 1 of 20 elected school boards in the State. Four counties 
have combined appointed and elected school boards. Appendix – Local Boards of 
Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership of 
the 24 local boards of education. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect: 
 
Fiscal 2027 
 
If the constitutional amendment is approved by the voters (in the 2026 general election), 
State general fund expenditures and Howard County expenditures each are expected to 
increase by $149,000 in fiscal 2027, reflecting the State and Howard County shares of 
(1) one-time costs for programming changes to the Agency Election Management System 
and the voter registration system ($260,000 total, $130,000 each) and (2) one-time costs 
for pollbook software modifications ($38,000 total, $19,000 each). 
 
These changes/modifications are needed in order to allow individuals under age 18 to vote 
in county board of education elections only, during elections when other voters are 
generally eligible to cast a vote for all offices/questions on the ballot. It is uncertain at this 
time how these costs will be divided between the State and Howard County; however, for 
the purposes of this fiscal and policy note, it is assumed that these costs are split evenly. It 
is also assumed the work is begun and completed in fiscal 2027 in advance of the 
2028 statewide primary election. A portion of these costs may be incurred in fiscal 2028 to 
the extent work continues into fiscal 2028. 
 
Fiscal 2028 and Future Years 
 
If the constitutional amendment is approved by the voters, State general fund expenditures 
and Howard County expenditures also increase in fiscal 2028 and future years for costs of 
additional mail-in ballots and in-person ballots. State general fund expenditures and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1163/ Page 3 
Howard County expenditures for ballots are expected to increase by less than  
$3,000 per election, respectively. 
 
Howard County expenditures are also assumed to increase due to additional personnel costs 
associated with voting machine (scanner) testing related to the unique ballots that are 
provided to under-age-18 voters who are not otherwise eligible to vote. Howard County 
may also incur voter education costs. These additional expenditures, however, have not 
been quantified at this time. 
 
Certain additional costs identified by the State Board of Elections and Howard County 
Board of Elections may be incurred; however, the Department of Legislative Services 
advises it is unclear whether incurring these costs is necessary:  (1) leasing of additional 
scanners to scan the unique, board of education ballots created for under-age-18 voters who 
are not otherwise eligible to vote, at an estimated total cost of $99,510 (the cost of which 
would be shared by the State and Howard County); and (2) costs for additional election 
judges and election judge training (predominantly incurred by Howard County). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Howard County; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1163/ Page 4 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. All 24 boards have either student members 
or student representatives who regularly present at board meetings; however, only 8 boards 
allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority to vote on matters 
relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with voting student 
members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to operating and 
capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership 
of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2026 
 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Anne Arundel 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore City 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed by Governor from county at large 
7 elected from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed by Governor from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1163/ Page 5 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Harford 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed by County Executive from 
county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (1-year term) 
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Kent 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Prince George’s 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Somerset2 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1163/ Page 6 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Washington3 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Wicomico4 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
4 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed and elected board:  (1) in Baltimore County, members are 
appointed by the Governor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore County School Board 
Nominating Commission; (2) in Caroline County, members are appointed by the Governor with the advice 
and consent of the Senate; (3) in Baltimore City, members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names 
provided by the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel; and (4) in Harford County, 
members are appointed by the county executive with the advice and consent of the county council. 
2 Although not in statute, the Somerset County Board of Education reports that there are three nonvoting 
student representatives who give presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the 
three regular high schools in the county. 
3Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
4 Chapter 429 of 2025 codified at least one nonvoting student member on the Wicomico County Board of 
Education. The Wicomico County Board of Education includes four student representatives who give 
presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the four high schools in the county. 
At each meeting, one of the four student representatives sits with the regular board members on the dais for 
the full meeting, while other student board members come forward to speak as needed. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6