START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1176 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1176 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Howard County – Board of Education Budget – Minimum Funding Ho. Co. 10–
26 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Howard County Executive from submitting and the Howard County 
Council from approving an annual budget that appropriates funding to the Howard County 
Board of Education in an amount that is less than 58% of the general fund revenue of the 
county for the fiscal year. If the Howard County Board of Education requests an amount 
in the annual budget that is less than 58% of the general fund revenue of the county, the 
county executive must submit and the county council must approve an annual budget that 
appropriates funding to the board in the amount requested. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Howard County expenditures are not necessarily increased under the bill; 
however, a reallocation of existing expenditures across budget categories will occur. In 
addition, the bill may result in a redesignation of county revenues between general and 
special funds, which may affect the overall funding level for the public school system. 
Under one set of assumptions, local funding for the Howard County Public School System 
may increase by $98.4 million in FY 2027 and by $131.6 million in FY 2031. Local funding 
for county government operations (public safety, public works, parks and recreation, etc.) 
may decrease by a commensurate amount. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1176/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Howard County expenditures totaled $2.7 billion in fiscal 2024. Of this 
amount, $1.3 billion was spent by the Howard County Public School System. Major 
spending categories by the county government include $157.2 million for police protection, 
$141.9 million for fire services, $107.7 million for transportation services, $65.3 million 
for parks and recreation, and $46.6 million for social services. In addition, debt service 
expenditures for the county government totaled $192.2 million.  
 
Additional information on county expenditures by category in fiscal 2024 is available in 
the Local Government Finances Report (pages 50 and 80). A copy of the complete audited 
report and summary analysis is available on the Department of Legislative Services 
website.  
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share Requirements under State Law 
 
Each year, the county government is required to appropriate funds to the local board of 
education equivalent to the greater of the per-pupil maintenance of effort (MOE) 
requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The per-pupil 
MOE amount is based upon the student enrollment count. The local share of major 
education aid programs equals the local share of the foundation formula, compensatory 
education, English learner, special education, comparable wage index, full-day 
prekindergarten, college and career ready, transitional supplemental instruction (through 
fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from the 
compensatory education State funding floor are required to fund the local share of the 
concentration of poverty grant. Additionally, the State and county governments must pay 
for Blueprint implementation coordinator salaries in the same proportion as the foundation 
program; and the county government must pay certain retirement costs for public school 
teachers and principals. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Howard County expenditures are not necessarily increased under 
the bill; however, a reallocation of existing expenditures across budget categories will 
occur. In addition, the bill may result in a redesignation of county revenues between 
general and special funds, which may affect the overall funding level for the public school 
system. 
 
Effect on Howard County Government Finances 
 
Total expenditures for Howard County are not directly affected by the bill; however, the 
bill may necessitate a significant shift in the allocation of general fund revenues across 
budget categories. Specifically, local school system expenditures may increase and county 
expenditures for other public services or government activities that utilize general funds 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1176/ Page 3 
may decrease to meet the bill’s mandated 58% general fund allocation to the public school 
system.  
 
As discussed below and based on current trends in the Howard County local appropriation 
to the public school system and current projected general fund revenues, the county 
government may need to allocate an additional $98.4 million to the local school system in 
fiscal 2027, which may result in a commensurate decrease in funding for other county 
government programs and activities that use general fund revenues. This funding increase 
represents approximately 13.9 cents on the county’s property tax rate, with each one cent 
increase generating approximately $7.1 million in fiscal 2027.  
 
To achieve the public school funding mandate without affecting the current funding level 
for other public services, the county government may be required to increase local tax rates. 
However, 58% of any new revenue raised for the general fund must still be appropriated 
to the local school system. To bypass this requirement, the county government may choose 
to designate any new or existing revenue source as special funds. This redesignation allows 
the county government to (1) backfill public services and government activities without 
the new revenues being diverted to the public school system and (2) reduce the overall 
level of total general funds generated by the county government thereby reducing the 
mandated funding amount for the public school system. 
 
General and Special Fund Designations 
 
Several county governments, including Howard County, dedicate certain revenue sources 
to a special fund. In Howard County, the local transfer tax is dedicated to a special fund 
for various purposes and 16.5% of the county property tax rate is dedicated to fire and 
rescue services. As shown in the Local Government Overview Report, other county 
governments including Montgomery and Prince George’s counties dedicate a higher share 
of their property tax rate to special funds. Should Howard County choose to attribute less 
tax revenue to the general fund, the county’s overall obligation to the school system under 
the bill likewise decreases. Other revenue streams such as income and recordation taxes 
are likewise subject to the county government’s discretion in budgeting as either general 
or special funds. As the bill does not alter the ability of Howard County to, at its own 
discretion, budget revenues across general and special funds, the bill does not, in a 
meaningful way, constrain the ability of the county executive and county council to set the 
overall funding level for the public school system. 
 
Information on the amount of revenues generated in Howard County from major local tax 
sources is available in the County Revenue Outlook Report.  
 
Effect on the Howard County Public School System Finances 
 
Assuming the Howard County government does not redesignate revenues away from the 
county general fund, Howard County Public School System revenues and expenditures 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1176/ Page 4 
increase beginning in fiscal 2027 due to the higher minimum education appropriation 
requirements established by the bill. Exhibit 1 shows the Howard County Spending 
Affordability Advisory Committee’s projected general fund revenues (excluding any fund 
balance) for fiscal 2027 through 2031 and the mandated funding level for the public school 
system under the bill. The exhibit also shows an estimate of Howard County local school 
appropriations under current law based on recent trends. Based on these estimates, the 
Howard County government appropriations to the public school system increase by as 
much as $98.4 million in fiscal 2027, rising to $131.6 million in fiscal 2031.  
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Howard County Local School Appropriations 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 FY 2030 FY 2031 
Appropriation – Current Law1 
$846.5 
$868.7 
$913.9 
$938.2 
$959.2 
 
 
 
 
 
Projected GF Revenue2 
1,629.2 
1,690.7 
1,755.8 
1,819.2 
1,880.7 
58% of GF Revenue 
944.9 
980.6 
1,018.4 
1,055.1 
1,090.8 
 
 
 
 
 
Difference vs. Current Law 
$98.4 
$111.9 
$104.5 
$117.0 
$131.6 
 
GF:  General Fund 
1 Estimates account for per-pupil appropriation trends, given that Howard County has appropriated 
considerably more than its minimum requirement in recent years. 
2 Excluding fund balance. 
 
Source:  Howard County Spending Affordability Advisory Committee; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Increases in revenues and expenditures for the local school system are lower to the extent 
that the Howard County Board of Education requests less than 58% of county general fund 
revenues in its annual budget request. As future board of education budget requests remain 
at the discretion of the school board, whether such requests will be less than 58% of 
general fund revenues is unknown at this time. Howard County Public Schools advises that 
the board does not currently project budget requests as the details of each budget request 
depend on trends in expected expenditures and revenues (federal, state, county, and other) 
that are too complex for the county to meaningfully model. Nevertheless, given recent 
inflationary pressures on the cost of education and the board’s continued discretion in 
making requests to the county government for funding, this analysis advises that future 
year budget requests will likely meet or exceed the 58% of general fund revenue threshold 
set by the bill.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1176/ Page 5 
Exhibit 2 shows, for fiscal 2022 through 2026, a comparison between 58% of general fund 
operating revenue for the county, the board’s funding request in each year, and the final 
local appropriation made to the local school system. The board’s budget request did not 
exceed 58% of county general fund revenues in any of the last five years, although the 
county’s fiscal 2026 request of $871.7 million represented approximately 57% of the 
$1.5 billion in county revenues estimated in the county’s approved fiscal 2026 operating 
budget.  
 
 
Exhibit 2  
History of Howard County Local School Appropriations 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2022 FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 
County GF Revenue1 
$1,326.3 $1,433.5 $1,444.6 $1,498.7 $1,532.5 
58% of GF Revenue 
$769.3 
$831.4 
$837.9 
$869.2 
$888.8 
Board of Education GF Request 
670.4 
757.4 
786.1 
769.8 
871.7 
Request % of GF Revenue 
51% 
53% 
54% 
51% 
57% 
Final Local Appropriation2 
640.8 
675.6 
721.2 
766.0 
822.7 
Appropriation % of GF Revenue 
48% 
47% 
50% 
51% 
54% 
 
GF:  General Fund 
1 Excluding fund balance – FY 2026 amounts are as approved in the operating budget, FY 2025 represents 
estimated revenues, FY 2024 and earlier are actuals. 
2 FY 2026 amount includes Chapter 604 of 2025 county obligation to make payments to the Board of 
Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System on behalf of public school teachers and principals. 
 
Source:  Howard County; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
This analysis assumes that the bill’s requirement to provide 58% of general fund revenue 
“for the fiscal year” means 58% of revenue projected for the year to be funded. As shown 
above, this analysis assumes that the fiscal 2027 appropriation considers 58% of the 
revenue projected to be available in fiscal 2027. To the extent the bill is interpreted to 
require an earlier baseline year (for instance, calculating 58% of the working budget year 
or the most recent year for which final actual revenue calculations are available), the upper 
limit of the bill’s affect on local school system revenues and expenditures may be lower 
since county revenues have grown in recent years. This analysis also assumes that the 
mandate applies only to general fund operating expenditures and that the bill neither 
considered capital funding requests for purposes of the 58% calculation nor has any effect 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1176/ Page 6 
on local capital funding for the local school system. Lastly, revenue and expenditure 
increases are dependent on the county government choosing to leave general fund revenues 
largely untouched and in line with the county Spending Affordability Advisory Committee 
projections. 
 
Additional Comments:  In fiscal 2026, Howard County had the fifth highest total  
per pupil funding amount for public schools at $23,088. Of this amount, State funding 
totaled $8,338 per pupil (nineteenth highest) and local funding totaled $14,750 per pupil 
(third highest). Providing an additional $98.4 million in local funding will increase the total 
per pupil amount by approximately $1,764. This will result in Howard County having the 
highest total per pupil funding amount in the State and the second highest local per pupil 
funding amount. The State and local per pupil funding amounts for fiscal 2026 is available 
on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Howard County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 18, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6