START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1181 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1181 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Appropriations and Health 
 
 
Family Law - Children in Out-of-Home Placement - Voluntary Placement 
Agreements 
 
   
This bill alters provisions related to children placed in out-of-home placements under a 
voluntary placement agreement with a local department of social services (LDSS). In 
determining the reasonable efforts to preserve and reunify families, a child’s parent or legal 
guardian need not exhaust all home- and community-based services. The Social Services 
Administration (SSA) must consult with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to 
provide specified annual training to LDSS staff. Annually beginning July 1, 2027, each 
LDSS must report specified information regarding voluntary placement agreements to the 
Department of Human Services (DHS), and annually beginning September 1, 2027, DHS 
must publish aggregated statewide data on its website. The bill alters the duties of the 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays and 
requires the workgroup to report its fundings and recommendations by October 1, 2026. 
By October 1, 2029, DHS and MDH must submit a joint report that contains specified 
information concerning children placed in an out-of-home placement under a voluntary 
placement agreement. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Sufficient information was not provided by DHS in time to fully analyze 
the fiscal impact of this legislation. However, this analysis assumes MDH can collaborate 
with DHS to complete required annual training and complete the required joint report. To 
the extent less child support is collected under the bill, Child Support Foster Care Offset 
revenue may decrease beginning in FY 2027. 
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County expenditures increase by approximately 
$162,000 annually, as discussed below. No assumed effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1181/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Voluntary Placement Agreements 
 
The bill specifies that a LDSS may not seek legal guardianship or custody of a child under 
a voluntary placement agreement if the child has a developmental disability or a mental 
illness and the purpose of the voluntary placement agreement is to obtain treatment or care 
that the parent is unable to provide. A child may remain in an out-of-home placement, 
including a residential placement, under a voluntary placement agreement for more than 
180 days if the child’s disability necessitates care or treatment in the out-of-home 
placement, and a juvenile court makes a finding that continuation of the placement is in the 
best interests of the child.  
 
If a LDSS receives a request for a voluntary placement agreement, it must (1) within 
five business days after receiving the request, schedule an assessment meeting with the 
child’s family and treating provider and (2) within five business days after the assessment 
meeting, issue a written eligibility determination to the child’s family and referring 
provider. Each LDSS must report any delay in assessing the child and providing an 
eligibility determination to SSA, including reasons for the delay and corrective actions 
taken by the LDSS. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement for a LDSS to, on receipt of a request for a voluntary 
placement agreement for a child with a developmental disability or mental illness, discuss 
the child’s care at the next meeting of the local care team for the purpose of determining 
whether any alternative or interim services for the child and family may be provided by 
any agency.  
 
A parent or legal guardian who enters into a voluntary placement agreement retains all 
legal and educational decision-making rights, unless otherwise agreed. A LDSS may not 
require a parent or legal guardian to relinquish custody or guardianship of a child to access 
services.  
 
A LDSS must notify the parent or legal guardian of a child subject to voluntary placement 
agreement of the right to petition the court for a modification of an existing child support 
obligation. SSA and the Child Support Administration must collaborate to establish 
uniform criteria for waiving or reducing child support obligations for low-income families 
who enter into a voluntary placement agreement. A child with special needs who is the 
subject of a voluntary placement agreement request for psychiatric residential treatment 
and who is eligible to receive Medicaid must be referred directly to the local behavioral 
health authority. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1181/ Page 3 
Required Training 
 
The bill specifies that the training that SSA must currently provide to staff at each LDSS 
who administer requests for voluntary placement agreements for children with 
developmental disabilities or mental illnesses must (1) be provided in consultation with 
MDH and (2) include training on timeline and procedural compliance, trauma-informed 
family engagement, and interagency coordination. 
 
Data Collection and Reporting 
 
By July 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, each LDSS must report to DHS:  (1) the number 
of voluntary placement agreement requests received in the preceding year; (2) the average 
time it took for the LDSS to make a determination and placement; (3) the number of 
requests that were denied and the reasons for the denials; and (4) the average length of a 
hospital stay for a child awaiting a placement.  
 
By September 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, DHS must publish on its website 
aggregated statewide data compiled from the LDSS reports.  
 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays 
 
The bill requires the workgroup to (1) study voluntary placement agreements for children 
with a developmental disability or mental illness and (2) recommend statutory and 
budgetary changes necessary to transfer funding from DHS to MDH.  
 
By October 1, 2026, the workgroup must report its fundings and recommendations to the 
Governor; the Joint Committee on Children, Youth, and Families; and the 
General Assembly. 
 
Required Report 
 
By October 1, 2029, DHS and MDH must submit a joint report to the Governor; the Joint 
Committee on Children, Youth, and Families; and the General Assembly that contains 
information concerning children placed in an out-of-home placement under a voluntary 
placement agreement, including (1) the impact on hospital discharge delays; (2) family 
outcomes and reunification rates; (3) the implementation status of voluntary placement 
agreement reform; and (4) recommendations for changes in the law. 
 
Current Law:  DHS, through SSA, has the primary responsibility for child welfare 
services throughout the State, which are provided primarily by the LDSS.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1181/ Page 4 
DHS must establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor children (1) who are 
placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 180 days, by a parent or 
legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who are abused, abandoned, 
neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that continued residence in the 
child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has committed the child to the custody 
or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with the approval of DHS, are placed in 
an out-of-home placement by a local department under a voluntary placement agreement 
regarding a child with a developmental disability or a mental illness, as specified. An  
out-of-home placement may include family foster care, group and residential care, kinship 
care, and a treatment foster care home. 
 
In establishing the out-of-home placement program, SSA must:   
 
 
provide time-limited family reunification services to a child place in an out-of-home 
placement and to the parents or guardian of the child, to facilitate the child’s safe 
and appropriate reunification within a timely manner; 
 
concurrently develop and implement a permanency plan that is in the best interests 
of the child; and 
 
provide training on an annual basis for the staff at each LDSS who administer 
requests for voluntary placement agreements for children with developmental 
disabilities or mental illnesses.  
 
Child in Need of Assistance 
 
A child in need of assistance (CINA) is a child who requires court intervention because 
(1) the child has been abused or neglected, has a developmental disability, or has a mental 
disorder, and (2) the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian is unable or unwilling to give 
proper care and attention to the child and the child’s needs. 
 
A former CINA may remain in an out-of-home placement under a voluntary placement 
agreement for more than 180 days if the former CINA continues to comply with the 
voluntary placement agreement and a juvenile court makes a finding that the continuation 
of the placement is in the best interest of the CINA.  
 
Voluntary Placement Agreements 
 
“Voluntary placement agreement” means a binding, written agreement that (1) is 
voluntarily entered into between a LDSS and the parent or legal guardian of a minor child 
or a former CINA whose commitment to the LDSS was rescinded after the individual 
reached age 18 but before the individual reached age 20 and 6 months and (2) specifies, at 
a minimum, the legal status of the child or former CINA and the rights and obligations of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1181/ Page 5 
the parent or legal guardian, the child or former CINA, and the LDSS while the child or 
former CINA is in placement.  
 
A LDSS may not seek legal custody of a child under a voluntary placement agreement if 
the child has a developmental disability or a mental illness and the purpose of the voluntary 
placement agreement is to obtain treatment or care that the parent is unable to provide. The 
child may remain in an out-of-home placement under a voluntary placement for more than 
180 days if the child’s disability necessitates care or treatment in the out-of-home 
placement, and a juvenile court makes a finding that continuation of the placement is in the 
best interests of the child. 
 
On receipt of a request for a voluntary placement agreement for a child with a 
developmental disability or mental illness, the LDSS must discuss the child’s care at the 
next meeting of the local care team for the purpose of determining whether any alternative 
or interim services for the child and family may be provided by any agency.  
 
A child may not be committed to the custody or guardianship of the LDSS and placed in 
an out-of-home placement solely because the child’s parent or guardian lacks shelter or has 
a disability or solely because the child’s parents are financially unable to provide treatment 
or care for a child with a developmental disability or mental illness.  
 
Reasonable Efforts 
 
Pursuant to the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, a LDSS may ask the court to find 
that reasonable efforts to reunify a child with the child’s parent or guardian are not required 
if the LDSS concludes that a parent or guardian has subjected the child to specified 
aggravated circumstances, has been convicted of specified crimes, or has involuntarily lost 
parental rights of a sibling of the child. 
 
Unless a court orders that reasonable efforts are not required, reasonable efforts must be 
made to preserve and reunify families (1) prior to the placement of a child in an  
out-of-home placement, to prevent or eliminate the need for removing the child from the 
child’s home and (2) to make it possible for a child to safely return home. In determining 
the reasonable efforts to be made, and in making the reasonable efforts, the child’s safety 
and health must be the primary concern. 
 
Reasonable efforts to place a child for adoption or with a legal guardian may be made 
concurrently with the reasonable efforts to preserve and reunify families. If continuation 
of reasonable efforts to reunify the child with the child’s parents or guardian is determined 
to be inconsistent with the permanency plan for the child:  (1) reasonable efforts must be 
made to place the child in a timely manner in accordance with the permanency plan, 
including consideration of both in-State and out-of-state placements, and to complete the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1181/ Page 6 
steps to finalize the permanent placement of the child and (2) in a case in which the parent 
of the child is receiving treatment in a residential substance use disorder treatment program 
with beds or services for patients’ children and the child is in the presence of the child’s 
parent for the duration of the child’s parent’s treatment, the LDSS must file a specified 
report with the court. 
 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays 
 
Chapters 479 and 480 of 2025 established the Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed 
Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays to:   
 
 
complete an assessment of the number, type, and cost of the additional beds and 
supportive services needed to place all children in pediatric overstays and other 
unlicensed settings in the least restrictive settings; 
 
develop a comprehensive and sustainable resource development plan designed to 
increase the number of licensed settings and end the use of pediatric overstays and 
unlicensed settings;  
 
develop an implementation plan with comprehensive data to inform the plan; and 
 
determine the anticipated timeline for when the practice of placing children in 
unlicensed settings will cease. 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 479 and 480, “child in an unlicensed setting” means an individual 
younger than age 21 in an out-of-home placement who is residing in a hotel, an office 
building, a shelter, or any other unlicensed setting. “Child in an unlicensed setting” does 
not include an individual younger than age 21 who is receiving a self-independent living 
stipend, living with kin awaiting approval for a placement, or on aftercare with a parent.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Most LDSS employees are State employees, except in 
Montgomery County where most social services staff are county employees. Based on the 
current number of voluntary placement agreement requests the department currently 
receives, Montgomery County advises that the Montgomery County Department of Health 
and Human Services requires two additional social workers and technology system 
upgrades to meet the bill’s requirements, with annual expenditures of approximately 
$162,000. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1181/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7