START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1178 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1178 
(Delegates Harrison and Toles) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Municipalities - Annexation - Limitations 
 
 
This emergency bill prohibits a municipality from annexing land that is:  (1) located in a 
different legislative district than a legislative district in which all or part of the municipality 
is located without first obtaining the consent of the members of the delegation to the 
General Assembly for the district in which the land is located; (2) owned by the  
United Sates, the State, a political subdivision of the State, without first obtaining the 
consent of the governmental entity that owns the land; or (3) owned by an entity exempt 
from federal income taxes under § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code without first obtaining 
the consent of the entity. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential impact on municipal government operations or finances, to the 
extent that the bill prevents or delays a planned annexation by a municipality. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A municipality may enlarge its boundaries by annexation of land, subject 
to various criteria and procedures established in Title 4, Subtitle 4 of the Local Government 
Article, including adoption of an annexation plan (a plan for providing municipal services 
to the annexed area) and enactment of an annexation resolution. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1178/ Page 2 
The power of annexation applies only to land that is contiguous and adjoining to the 
existing boundaries of the municipality and does not create an unincorporated area that is 
bounded on all sides by:  (1) real property presently in the boundaries of the municipality; 
(2) real property proposed to be in the boundaries of the municipality; or (3) any 
combination of real property that is either presently or proposed to be in the boundaries of 
the municipality. 
 
A municipality may not annex land that is in another municipality. 
 
A map depicting each municipality in Maryland by legislative district is available on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1525 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
me/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2