START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1137 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1137 
(Delegate Allen) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Residential-in-Commercial-Zone Laws - Study (Bring Back Main Street Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
conduct a study of specified “residential-in-commercial-zone (RICZ) laws,” including 
(1) a summary and comparison of RICZ laws enacted by other states; (2) an assessment of 
specified impacts of RICZ laws; and (3) recommendations regarding appropriate 
requirements and restrictions applicable to multifamily residential and mixed-use 
development under RICZ laws. By December 1, 2026, DHCD must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026, and terminates May 31, 2027.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures for DHCD increase by 
$75,000 in FY 2027 only, for contractual services to assist with the study, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Residential-in-commercial-zone (RICZ) law” means statewide 
legislation that requires local jurisdictions to allow multifamily residential or mixed-use 
developments as a permitted use in at least some commercially zoned areas. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1137/ Page 2 
The study must include: 
 
 
a summary and comparison of RICZ laws enacted by other states; 
 
an assessment of the impact of RICZ laws on (1) urban communities where there is 
already a mix of commercial and residential uses; (2) local infrastructure; (3) local 
economic development goals; and (4) housing production; and 
 
recommendations regarding appropriate requirements and restrictions applicable to 
multifamily residential and mixed-use development under RICZ laws, including 
recommendations regarding (1) off-street parking requirements; (2) allowed 
density; (3) first-floor nonresidential use requirements; (4) building height 
restrictions; (5) the types of commercial areas appropriate for multifamily 
residential and mixed-use developments; and (6) special considerations for urban, 
suburban, and rural areas.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Land Use – Generally 
 
The regulation of land use in the State, through planning and zoning, is implemented by 
local governments, subject to applicable State law. Planning and zoning authority is 
delegated by the State to local governments primarily under the Land Use Article and, for 
certain counties, the Express Powers Act (Title 10 of the Local Government Article).  
 
Both the Land Use Article and Express Powers Act contain the State’s policy statement 
that (1) the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive 
regulation through implementation of planning and zoning controls and (2) planning and 
zoning controls must be implemented by local government. State law includes various 
provisions authorizing local governments to regulate the location, size, and use of 
structures through zoning regulations.  
 
Development Mechanisms  
 
Section 7-101 of the Land Use Article authorizes and encourages a local jurisdiction – in 
order to encourage the preservation of natural resources or the provision of affordable 
housing and to facilitate orderly development and growth – to enact local laws providing 
for or requiring (1) the planning, staging, or provision of adequate public facilities and 
affordable housing; (2) off-site improvements or the dedication of land for public facilities 
essential for a development; (3) moderately priced dwelling unit programs; (4) mixed use 
developments; (5) cluster developments; (6) planned unit developments; (7) alternative 
subdivision requirements that meet minimum performance standards set by the local 
jurisdiction and reduce infrastructure costs; (8) floating zones; (9) incentive zoning; and 
(10) performance zoning.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1137/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for DHCD increase by $75,000 in 
fiscal 2027 only. This estimate (1) reflects the cost of contractual services to assist the 
Division of Policy, Strategy, and Research (DPSR) within DHCD to complete the study 
and make recommendations and (2) assumes the cost is incurred in fiscal 2027. DHCD 
advises that its existing staff in DPSR does not have the capacity to conduct a 
comprehensive study of RICZ laws within the expedited time frame of six months without 
outside assistance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 829 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Howard, Prince George’s, and Queen Anne’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3