START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1166 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1166 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Economic Matters and Environment and 
Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Dealers - Front Registration Plate Display 
 
  
This bill prohibits a motor vehicle dealer (as defined under § 15-101 of the Transportation 
Article) from delivering to the buyer or lessee a motor vehicle for which two registration 
plates are required unless the motor vehicle has front registration plate mounting hardware 
or the buyer or lessee signs a written statement acknowledging that (1) they declined the 
installation of the front registration plate mounting hardware and understand that State law 
requires the display of a registration plate on the front of the motor vehicle; (2) front 
registration plate mounting hardware is available from the dealer; and (3) failure to display 
a front registration plate is a misdemeanor subject to a fine up to $500. On a monthly basis, 
a dealer must report to the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) the name of each buyer 
or lessee who signed this written statement.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can implement the reporting requirement with existing budgeted 
resources. The bill may have a (currently unquantifiable) effect on traffic fine and toll 
collection revenues, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  All vehicles are required to display two registration plates, unless they are 
in one of five vehicle classes. Class D (motorcycle), Class F (tractor), and Class G (trailer) 
vehicles are exempt from the two-registration-plate requirement. In addition, a Class L 
(historic) or Class N (street rod) vehicle is exempt if the vehicle was manufactured 50 years 
or more before the current model year. Class F vehicles are required to display the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1166/ Page 2 
registration plate on the front of the vehicle. Historic and antique vehicles must display a 
current registration plate in the place provided on the vehicle. In addition, MVA must issue 
only one plate for vehicles with temporary registration.  
 
An owner of a motor vehicle may not drive the vehicle or permit it to be driven on any 
highway in Maryland without validated registration plates, unless otherwise expressly 
authorized by MVA. Expired registration plates may not be displayed. A violation of these 
provisions is a misdemeanor, subject to a fine of up to $500 or a prepayment fine of $70.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill (1) requires dealers to deliver vehicles with front plate 
mounting hardware or the purchaser or lessee of a vehicle to sign a written statement 
acknowledging the lack of hardware and related consequences and (2) requires dealers to 
report to MVA buyers or lessees who sign these written statements. However, it is unclear 
what MVA is to do with this information. Enforcement of the two-plate law is conducted 
by law enforcement; MVA does not have independent enforcement authority. 
 
Information is not available as to how many car owners or lessees fail to affix a front plate 
due to a lack of hardware. To the extent the bill results in the increased installation of front 
registration plates, the bill may have downstream effects, including (1) reduced fines for 
violation of the two-plate law and (2) increased toll collections. In fiscal 2025, there were 
3,937 violations for driving with only one registration plate. The Maryland Transportation 
Authority (MDTA) advises that it uses camera images of both the front and rear license 
plate to identify vehicles passing through toll facilities (if an E-ZPass is not present). If the 
rear plate is obscured or the image is distorted, MDTA relies on the front plate to determine 
who owes the toll. Any such effects generated solely by the bill cannot be reliably 
quantified at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2