START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1109 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1109 
(Chair, Health Committee, et al.) 
Health and Appropriations 
 
 
Public Health Reform Act 
 
   
This bill alters the membership, duties, leadership, and staffing of the Commission on 
Public Health (CPH); extends the commission’s termination date; and requires the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide quarterly updates on implementation 
of CPH’s recommendations. The bill also (1) requires MDH to organize the Maryland 
Medical Reserve Corps and makes alterations to the corps; (2) establishes a Public Health 
Workforce Development Fund and authorizes funds from the Population Health 
Improvement Fund to be transferred to the fund; (3) requires the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) to develop a process to assess the health equity impacts of relevant 
legislation; (4) makes administrative changes relating to county health officers and local 
health departments (LHDs); (5) requires MDH to consult with LHDs and notify each health 
officer of certain procurements; and (6) alters the membership of the Maryland Corps 
Program Advisory Board. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can generally be handled by affected State agencies 
using existing budgeted resources. Expenditures (likely general or special funds) increase 
by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as FY 2027 to capitalize the Public Health 
Workforce Development Fund; special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund 
increase accordingly. Expenditures increase by a minimal amount in FY 2027 and 2028 to 
continue CPH for two additional years, as discussed below.      
  
Local Effect:  The Maryland Association of County Health Officers advises that the bill’s 
impact on LHDs is primarily operational and can be absorbed with existing resources. To 
the extent the Public Health Workforce Development Fund provides funding for LHDs, 
revenues may increase.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1109/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Commission on Public Health 
 
Membership:  The bill expands the membership of CPH to include the Secretary of Budget 
and Management (or their designee), the Secretary of Information Technology (or their 
designee), and the Chief Executive Officer of the Chesapeake Regional Information 
System for Our Patients (CRISP) (or their designee). The bill replaces the Deputy Secretary 
for Behavioral Health (or designee) with the Deputy Secretary for Operations (or designee) 
as a commission member. The bill specifies that the Governor may appoint at most 
two members of the public (rather than at least three but not more than five) with 
experience in public health as additional members of the commission.  
 
Commission Duties:  CPH must provide oversight over implementation of the 
commission’s recommendations. The bill repeals the requirement that CPH consult with 
specified State departments and commissions. The bill alters the due date for CPH’s  
annual report from December 1 to January 1 and specifies that the report must be on the 
implementation of the commission's recommendations and barriers to implementation.   
 
Workgroups:  CPH is authorized (rather than required) to establish workgroups at the 
discretion of the commission. The chair of CPH may appoint members of the public to a 
workgroup. Specific member requirements and the purpose of workgroups are repealed.  
 
Chair and Staffing:  The bill repeals current requirements about who must chair the 
commission and instead specifies that CPH must select a chair and a vice chair from among 
its members. To qualify as chair, a member must agree to provide staff for the commission. 
The Secretaries of Budget and Management and Information Technology, and the 
Deputy Secretaries for Public Health and Operations may not serve as chair. The chair of 
CPH must provide staff support for the commission. If the chair fails to provide staffing, 
the members must select a new chair.  
 
Termination Date:  The bill extends the termination date of CPH by two years to 
June 30, 2028.  
 
Maryland Medical Reserve Corps 
 
MDH must organize the Maryland Medical Reserve Corps, the purpose of which is to 
provide a statewide volunteer network integrated into community emergency systems to 
facilitate a coordinated approach to volunteer management. The corps must include clinical 
and nonclinical personnel capable of assisting during crises that strain the health care or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1109/ Page 3 
public health system, including public health emergencies, disease outbreaks, and natural 
disasters. MDH must maintain an efficient and modern electronic registration system to 
register and track volunteers for the corps and designate a Public Health Emergency Surge 
Coordinator among its staff to coordinate and plan improvements to the corps.  
 
Public Health Workforce Development Fund 
 
The purpose of the fund is to support the education and training of the public health 
workforce. The Maryland Community Health Resources Commission (MCHRC) must 
administer the fund, which consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the 
fund; (2) interest earnings; (3) any money transferred from the Population Health 
Improvement Fund; and (4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit 
of the fund. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the  
State budget. MDH and the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) may 
transfer money from the Population Health Improvement Fund to the Public Health 
Workforce Development Fund.  
 
Health Equity Impacts of Legislation  
 
DLS, in consultation with the Legislative Policy Committee, must develop a process to 
assess the health equity impacts of relevant legislation.  
 
Local Health Department and County Health Officer Provisions  
 
Health Department Staffing:  The bill specifies that, if a position with a county health 
department is fully funded without the use of State funding, the county health officer may 
appoint an individual to the position without approval by the Secretary of Health or the 
Secretary of Budget and Management.  
 
Agreements for the Delivery of Health Care Services:  Under current law, a county health 
officer can enter into a contract or any other written agreement to assist or participate in 
the delivery of health care services with a person authorized to provide, finance, coordinate, 
facilitate, or otherwise deliver health care services in the State if the health officer has the 
consent of the governing body of the county and written approval of the Secretary of 
Health. The bill specifies that, if the Secretary does not respond to a request for written 
approval within seven days, the county health officer may enter into the contract or written 
agreement.  
 
Service on Hospital Boards:  A county health officer may serve on the board of a Maryland 
hospital only if the health officer does not accept payment for their service on the board. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1109/ Page 4 
Notice from the Maryland Department of Health:  Before procuring a system for collecting 
and storing electronic health records, MDH must consult with LHDs to assess the necessary 
qualities of such a system. If MDH procures a system, it must notify each health officer 
and offer the county health department the opportunity to join the procurement.  
 
Maryland Corps Program Advisory Board  
 
The bill authorizes the Governor to appoint a fifth member to the board and specifies that 
one of the five members appointed by the Governor must be a local health officer.  
 
Current Law:           
 
Commission on Public Health 
 
Chapter 385 of 2023 established CPH to make recommendations to improve the delivery 
of “foundational public health services” in the State. CPH must assess the foundational 
public health capabilities of MDH and LHDs. Based on this assessment, CPH must make 
recommendations for reform in specified areas. CPH submitted interim reports on its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and specified committees of the 
General Assembly in December 2023 and December 2024. A final report was submitted in 
October 2025. CPH terminates June 30, 2026.  
 
Maryland Medical Reserve Corps 
 
The Maryland Responds Medical Reserve Corps is a community-based, civilian, volunteer 
program that helps build the public health infrastructure and response capabilities. 
Maryland Responds is composed of responders who stand ready to volunteer their skills, 
expertise, and time to support ongoing public health initiatives and to assist during 
emergencies. Maryland Responds, previously known as the Maryland Professional 
Volunteer Corps, is administered by MDH’s Office of Preparedness and Response. 
 
Population Health Improvement Fund 
 
Chapter 615 of 2025 established the Population Health Improvement Fund to support 
statewide population health targets under the Advancing All-Payer Health Equity 
Approaches and Development (AHEAD) Model. Through December 31, 2027, HSCRC 
may assess a uniform, broad-based, and reasonable amount in hospital rates to be credited 
to the fund.  
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by MDH and HSCRC that consists of 
(1) through December 31, 2027, revenues from the uniform, broad-based assessment by 
HSCRC; (2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1109/ Page 5 
(4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Interest 
accrues to the fund beginning in fiscal 2029, as for most special funds; however, from 
fiscal 2026 through 2028, interest is instead credited to the general fund. The composition 
of the fund is altered effective January 1, 2028, by repealing revenues from the assessment. 
The fund may be used only for expenses associated with statewide population health 
improvement initiatives in alignment with the Statewide Health Equity Plan required under 
the AHEAD Model. Activities paid for by the fund must support the goal of meeting the 
statewide population health targets outlined in the AHEAD Model and have at least one of 
the following functions:  (1) reducing rates of common preventable health conditions; 
(2) addressing health-related social needs; or (3) reducing or eliminating health disparities.  
 
Maryland Corps Program Advisory Board  
 
The Maryland Corps Program in the Department of Service and Civic Innovation (DSCI) 
was established to (1) provide meaningful service opportunities to participants to address 
the social needs of the community; (2) equip participants with the skills that will enable 
them to successfully make the transition from high school to an institution of higher 
education or to the workforce; and (3) provide program completion awards to participants 
who complete the program. The Maryland Corps Program Advisory Board is tasked with, 
among other things, advising DSCI on best practices for service and volunteerism; 
providing oversight of the design, development, implementation, operation, and expansion 
of the program; and participating in program-sponsored events. The Governor may appoint 
four members to the advisory board, one of whom must be a representative of the 
Maryland State Service Commission. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:           
 
Public Health Workforce Development Fund 
 
The bill establishes this new fund, administered by MCHRC, to support the education and 
training of the public health workforce. MCHRC advises that it can administer the fund 
using existing budgeted resources. Expenditures increase (likely general or special funds) 
by an indeterminate amount to capitalize the special fund beginning as early as fiscal 2027. 
Special fund revenues to the fund and special fund expenditures from the fund increase 
accordingly. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
The bill requires MDH to organize the Maryland Medical Reserve Corps. MDH advises 
that the Maryland Responds Medical Reserve Corps generally reflects the bill. Each LHD 
has a Unit Administrator that can access the corps. They also recruit, train, and engage in 
retention activities with these volunteers. These activities are currently supported by 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1109/ Page 6 
federal Public Health Emergency Planning funds via MDH. Thus, there is no additional 
cost to MDH under the bill, particularly since uncodified language in the bill specifies 
legislative intent that the Maryland Medical Reserve Corps replace the Maryland Responds 
Health Reserve Corps. 
 
Commission on Public Health 
 
The bill extends the termination date of CPH by two years and alters the commission’s 
membership, duties, leadership, and staffing. Staffing for the commission, which is 
currently provided by the academic institutions represented by the co-chairs, must instead 
be provided by the chair of the commission, who must be selected from among certain 
members. Thus, expenditures are likely to increase by a minimal amount in 
fiscal 2027 and 2028 for continued staffing of the commission. However, without knowing 
who will be selected as chair, the source of such expenditures cannot be known and could 
be borne by the Maryland General Assembly, State academic institutions, or LHDs, among 
others.  
 
The bill also requires MDH to provide quarterly updates on implementation of CPH’s 
recommendations. This analysis assumes that any impact on MDH can be absorbed within 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
Department of Legislative Services  
 
Under the bill, DLS, in consultation with the Legislative Policy Committee, must develop 
a process to assess the health equity impacts of relevant legislation. DLS can likely develop 
a health equity impact assessment process as required under the bill using existing budgeted 
resources. However, to the extent that DLS is required to use that process to incorporate 
health equity impact into fiscal and policy notes or racial equity impact notes, additional 
staff resources would be required. Depending on the number and scope of the bills that 
might require a health equity impact analysis, general fund expenditures for additional staff 
could be significant. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 790 (Senator Lam)(By Request - Commission on Public 
Health) - Finance and Budget and Taxation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1109/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of 
Information Technology; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Department 
of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7