START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1140 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1140 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Baltimore County Board of Education - Membership - Alterations 
 
 
This bill increases the number of nonpartisan elected members of the Baltimore County 
Board of Education from seven to nine and decreases the number of appointed members 
from four to two starting with the 2030 general election. One member must be elected from 
each of the nine councilmanic districts in the county by the voters of that district and 
two members must be appointed by the Governor from the county at large. The nine elected 
members must be elected in a general election in years in which a gubernatorial election is 
held, and the two appointed members must be appointed by the Governor in years in which 
a presidential election is held. Of the four members appointed to the county board in 2028, 
the terms of two members will terminate in 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects Baltimore County Public Schools. 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill is not expected to have a material fiscal impact on 
Baltimore County Public Schools. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of 7 nonpartisan elected 
members and 4 appointed members serving four-year terms, as well as 1 student member. 
Of the 11 elected and appointed members of the county board, 1 member must be elected 
from each of the seven councilmanic districts in the county, and 4 members must be 
appointed by the Governor from the county at large. The 7 elected members must be elected 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1140/ Page 2 
in a general election in years in which a gubernatorial election is held, and the 4 appointed 
members must be appointed by the Governor in years in which a presidential election is 
held. The Governor must choose appointed members from a list of nominees submitted by 
the Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission. 
 
A member who has served three consecutive four-year terms cannot be elected or appointed 
to the county board until at least four years have elapsed since the end of the member’s 
last term on the county board. During an election year, the Governor may not appoint to 
the county board an individual who has filed a certificate of candidacy for election to the 
board, nor can the individual seek appointment. 
 
Additional Comments:  In September 2025, the Baltimore County Council approved new 
council district maps that increased the number of councilmanic districts by two to make a 
total of nine districts. These councilmanic district boundaries will be effective for the 
2026 county council elections.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2