START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1110 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1110 
(Delegate Lewis) 
Ways and Means 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Judicial In Rem Tax Foreclosure - Notice Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires that a county or municipality – when filing a complaint for an in rem 
foreclosure action on specified vacant property – serve the complaint on each interested 
party in accordance with the Maryland Rules. This requirement replaces an existing 
requirement that the county or municipality, within five days after filing the complaint, 
send notice and a copy of the complaint to each interested party by first-class mail and 
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, bearing a postmark from the U.S. 
Postal Service. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
“Interested Party” 
 
Existing statute defines an “interested party,” in the context of judicial in rem tax 
foreclosure, to mean:  (1) the person who last appears as owner of the real property on the 
collector’s tax roll; (2) a mortgagee of the property or assignee of a mortgage of record;  
(3) a holder of a beneficial interest in a deed of trust recorded against the real property;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1110/ Page 2 
(4) a taxing agency that has the authority to collect tax on the real property; or (5) any 
person having an interest in the real property whose identity and address are reasonably 
ascertainable from the county land records or revealed by a full title search consisting of at 
least 50 years. 
 
In Rem Foreclosure and Sale 
 
Statute provides counties and municipalities with specified authority for in rem foreclosure 
and sale of real property (1) that consists of a vacant lot or improved property cited as 
vacant and unsafe or unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a housing or building 
violation notice and (2) for which the total amount of liens for unpaid taxes on the property 
exceeds the total value of the property. A complaint for an in rem foreclosure action may 
not be filed by a county or municipality unless (1) the tax on the real property has been 
delinquent for at least six months, and (2) the right to appeal the notice of the property as 
vacant and unsafe or unfit has tolled. 
 
A complaint for in rem foreclosure must be filed in the circuit court of the county where 
the real property is located and must meet specified criteria. The complaint must include a 
request that the circuit court not schedule a hearing on the complaint until 30 days after the 
date the complaint is filed, and the court may not set a hearing until 30 days after the 
complaint is filed. Within five days after filing the complaint, a county or municipality 
must send notice and a copy of the complaint to each interested party by first-class mail 
and certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, bearing a postmark from the 
U.S. Postal Service.  
 
An interested party has the right (1) to cure the delinquent taxes and liens on the real 
property by paying all past due fees, payments, and penalties at any time before the entry 
of the foreclosure judgment and (2) to be heard at the hearing on the complaint and contest 
the delinquency of the taxes and the adequacy of the proceedings. 
 
If the court finds that the county or municipality sent sufficient notice and a copy of the 
complaint to each interested party and that the information in the complaint is accurate, it 
must enter a judgment and order that ownership of the real property be transferred to the 
county or municipality. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 730 (Senator M. Washington) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1110/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3