START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1126 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1126 
(Delegate Qi) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance and Managed Care Organizations - Laboratory Services - 
Contract Providers 
 
 
This bill prohibits a carrier that provides coverage for laboratory services from prohibiting 
an enrollee from selecting, or limiting the ability of an enrollee to select, a laboratory of 
the enrollee’s choice for laboratory services if the laboratory participates as a contract 
provider in the health benefit plan offered by the carrier. A carrier may not deny a 
laboratory the right to participate as a contract provider if the laboratory agrees to 
(1) provide laboratory services in a manner that meets the terms and conditions under the 
health benefit plan and (2) the terms of reimbursement established by the carrier under the 
health benefit plan. A carrier may not, for laboratory services provided by a contract 
provider, impose on the enrollee a copayment, fee, or condition not imposed on all other 
enrollees for the same laboratory under the health benefit plan. The bill’s prohibitions also 
apply to Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase minimally for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any 
additional MIA workload can be handled with existing resources. Medicaid expenditures 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) may increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is not likely 
materially affected.  
 
Local Effect:  Local governments with fully insured health benefit plans are not likely 
materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1126/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires 
nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits, which include 
laboratory services.  
 
For each health care facility (including a laboratory) in a carrier’s network, the network 
directory must include the health care facility’s name and address, and the type of services 
provided by the health care facility, as well as a statement that advises enrollees and 
prospective enrollees to contact a health care facility before seeking treatment or services 
to confirm the facility’s participation in the carrier’s network. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) advises that the bill’s 
requirement to accept any willing laboratory provider may increase costs for Medicaid 
MCOs, which in turn may require a change or increase in MCO capitation rates paid by 
MDH. The amount of any such increase cannot be reliably estimated but would be subject 
to a 50% federal match. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business laboratories that contract with health 
insurance carriers to provide diagnostic testing may benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2