START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1111 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1111 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - Class 3 Wineries and Class 4 Limited Wineries - Bulk 
Wine 
 
 
This bill authorizes (1) a holder of a Class 3 winery license to acquire bulk wine from the 
holder of a Class 4 limited winery license and (2) a holder of a Class 4 limited winery 
license to sell and deliver bulk wine to the holder of a Class 3 winery license. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Class 3 Winery License 
 
A Class 3 winery license holder may, among other things, (1) establish and operate a plant 
for fermenting and bottling wine at the location described in the license; (2) import bulk 
wine from a holder of a nonresident dealer’s permit; and (3) sell and deliver wine to a 
wholesaler licensee, a holder of a permit authorized to acquire wine, and a person outside 
the State authorized to acquire wine. The annual license fee is determined by the Executive 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1111/ Page 2 
Director of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) and may not exceed 
$750. 
 
Class 4 Limited Winery License 
 
Generally, a Class 4 license holder must (1) own or have under contract at least 20 acres of 
Maryland‑grown agricultural products in cultivation for use in the production of wine or 
(2) if less than 20 acres are owned or under contract, ensure that at least 51% of the 
ingredients used in the annual production of wine are Maryland‑grown agricultural 
products.  
 
A license holder may (1) ferment and bottle wine and distill and bottle pomace brandy, as 
specified; (2) sell and deliver the wine and pomace brandy to a wholesaler licensee, a holder 
of a permit authorized to acquire wine or pomace brandy, or a person outside the State 
authorized to acquire wine or pomace brandy; (3) sell or serve specified types of foo;  
(4) distill and bottle up to 1,900 gallons of pomace brandy made from available Maryland 
agricultural products; (5) purchase bulk wine and pomace brandy in a specified manner; 
(6) import, export, and transport its product; (7) store the product of other Class 4 limited 
wineries in a specified manner; and (8) produce wine and pomace brandy at a warehouse 
for which the license holder has been issued an individual storage permit if specified 
conditions are met.  
 
A Class 4 limited winery may only be located at the place stated on the license. Throughout 
the winemaking process, the licensee must maintain ownership of the wine or pomace 
brandy and ensure it returns to the location of the limited winery. The annual license fee is 
determined by the Executive Director of ATCC and may not exceed $200.    
 
Small Business Effect:  Revenues for small business Class 3 winery license holders and 
Class 4 limited winery license holders may increase due to authorized purchases and sales 
under the bill.           
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 803 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1111/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3