START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1194 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1194 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Reemployment After Retirement - 
Exemption From Earnings Offset 
 
 
This bill allows a retiree of the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) to be 
reemployed with any employer on a permanent, temporary, or contractual basis that 
participates in the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) without being subject to a 
reduction to the retiree’s allowance. The bill also repeals existing exemptions to the benefit 
reduction and reporting requirements related to the reemployment of CORS retirees. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities increase by $42.4 million, and the normal cost 
increases by $2.08 million due to earlier retirements. As a result, State pension 
contributions increase by $8.23 million in FY 2029. These costs are assumed to be 
allocated 60% general funds, 20% special funds, and 20% federal funds and increase 
annually according to actuarial assumptions. No effect on revenues.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
4,938,000 
5,070,000 
5,214,000 
SF Expenditure 
0 
0 
1,646,000 
1,690,000 
1,738,000 
FF Expenditure 
0 
0 
1,646,000 
1,690,000 
1,738,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
($8,230,000) 
($8,450,000) 
($8,690,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, there 
is no discernible effect on pension liabilities or contribution rates for participating 
governmental units that participate in CORS. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1194/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Normal Service Retirement 
 
A CORS member may retire with a normal service retirement allowance if the member  
(1) has 20 years of service or (2) is at least 55 years old with at least 5 years of eligibility 
service credit if the member was a member on June 30, 2011, or at least 10 years of 
eligibility service credit for an individual who became a member on or after July 1, 2011.  
 
Offset of Benefits for Reemployment 
 
In general, a retiree who receives a retirement benefit from SRPS may be reemployed, 
except that the retiree may not be reemployed by the State or any participating SRPS 
employer within 45 days of retiring. In most cases, a retiree who is rehired by the same 
employer for whom the retiree worked at the time of retirement is subject to an earnings 
cap. The purpose of the cap, which is the member’s average final compensation at the time 
of retirement, is to ensure that a retiree does not earn more in retirement than the retiree 
earned as an active member with the same employer. If the sum of a retiree’s earnings with 
the same employer and initial retirement allowance exceeds the earnings cap, the retiree is 
subject to a dollar-for-dollar offset of the retirement benefit for any amount that exceeds 
the cap. For a member who retires directly from State service, the State is regarded as a 
single employer, so reemployment with any State agency activates the benefit reduction. 
 
For CORS retirees, the benefit reduction does not apply to:   
 
 
an individual who has been retired for five years, beginning on January 1, after the 
date the individual retires; 
 
an individual whose average final compensation was less than the minimum annual 
salary on the standard State pay scale as of January 1 of the preceding year; 
 
an individual serving in an elected position as an official of a participating 
governmental unit (PGU) or as a constitutional officer for a county that is a PGU; 
 
a retiree of CORS who is reemployed on a contractual basis for no more than four 
years by the Division of Corrections, Division of Pretrial Detention and Services, or 
the Patuxent Institution in the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS) as a correctional officer in a correctional facility; or 
 
a retiree of CORS who is reemployed on a contractual basis for no more than  
four years as a parole and probation employee. 
 
An individual who is receiving a service retirement allowance or a vested allowance and is 
reemployed by a participating employer may not receive creditable service or eligibility 
service during the period of reemployment. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1194/ Page 3 
Immediately upon the employment of an individual receiving an allowance, participating 
employers must notify the State Retirement Agency (SRA) of the type of employment and 
the anticipated earnings of the individual. At least once per year, each participating 
employer must provide SRA with a list of all employees included on any payroll of the 
employer, the Social Security numbers of the employees, and their earnings for that year. 
 
The Division of Corrections, Division of Pretrial Detention and Services, and  
Patuxent Institution in DPSCS must notify SRA of retirees who are eligible for an 
exemption to the benefit reduction as a correctional officer in a correctional facility. These 
entities must also annually report to the Joint Committee on Pensions on (1) the number of 
rehired retirees eligible for specified exemptions; (2) the annual salary of each retiree at 
the time of retirement and the current annual salary of each rehired retiree; (3) the number 
of correctional officers hired who are not retirees; and (4) the annual salary of each 
correctional officer who is hired. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Offsets for Current CORS Retirees 
 
Most CORS members who retire and begin receiving benefits are not rehired by a 
participating employer. Over the past five calendar years, the highest number of CORS 
retirees rehired by a participating employer in a single year was 60 individuals in  
calendar year 2024, out of approximately 7,400 retirees. Furthermore, the highest number 
of CORS retirees eligible for an exemption from the benefit offset under current law (for 
returning as a correctional officer) was 5 individuals in calendar year 2020. SRA’s actuary 
has indicated that benefit offsets are not reflected in its annual actuarial valuation. As a 
result, the valuation effectively assumes that all rehired retirees receiving a CORS benefit, 
including the 60 individuals rehired in calendar year 2024, receive both their full salary 
and full pension benefit. As the bill eliminates the offsets for all CORS retirees who are 
reemployed with a participating employer, it reflects current actuarial practice (which does 
not account for the offsets) and therefore has no practical effect on State pension liabilities. 
 
Earlier Retirements 
 
However, by allowing all CORS retirees to be reemployed by any participating employer 
and in any position (instead of just in correctional positions) without an offset, the bill 
creates an incentive for retirement-eligible CORS members to retire earlier than they 
otherwise might. Rather than delaying retirement, members can retire as soon as they 
become eligible, begin receiving their full CORS pension benefit, and then, after at least 
45 days, be rehired by a participating employer (including their former employer) and also 
receive a full salary (effectively increasing their annual income by at least 40%).  
Earlier-than-expected retirements increase State pension liabilities because it requires 
SRPS to pay benefits to each retiree over a longer period of time. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1194/ Page 4 
With this in mind, the General Assembly’s consulting actuary adjusted the retirement 
assumptions for CORS to reflect earlier retirements. Specifically, the actuary increased 
expected retirement rates by 10 percentage points at the point when an employee first 
becomes eligible for retirement, with that adjustment gradually declining to 5 percentage 
points over a 15-year period. Although not included in this analysis, CORS may see normal 
cost savings as individuals retire and are subsequently rehired to the extent that those 
individuals are filling positions that would have otherwise been filled by new hires to the 
system. Since these individuals are returning as CORS retirees that earn no new benefits 
for their reemployment, the State does not have to make employer contributions for these 
members. 
 
Based on these assumptions and the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date, the change in the 
CORS offset policy is first recognized with the June 30, 2027 actuarial valuation (when 
new retirees are first reflected in retiree counts), which determines pension contribution 
rates for fiscal 2029. Thus, there is no fiscal effect until fiscal 2029. The actuary estimates 
that pension liabilities increase by $42.36 million and the normal cost increases by  
$2.08 million. Amortizing the increase in liabilities over 10 years and adding the full 
normal cost increase results in first-year State pension contributions increasing by  
$8.23 million in fiscal 2029. Costs are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds,  
20% special funds, and 20% federal funds and increase annually according to actuarial 
assumptions. To the extent that actual retirement patterns differ from the assumptions used 
in this analysis, the fiscal effects will differ.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 710 (Senator Corderman, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4