START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1132 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1132 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Condominiums and Homeowners Associations - Resale Contracts - Notice 
Requirements (Keeping Affordable Housing Affordable Act) 
 
 
This bill alters the deadline within which specified information required for the resale of a 
unit within a condominium or a lot within a homeowners association (HOA) must be 
provided to the purchaser. Among other provisions, the bill also (1) requires the seller to 
provide notice of changes in mandatory fees and payments and other disclosures; (2) alters 
the fees a governing body for a condominium or HOA (or its agent) may charge for 
providing specified information; and (3) alters the time period within which a purchaser of 
a lot within an HOA may cancel a contract if the purchaser does not receive the required 
information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.    
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:      
 
Certificates and Information for the Resale of Condominium Units  
 
In General:  Generally, under current law, a contract for the resale of a unit by a unit owner 
other than the developer is not enforceable unless the owner provides specified 
information, including a certificate containing certain disclosures (e.g., a statement of fees 
payable by unit owners to the council of unit owners, the operating budget of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1132/ Page 2 
condominium, etc.) to the purchaser no later than 15 days prior to closing. The bill (1) alters 
the deadline from 15 days prior to closing to within 20 calendar days after entering into the 
contract and (2) adds that the owner must provide a written notice of any change in 
mandatory fees or payments exceeding 10 percent of the amount previously stated to exist 
or any other substantial and material change to the required disclosure after it become 
known to the seller.  
 
The bill makes an identical timing change to statutory provisions that specifically govern 
the resale of a unit within a condominium containing fewer than seven units.  
 
Under current law, on written request by the unit owner, the council of unit owners must 
provide within 20 days a certificate containing the information necessary to enable the unit 
owner to comply with the above requirements. The bill reduces, from 20 days to 10 days, 
the time within which the council of unit owners must comply.  
 
Fees:  Under current law, the written request from a unit owner must be accompanied by 
any reasonable fee charged by the council of unit owners; the fee may be up to $250 but 
may not exceed the actual cost to the council of unit owners to provide the information. 
The bill decreases the limitation on the fee from $250 to $100.  
 
Under current law, a council of unit owners is also entitled to a reasonable fee of up to 
$50 for delivery of the certificate within 14 days after a written request, or a fee of up to 
$100 for delivery of the certificate within 7 days. The bill repeals these provisions and 
instead limits the fees a council of unit owners may charge to (1) a maximum fee of $50 for 
delivery of the certificate within 5 days and (2) a maximum fee of $50 for a financial update 
ordered by a settlement agent.  
 
Current law requires DHCD to adjust the maximum fee every two years based on the 
aggregate two-year increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for the 
Washington Metropolitan Area (or a successor index) and post the adjusted maximum fees 
on its website. The bill repeals this requirement.  
 
Information for the Resale of Lots within a Homeowners Associations 
 
In General:  Under current law, a contract for the resale of a lot within an 
HOA development of any size (or the initial sale of a lot in a development containing 12 or 
fewer lots) is not enforceable by the seller unless the purchaser is provided with specified 
information before entering into the contract or within 20 days after doing so. This 
information includes, among other items, information regarding past and present monthly 
fees or assessments, the existence of any delinquent charges against the lot, and a copy of 
the HOA’s governing documents.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1132/ Page 3 
Under current law, to facilitate these requirements, an HOA, a management agent of an 
HOA, or any authorized officer or agent of an HOA must provide specified information to 
a lot owner within 20 days after receiving a written request from the lot owner. The bill 
decreases this time period to 10 days.  
 
Fees:  Under current law, the written request from a lot owner must be accompanied by 
any reasonable fee charged by the HOA; the fee may be up to $250 but may not exceed the 
actual cost to the HOA to provide the information. The bill decreases the limitation on the 
fee from $250 to $100.  
 
Under current law, an HOA is also entitled to a reasonable fee of up to $50 for delivery of 
the information within 14 days after a written request, or a fee of up to $100 for delivery 
of the information within 7 days. The bill repeals these provisions and instead limits the 
fees that the HOA may charge to (1) a maximum fee of $50 for delivery of the information 
within 5 days and (2) a maximum fee of $50 for a financial update ordered by a settlement 
agent.   
 
Termination of Contract:  Under current law, if a purchaser has not received all of the 
required information within five calendar days or more before entering into the contract 
(within an HOA community, as specified), the purchaser may cancel the contract – within 
five calendar days following the eventual receipt of the required specified disclosures – 
without stating a reason and without liability on the part of the purchaser. The bill extends 
each of these time periods to seven days and makes conforming changes to notices that 
must be presented to purchasers.   
 
Additional Comments:  For additional information on condominiums and HOAs – which, 
along with cooperative housing corporations, are known as common ownership 
communities – see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 898 and HB 1039 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1132/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1132/ Page 5 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 5