START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1156 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1156 
(Delegate Fisher) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Calvert County - Length of Service Award Program - Benefits 
 
 
This bill alters the Length of Service Award Program (LOSAP) in Calvert County. The bill 
increases the death or burial benefit amount that specified Calvert County volunteer fire 
and rescue members are eligible to receive under certain circumstances. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Calvert County expenditures may increase by approximately 
$16,000 annually beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Calvert County revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  LOSAP in Calvert County is for qualified active volunteer 
members of the Calvert County volunteer fire, rescue, and emergency medical services 
departments. 
 
Under current law, if a qualified volunteer who has completed 25 years of certified service 
dies, the qualified volunteer will receive a death benefit up to $10,000. Under the bill, if a 
qualified volunteer who has completed 25 years of certified service dies, the qualified 
volunteer will receive a death or burial benefit up to $14,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1156/ Page 2 
If any active volunteer fireman, squad member, or rescue dive team member (defined as 
an individual who has at least two years of qualifying service in the five preceding years) 
reaches 70 years of age and fails to achieve the required 25 years of service, the individual 
is entitled to a monthly benefit of the number of years of certified service completed 
multiplied by $8. Under current law, in the event of death, the individual is entitled to 
receive a burial benefit of $336 for each year of certified service. Under the bill, in the 
event of a death, the burial or death benefit is $560 for each year of certified service. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Based on the 10-year average rate of four deaths per year,  
Calvert County advises expenditures for death or burial benefits may increase  
$16,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. This estimate does not reflect the impact of 
increasing the death and burial benefits for certain volunteer fireman, squad member, or 
rescue dive team members that have not reached 25 years of service, as specified. 
 
According to the Calvert County fiscal 2025 audit report, the county contributed 
$1.1 million dollars to LOSAP. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2