START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1123 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1123 
(Delegate Stinnett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Minor's Access to Firearms - Penalty 
 
 
This bill establishes an incarceration penalty for a person storing or leaving a loaded 
firearm in a location where the person knew or should have known that an unsupervised 
minor has access to the firearm. The bill alters the penalty from a maximum fine of $1,000 
to imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of $1,000.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s 
alteration of penalty provisions. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially affect 
State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s alteration of penalty provisions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Access to a Firearm by a Minor 
 
A person may not store or leave a loaded firearm in a location where the person knew or 
should have known that an unsupervised minor has access to the firearm. A violator is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1123/ Page 2 
The prohibition does not apply if:   
 
 
the minor’s access to a firearm is supervised by an individual at least 18 years old; 
 
the minor’s access to a firearm was obtained as a result of an unlawful entry; 
 
the firearm is in the possession or control of a law enforcement officer while the 
officer is engaged in official duties; or 
 
the minor has a certificate of firearm and hunter safety issued under applicable 
provisions of the Natural Resources Article. 
 
A violation may not (1) be considered evidence of negligence; (2) be considered evidence 
of contributory negligence; (3) limit liability of a party or an insurer; or (4) diminish 
recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a firearm 
or ammunition. A party, witness, or lawyer may not refer to a violation during a trial of a 
civil action that involves property damage, personal injury, or death.  
 
Prohibition on Possession – Regulated Firearms 
 
A person may not possess a regulated firearm if the person (1) has been convicted on or 
after October 1, 2023, of a second or subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law 
Article (access to a firearm by a minor) or (2) has been convicted on or after 
October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 if the violation resulted in the use of a loaded 
firearm by a minor causing death or serious bodily injury to the minor or another person. 
In addition, a person who has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a violation of  
§ 4-104 may not possess a regulated firearm for five years following the date of the 
conviction. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, there were 51 filings and 1 conviction 
in the District Court and 39 filings and 2 convictions in the circuit court for violations of  
§ 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article during fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1518 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1123/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3