START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1172 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1172 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Economic Development Authority - Alterations  
Ho. Co. 14-26 
 
 
This bill alters provisions of the Public Local Laws of Howard County pertaining to the 
Board of Directors of the Howard County Economic Development Authority. The bill 
decreases, from once a month to once every other month, the frequency at which the board 
must meet. The bill repeals the requirement that the Chairman of the Mid-Maryland Private 
Industry Council designate a county private sector representative from the council to serve 
as an ex officio nonvoting member of the board and makes conforming changes. The bill 
also clarifies that the executive director of the board is the chief executive officer of the 
authority.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Howard County operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board consists of 13 voting members who are appointed by the 
county executive with the approval of the county council.  
 
The Chairman of the Mid-Maryland Private Industry Council must designate a county 
private sector representative from the council to be an ex officio nonvoting member of the 
board.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1172/ Page 2 
The board must meet at least once each month at the times and places that it determines 
and more often at the call of the chair.  
 
The county executive, subject to approval of the board, must nominate one or more 
candidates to serve as executive director, who is the chief administrative officer of the 
authority.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2