START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1101 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1101 
(Worcester County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Worcester County - Alcoholic Beverages - Temporary To-Go Event Permit and 
Class C Per Diem Municipal To-Go Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
 
This bill establishes, in Worcester County, a Class C per diem municipal to-go beer, wine, 
and liquor (BWL) license and a related temporary to-go event permit. The bill authorizes 
the Worcester County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to 
municipalities in the county, and authorizes the license holder to allow beer, wine, and 
liquor sold by the holder of a temporary to-go event permit to enter a designated 
special event 
area 
described 
in 
the 
license 
for 
a 
period 
not 
exceeding  
seven consecutive days, as specified. The bill also authorizes the board to issue a  
to-go event permit to the holder to a Class B BWL six‑day license or a Class B BWL 
seven‑day license located within or immediately adjacent to a special event area identified 
in and for use in conjunction with a Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL license. The 
board must establish regulations for the license and permit, as specified. The fee for the 
Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL license is $45 per day, and the fee for the temporary 
to‑go event permit is $20 per day. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Worcester County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2027, to the extent 
Class C per diem municipal to‑go BWL licenses and temporary to-go event permits are 
issued. Worcester County can handle the monitoring of any additional licenses or permits 
issued using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1101/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Class C Per Diem Municipal To-go License  
 
The board must adopt regulations related to the issuance of and requirements for a 
Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL license, including regulations related to (1) the 
designation of a special event area; (2) the hours of sale; (3) age verification requirements; 
(4) the use of specified to-go cups; (5) advertising, posting of notice, and public hearing 
requirements for the license and any associated temporary to-go event permit; and 
(6) public safety and event security requirements. 
 
Temporary To-go Event Permit 
 
The temporary to-go event permit authorizes the holder to sell at retail beer, wine, and 
liquor in approved to-go cups that may be carried outside the licensed established of a 
Class B BWL six-day license or a Class B BWL seven-day license and into the designated 
special event area. The permit holder must be responsible for complying with all applicable 
laws and regulations. 
 
The board must adopt regulations related to the issuance of and requirements for the permit, 
including regulations related to (1) the designation of a special event area; (2) the hours of 
sale; (3) age verification requirements; (4) the use of specified to-go cups; and 
(5) advertising, posting of notice, and public hearing requirements for the temporary  
to-go event permit. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the Worcester County Board of License Commissioners is 
authorized to issue a Class B BWL six-day or seven-day license to hotels that meet 
specified room and seating requirements and to restaurants that meet specified seating 
requirements and have average daily receipts from the sale of food exceeding the 
average daily receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages, as specified. The annual fee is 
$1,750 for a six-day license, and $2,000 for a seven-day license. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Worcester County revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the 
extent the board issues Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL licenses and temporary 
to‑go event permits. The number of municipalities that will apply for a license under the 
bill is unknown, and any related permits are dependent on where the license is issued and 
if any Class B BWL license holders choose to apply for a permit. Therefore, any potential 
increase in Worcester County license and permit fee revenues under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated. Worcester County can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1101/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 846 (Senator Carozza) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Worcester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3