START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1135 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1135 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Occupations - Pharmacists - Vaccination Orders 
 
 
This bill authorizes a pharmacist to order a vaccine for an individual who is at least  
three years old without the pharmacist administering the vaccine. If a vaccination is 
administered to an individual younger than 18, or ordered for administration by an adult 
caregiver to an individual younger than 18, the pharmacist must inform the patient and 
adult caregiver of the importance of visits with a pediatric primary care provider and refer 
the patient to a pediatric primary care provider when appropriate. The bill also makes 
conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A pharmacist may order and administer a vaccination to an individual who 
is at least age three if the vaccine is (1) an influenza vaccine; (2) a COVID-19 vaccine; or 
(3) used in response to a public health emergency. A pharmacist must have completed 
specified training, hold current cardiopulmonary resuscitation certification, complete 
specified continuing education as part of license renewal, comply with recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements, and inform child vaccination patients and their caregivers of the 
importance of well-child visits and refer them to a pediatric primary care provider when 
appropriate.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1135/ Page 2 
A pharmacist who has met the above noted requirements may administer to an individual 
who is at least age seven a vaccination that is (1) recommended by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) or 
(2) approved or authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). For adults, 
a pharmacist may administer a vaccination that is recommended in CDC’s Health 
Information for International Travel. 
 
Chapter 738 of 2025 specifies that the ACIP recommendations governing the 
administration of vaccinations by pharmacists refer to federal statutes, rules, and guidance 
in effect either on December 31, 2024, or at a later date to account for any new vaccines 
recommended by ACIP after that date.  
 
A pharmacist must report all vaccinations administered by the pharmacist to the 
ImmuNet Program and generally must document at least one effort to inform the patient’s 
authorized prescriber or primary care provider of the administration of the vaccine. 
 
Additional Comments:  In September 2024, the FDA approved FluMist, a nasal spray for 
prevention of influenza, for administration by the self or a caregiver.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 773 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2