START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1144 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1144 
(Delegate Crutchfield) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child Support - Adjusted Actual Income - Definition 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “adjusted actual income” under the child support 
guidelines, specific to the conditions under which an allowance of support for other 
children living in the home must be deducted from actual income. Under the bill, “adjusted 
actual income” means actual income minus – in addition to certain obligations paid, 
consistent with existing provisions – an allowance of support for each child living in the 
parent’s home to whom the parent owes a legal duty of support if the child is considered to 
be spending more than 25% of the child’s overnights (at least 92 overnights) in the parent’s 
home in a year and not subject to the support order. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In a proceeding to establish or modify child support, whether pendente lite 
or permanent, the court is required to use the child support guidelines. The basic child 
support obligation is established in accordance with a schedule provided in statute. The 
current schedule uses the combined monthly adjusted actual income of both parents and 
the number of children for whom support is required to determine the basic child support 
obligation. Adjusted actual income, which is the basis for determining the basic child 
support obligation, is calculated from actual income minus (1) preexisting reasonable child 
support obligations actually paid; (2) except as specified, alimony or maintenance 
obligations actually paid; and (3) an allowance for support for each child living in the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1144/ Page 2 
parent’s home to whom the parent owes a legal duty of support if the child is considered to 
be spending more than 92 overnights in the parent’s home in a year and not subject to the 
support order. 
 
For purposes of determining the allowance deduction, the following calculation must be 
used:   
 
 
the basic support obligation for each additional child in the parent’s home must be 
determined according to the guidelines, using only the actual income of the parent 
entitled to the deduction; and  
 
this amount is to be multiplied by 75%. 
 
This amount is to be subtracted from the parent’s actual income before the child support 
obligation is computed. The court must decline awarding an allowance under these 
provisions if the court finds, after considering the evidence and the best interest of the child 
for whom support is being determined, that the application of an allowance would be unjust 
or inappropriate.  
 
The child support statute establishes a rebuttable presumption that the amount of child 
support that would result from the application of the child support guidelines is the correct 
amount of child support that the court is to award. The presumption may be rebutted, 
however, by evidence that the application of the guidelines would be unjust or 
inappropriate in a particular case. If the court determines that application of the guidelines 
would be unjust or inappropriate in a particular case, the court must make a written finding 
or specific finding on the record that states the reasons for departure from the guidelines, 
as required by statute. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2