START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1182 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1182 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public and Nonpublic Schools - Student Elopement - Locative Devices 
 
 
This bill authorizes a school to coordinate a student’s voluntary use of a locative device 
and monitor the student’s location only if (1) the student has a documented history of 
wandering or elopement in the student’s individualized education program (IEP) or 
behavior intervention plan and (2) the student’s parent or guardian provides informed 
consent. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must issue advisory 
guidance to schools on incorporating a student’s use of a locative device and related 
privacy protections, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MSDE can issue advisory guidance with existing budgeted resources. 
No effect on revenues.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature and therefore has no direct effect on local 
school systems’ operations or finances. If a school elects to use locative devices, it may 
incur costs to purchase the devices and data plans, and must abide by privacy and data 
protection protocols; any resulting costs are discretionary. No effect on revenues.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “locative device” is a wearable or portable electronic device that is 
capable of locating a student during an elopement incident.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1182/ Page 2 
A school may monitor a student’s location using a locative device only for wandering or 
elopement behavior. It must limit information obtained through the device to information 
that is reasonably necessary to address or respond to a student’s wandering or elopement 
behavior and maintain any information obtained in accordance with applicable federal and 
State laws. The bill further specifies the personnel who may access the information and 
under what circumstances. 
 
MSDE’s guidance must grant a school discretion as to whether and how to implement a 
student’s voluntary use of a locative device.  
 
The bill may not be construed to require (1) a school to provide, purchase, reimburse, 
manage, or monitor a locative device to a related service plan or (2) a parent, guardian, or 
student to purchase or use a locative device. 
 
A school must develop policies and procedures to implement requirements related to 
wandering and elopement, and may develop policies and procedures to implement the 
voluntary use of locative devices. 
 
Current Law:  “Elopement” means the act of a student leaving the school campus without 
the permission of the school staff member who is responsible for the student. “Wandering” 
means the act of a student leaving a classroom or area on the school campus, as specified.  
 
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that a child with 
disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student turns 
21 years old, in accordance with the Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) or the IEP 
specific to the individual needs of the child. An IFSP is for children with disabilities from 
birth up to age 3, and up to age 5, under Maryland’s Extended IFSP Option if a parent 
chooses the option. An IEP is for students with disabilities age 3 through 21. Local school 
systems are required to make a free appropriate public education available to students with 
disabilities from age 3 through 21. However, the State, under its supervisory authority 
required by IDEA, has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that this obligation is met. 
 
Each time a student attempts or accomplishes an elopement, the school must notify the 
parent or guardian on the same day. At least one time each year, a school or a student’s IEP 
team must review and address with relevant stakeholders a student’s wandering or 
elopement behavior in updating the IEP or behavior intervention plan. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1182/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland School for 
the Deaf; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3