START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1185 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1185 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission - Personnel Management - 
Disciplinary Actions  
PG/MC 104-26 
 
 
This bill requires the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC), before taking 
disciplinary action against an employee, to (1) investigate the alleged misconduct; (2) meet 
with the employee; (3) consider mitigating circumstances; (4) determine the appropriate 
disciplinary action; and (5) give the employee a written notice, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) advises that it can implement 
the bill using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  WSSC can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. WSSC 
revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes WSSC employees to appeal a suspension for 
disciplinary reasons to OAH. WSSC has up to 30 days after learning about the misconduct 
to take disciplinary action against an employee. WSSC may suspend an employee 
without pay up to five workdays following the close of the employee’s next shift after the 
commission acquires knowledge of the misconduct for which the suspension is imposed. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1185/ Page 2 
Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and employee leave days do not count toward the 
five-workday period. 
 
The bill requires OAH to dispose of a case or conduct a hearing and issue a final decision 
in an appeal for the suspension of a WSSC employee. 
 
Current Law:  WSSC is among the largest water and wastewater utilities in the country, 
providing water and sewer services to 1.9 million residents in Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties. It has more than 475,000 customer accounts, serves an area of 
nearly 1,000 square miles, and has a network of 5,900 miles of drinking water pipeline and 
over 5,600 miles of sewer main lines. 
 
WSSC has over 1,800 employees. The commission’s total fiscal 2026 operating budget is 
$1.1 billion, which includes approximately $200 million in salaries and wages. 
 
Suspension of Employees 
 
WSSC may suspend an employee, for disciplinary purposes, up to 30 days. Each 
suspension must be without pay. An employee may not be suspended for disciplinary 
purposes for more than 30 days in a calendar year. Based on existing caseload data, WSSC 
has averaged approximately 16 annual employee suspensions in the last three fiscal years. 
 
Permanent Removal of Employees 
 
A WSSC employee may not be permanently removed except for cause and after an 
opportunity to be heard. A WSSC employee may not be permanently removed from the 
merit system because of religious or political opinions or affiliations. An employee who is 
permanently removed may appeal to OAH. Based on existing caseload data, the number of 
appeals to OAH tends to be limited. In both 2024 and 2025, OAH has handled only 
one case each year. Prior to that, OAH last handled a case in 2021. 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
OAH has been delegated authority by the Department of Budget and Management to 
conduct State Personnel Management System hearings. OAH must dispose of a case or 
conduct a hearing and issue a final decision in any appeal for the removal of an employee 
of WSSC. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1185/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of Administrative Hearings; Montgomery and Prince 
George’s counties; Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3