START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1107 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1107 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Required 
Coverage for Aesthetic Services and Restorative Care for Victims of Domestic 
Violence (Healing Our Scars Act) 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively carriers), as well as Medicaid, to provide coverage to a victim 
of domestic violence for aesthetic services and restorative care specifically related to scars 
or scarring. The requirement applies when the services and care are provided for the 
treatment of physical injuries caused by domestic violence and determined to be medically 
necessary by a licensed physician. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to 
all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the 
State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of 
form filings can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Any impact on Medicaid and 
the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program (State plan) is 
indeterminate, as discussed below. Medicaid expenditures would be subject to a 
50% federal match if approved by the federal Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services 
(CMS). 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases the cost of health insurance, expenditures for 
local governments that purchase fully insured plans may increase. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 381/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Domestic Violence 
 
Under § 4-513 of the Family Law Article, “victim of domestic violence” means an 
individual who has received deliberate, severe, and demonstrable physical injury, or is in 
fear of imminent deliberate, severe, and demonstrable physical injury from a current or 
former spouse, or a current or former cohabitant. “Cohabitant” means a person who has 
had a sexual relationship with the respondent and resided with the respondent in the home 
for a period of at least 90 days within one year before the filing of a petition for a protective 
order. 
 
Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential 
health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services in the following categories:  
(1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity 
and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use disorder services, including 
behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services, including dental and vision care. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 
For additional information on mandated health insurance benefits in Maryland, please see 
the Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits. 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission Study 
 
In December 2025, the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) submitted a mandate 
study as requested by the Senate Finance Committee on proposed legislation (Senate Bill 
508/House Bill 381 of 2025) to require coverage for aesthetic services and restorative care 
for victims of domestic violence. Using 2024 as the base year, the report’s modeling 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 381/ Page 3 
indicates that the proposed mandate would increase insurance costs per member per month 
(PMPM) across all market segments. For fully insured plans and the State plan, the 
estimated increase to insurance costs ranges from $0.02 to $0.15 PMPM, representing 
percentage increases of 0.00% to 0.03%. For Medicaid, the projected increase is  
$0.07 (0.02%) to $0.47 (0.11%) PMPM. The report noted that estimating the fiscal impact 
is challenging due to “the lack of comprehensive data and research” on domestic violence 
and related injuries in the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As the bill does not define “aesthetic services and restorative care” 
related to scars or scarring, it is unclear which specific services must be covered. 
Furthermore, it is difficult to quantify the number of individuals who may be eligible for 
services under the bill. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) notes that, while there 
are diagnosis codes providers may use to identify an individual as a victim of domestic 
violence, providers do not consistently use these codes in practice. Furthermore, domestic 
violence is often underreported. 
 
Medicaid 
 
MDH advises that Medicaid currently covers services that address physical injuries that 
occur during a physical altercation, including reconstructive surgery and restoration of 
function. Cosmetic services that are intended to improve a patient’s physical appearance 
but do not restore or materially improve a body function are not covered. Additionally, 
coverage for dental services through the adult benefits package may not cover all injuries 
that could occur during a domestic violence altercation. Currently, Medicaid does not cover 
partial or full dentures or dental implants. The cost of providing these services may be 
significant, depending on the number of individuals who may require them. 
 
Accordingly, to the extent Medicaid is required to cover additional services beyond those 
already covered, Medicaid expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
fiscal 2027. Expenditures would be subject to a 50% federal match if approved by CMS. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, based on the range of potential costs from the 2025 MHCC 
study, Medicaid expenditures could increase by between $1.3 million and $9.4 million in 
total funds annually under the bill. 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The State plan is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, except for the 
one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is not subject to this bill. 
However, the program generally provides coverage as otherwise required under State law. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 381/ Page 4 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that the requirement to cover aesthetic 
services and restorative care related to scars or scarring for victims of domestic violence 
has an indeterminate fiscal impact on the program. However, without additional 
information, the impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, based on the range of potential costs from the 2025 MHCC 
study, program expenditures may increase only marginally or up to 3% annually under the 
bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the bill does not apply to the nongrandfathered 
individual and small employer markets. Should the bill be amended to apply to all markets, 
the State would be required to defray the cost of the new mandate to the extent it applies 
to the individual and small group ACA plans. 
 
Effective January 1, 2024, Illinois requires carriers and Medicaid to cover medically 
necessary “reconstructive services” (treatments performed on structures of the body 
damaged by trauma to restore physical appearance). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 508 and HB 381 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 381/ Page 5 
Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
 
Overview 
 
Fully insured, large group plans and certain individual plans must cover Maryland’s 
mandated health insurance benefits. These mandates do not apply to most individual or 
small group plans, public health insurance, or plans issued outside of Maryland. However, 
individual and small group plans and plans sold through the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) must cover federal essential health benefits (EHBs). Thus, the type of 
plan an individual is enrolled in generally determines which benefits must be provided. 
 
Most Marylanders Are Insured by Employment-based Coverage 
 
Maryland residents generally obtain health insurance from one of three sources:  
(1) employment-based coverage; (2) private coverage in the individual market; or 
(3) public health insurance provided by the State and/or federal government (i.e., Medicaid, 
the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and military-related 
coverage). In calendar 2023 (the most recent data available), more than one-half (53.9%) 
of the State’s population had employment-based coverage, more than one-third (34.1%) 
were covered by public health insurance programs, and 5.7% purchased coverage in the 
individual market. The remaining 6.5% of Marylanders were uninsured. 
 
State Regulation of Insurance Applies Only to Certain Plans 
 
Employment-based coverage is either fully insured or self-insured. A fully insured plan is 
a traditional model for health insurance under which an employer pays a fixed premium to 
an insurer and the insurer assumes all financial risk and responsibility for paying claims. 
Fully insured plans are most common among small to mid-sized businesses as they offer 
more predictable costs and less administrative burden. In a self-insured plan, the employer 
assumes all financial risk and pays claims directly, usually through a third‑party 
administrator. Self-insured plans are more common among larger employers with the 
resources to assume the financial risk. 
 
The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act preempts states’ ability to require 
private employers to offer health insurance coverage and exempts self-insured plans from 
state insurance regulation. As a result, only fully insured plans are regulated by state 
insurance regulators. Thus, in Maryland, self-insured plans are not regulated by the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and are not subject to Maryland law. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 381/ Page 6 
In calendar 2024, 2.58 million Maryland residents younger than age 65 were insured 
through commercial health benefit plans, of which 890,245 were covered by a fully insured 
plan and 1.69 million were covered by a self-insured plan. Thus, only about one‑third 
(34.5%) of those covered through commercial plans were in fully insured plans subject to 
State regulation. Overall, only 17.4% of the State’s nonelderly population was covered by 
a plan subject to State regulation. 
 
Mandated Benefits Apply Only to Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
Maryland law requires insurers, health maintenance organizations, and nonprofit health 
service plans to cover more than 50 specific benefits. These “mandated benefits” apply to 
expense‑incurred contracts that provide “hospital, medical, and surgical benefits,” which 
include non-major medical products and federally excepted benefits (benefits outside of 
primary medical coverage that are not subject to certain federal requirements). These 
include fully insured, large group plans (≥50 employees), individual grandfathered plans 
in effect on or before March 23, 2010, when the federal Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) was enacted, and limited or specialty plans such as fixed-indemnity plans. 
Maryland’s State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
predominately self-insured and thus largely exempt from mandated benefits. However, the 
program generally provides coverage for these benefits as otherwise required under State 
law. 
 
Mandated benefits could apply to individual and small group policies. However, if the 
benefits go beyond those in the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that defines the 
minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group markets in 
Maryland), the State must cover the cost. Thus, mandated benefits are not typically applied 
to those policies. 
 
Mandated benefits do not apply to Medicaid/MCHP, Medicare, the Federal Employees 
Health Benefits Program, or military/Veterans Administration coverage. Mandated 
benefits also do not apply to health benefit plans issued outside of Maryland – such as when 
a Maryland resident works for an employer based in another state and the plan is issued in 
that state. In that instance, the plan is subject to the requirements (and mandated benefits) 
of the state in which it is issued. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes mandated benefits for large group and grandfathered plans. For 
further specifics on mandated benefits, see Title 15, Subtitle 8 of the Insurance Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 381/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland’s Mandated Health Insurance Benefits for 
Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
 Amino-acid elemental formula 
 Anesthesia for dental care 
 Biomarker testing 
 Blood products 
 Breast cancer screening 
 Breast prosthesis following a mastectomy 
 Child well visits and immunizations 
 Chlamydia screening 
 Cleft lip/palate treatment/management 
 Clinical trials 
 Colorectal cancer screening 
 Contraceptive drugs or devices 
 Diabetic equipment or supplies 
 Emergency room services 
 Fertility awareness-based methods 
 Fertility preservation due to medical 
treatment that may cause infertility 
 Gynecological care 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Human papilloma virus screening 
 Infertility benefits (including IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Laboratory services 
 Lung cancer screening 
 Lymphedema diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment 
 Male sterilization 
 Mastectomies 
 Medical foods 
 Mental health and substance use 
treatment 
 Morbid obesity surgical treatment 
 Osteoporosis prevention and treatment 
 Ostomy equipment and supplies 
 Physician services 
 Pregnancy and maternity benefits 
 Prescription benefits 
 Preventive services 
 Prosthetic devices 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Reconstructive breast surgery 
 Referrals to specialists 
 Second opinions and coverage of 
outpatient services 
 Smoking cessation 
 Surgical removal of testicles 
 Temporo-Mandibular Joint Syndrome 
treatment 
 X-rays 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Mandated benefits as of January 2025. Coverage of calcium score testing is required beginning 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 381/ Page 8 
Application of Mandated Benefits in Practice 
 
Legislation is frequently introduced to add new mandated benefits. For example, 
Senate Bill 518 of 2025 would have required coverage for preventive screenings for 
ovarian cancer for individuals aged 45 and older. The bill would have applied only to 
commercial health insurance, specifically fully insured large group plans and individual 
grandfathered plans. Coverage would not have applied to self-insured plans, 
nongrandfathered individual or small group plans, plans issued in another state to a 
Maryland resident, or any public health insurance program (in the same way that current 
mandated benefits do not apply to these plans). 
 
Essential Health Benefits Apply to Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Maryland law requires that EHBs be included in the State benchmark plan and in all 
qualified health plans offered through MHBE. Exhibit 2 summarizes the EHBs required 
as of September 2025. For further specifics, see MIA’s Essential Health Benefits Chart:  
Individual and Small Group Plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 381/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 2 
Essential Health Benefits for Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
 Allergy serum 
 Ambulance service 
 Bariatric surgery 
 Blood and blood products 
 Breast reconstructive surgery/prosthesis 
 Cardiac rehabilitation 
 Care in office for illness or injury 
 Case management 
 Chiropractic services 
 Controlled clinical trials 
 Diabetic treatment/equipment/supplies 
 Durable medical equipment 
 Emergency services 
 Family planning services 
 General anesthesia/associated care for 
dental care for children 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Hospice 
 Infertility services (excludes IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Medical food 
 Mental health and substance use 
benefits 
 Nutritional services 
 Outpatient hospital services 
 Outpatient laboratory/diagnostic 
services 
 Outpatient short-term rehabilitation 
 Patient centered medical homes 
 Pediatric dental 
 Pediatric vision 
 Pregnancy and maternity 
 Prescription drugs 
 Preventive services 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Pulmonary rehabilitation 
 Skilled nursing facility 
 Transplants 
 Wellness benefits
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Essential health benefits as of September 2025. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9