START OF PAGE 1
HB1164/983920/1

BY: Environment and Transportation Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1164
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 3, strike “Rate Consolidation and”; strike beginning with
“requiring” in line 4 down through “period;” in line 9; in line 11, after “companies;”
insert “requiring the Public Service Commission to study the feasibility of requiring
certain companies to adopt a limited–income mechanism to benefit limited–income
customers;”; in line 16, strike “and 4–309(d)”; and in line 21, strike “4–307 and 4–309(a)
and (e)” and substitute “4–309”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On pages 2 and 3, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 20 on page
2 through line 30 on page 3, inclusive.

On page 4, after line 22, insert:

“(b) The General Assembly finds and declares that the societal benefits of a
well–constructed limited–income mechanism to benefit Maryland’s eligible limited–
income customers are in the public interest.

(c) (1) Subject to the approval of the Commission, a utility company shall
adopt a limited–income mechanism to benefit an eligible limited–income customer.

(2) Notwithstanding § 4–503(b) of this title, the mechanism may take
the form of a program, tariff provision, credit, rate, rider, or other means to assist an
eligible limited–income customer to afford a utility service.

(3) A municipal electric utility may adopt a limited–income mechanism
subject to the approval of the Commission in the same manner as a utility company in
accordance with this section.”.

On page 5, after line 27, insert:
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1164/983920/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 1164
Page 2 of 3

“(f) If an approved limited–income mechanism requires that the Office of Home
Energy Programs must certify an eligible limited–income customer’s qualifications to
participate in a limited–income mechanism, the Office shall certify an eligible limited–
income customer’s qualifications before the customer may participate in the mechanism.

(g) An eligible limited–income customer who participates in a mechanism
under this section may also be eligible for other assistance programs offered in the State,
including those offered by a utility company or the Office of Home Energy Programs,
the Department of Housing and Community Development, or any other public or private
source.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Eligible limited–income customer” and “limited–income
mechanism” have the meanings stated in § 4–309 of the Public Utilities Article.

(3) “Sewage disposal company” and “water company” have the
meanings stated in § 1–101 of the Public Utilities Article.

(b) The Public Service Commission shall study the feasibility of requiring the
following companies to adopt a limited–income mechanism to benefit eligible limited–
income customers:

(1) a water company;

(2) a water and sewage disposal company; and

(3) a sewage disposal company.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB1164/983920/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 1164
Page 3 of 3

(c) On or before December 1, 2026, the Public Service Commission shall report
its findings to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
take effect July 1, 2027.”;

in line 28, strike “2.” and substitute “4.”; and in line 28, after “That” insert “, except as
provided in Section 3 of this Act,”.
END OF PAGE 3