START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1150 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1150 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Health 
 
 
Health Occupations - Pharmacists - Minor Conditions and HIV Prevention and 
Treatment 
 
 
This bill authorizes a pharmacist to order, test for, screen for, and treat certain minor 
conditions in accordance with a statewide written protocol established by the Maryland 
Board of Pharmacy. The bill repeals the Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis 
(nPEP) Standing Order Program and instead authorizes the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) to establish a statewide written protocol for the delivery of pre-exposure and 
postexposure prophylaxis medications for the prevention and treatment of human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The bill also updates the definition of “practice pharmacy” 
in accordance with the additional authorizations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $42,100 in FY 2027 only for 
contractual staff to develop a statewide protocol for the prevention and treatment of HIV. 
Board special fund expenditures increase by $112,800 in FY 2027 for staff, as discussed 
below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Board special fund revenues 
may increase to cover special fund expenditures (not shown below). 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
42,100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
112,800 
127,900 
134,200 
140,400 
146,700 
Net Effect 
($155,000) 
($127,900) 
($134,200) 
($140,400) 
($146,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1150/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Minor Conditions 
 
The minor conditions that a pharmacist may order, test for, screen for, and treat include 
cold sores; Group A streptococcus pharyngitis (strep throat); influenza; lice; COVID-19 
and other respiratory illnesses, conditions, or diseases; skin conditions, including ringworm 
and athlete’s foot; urinary tract infection; and other emerging and existing public health 
threats identified by MDH, if authorized by an order, rule, or regulation. 
 
A pharmacist may use any test that may guide clinical decision making that is classified as 
waived under specified federal rules, or any screening procedure established by statewide 
written protocol. A test does not require a letter of exception from MDH. A pharmacist 
may delegate administrative and clinical tasks of performing a test to a registered pharmacy 
technician, pharmacy student, or an individual engaged in a board-approved pharmacy 
technician training program under supervision of a pharmacist. 
 
Prevention and Treatment of HIV 
 
In accordance with the established statewide written protocol for the prevention and 
treatment of HIV, a pharmacist may (1) perform and interpret laboratory tests; (2) conduct 
assessments and consultations; (3) initiate, dispense, or administer pre-exposure or 
postexposure prophylaxis medications; and (4) provide referrals for additional care.  
 
Definition of Practice Pharmacy 
 
The definition of “practice pharmacy” is expanded to include: 
 
 
prescribing drugs or devices, excluding controlled substances, that are prescribed 
(1) in accordance with the product’s U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)‑approved labeling and (2) to treat conditions that do not require a new 
diagnosis, are minor and generally self-limiting, or have a test that is used to guide 
diagnosis or clinical decision making that is classified as waived; or 
 
performing and interpreting laboratory tests for HIV and prescribing and dispensing 
pre-exposure prophylaxis and postexposure prophylaxis medications. 
 
Current Law:  “Practice pharmacy” means engaging in any of the following:   
 
 
providing pharmaceutical care; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1150/ Page 3 
 
compounding, dispensing, or distributing prescription drugs or devices; 
 
compounding or dispensing nonprescription drugs or devices; 
 
monitoring prescriptions for prescription and nonprescription drugs or devices; 
 
providing information, explanation, or recommendations to patients and health care 
practitioners about the safe and effective use of prescription or nonprescription 
drugs or devices; 
 
identifying and appraising problems concerning the use or monitoring of therapy 
with drugs or devices; 
 
acting within the parameters of a therapy management contract; 
 
administering vaccinations, self-administered drugs, or maintenance injectable 
medications; 
 
delegating a pharmacy act to a registered pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, 
or individual engaged in a board-approved pharmacy technician training program; 
 
providing drug therapy management; 
 
prescribing and dispensing contraceptive medications and self-administered 
contraceptive devices approved by the FDA; 
 
prescribing and dispensing nicotine replacement therapy medications; or 
 
if the pharmacist is registered with the nonoccupational postexposure prophylaxis 
(nPEP) medication approved by the FDA or Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). 
 
Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis Standing Order Program 
 
Chapter 753 of 2024 established the nPEP Standing Order Program. nPEP is a 28-day 
course of three antiretroviral medications that an individual must begin taking within 
72 hours of exposure to HIV to prevent transmission. The program must (1) authorize a 
pharmacist registered with the program to dispense nPEP through a standing order; 
(2) authorize a licensed health care provider with prescribing authority to prescribe and 
dispense nPEP through a standing order; and (3) operate in accordance with the procedures 
approved by MDH with the advice and approval of the State Board of Pharmacy. 
 
At the time of dispensing nPEP, a pharmacist registered with the program must (1) screen 
the patient to determine that HIV exposure occurred within 72 hours before the dispensing; 
(2) determine whether the patient meets clinical criteria consistent with CDC guidelines, 
including the identification of any contraindicated medications; (3) determine whether an 
available standing order is appropriate for the patient and dispense nPEP in accordance 
with CDC guidelines; (4) refer the patient to a disease intervention specialist within MDH 
for ongoing treatment; and (5) determine whether the patient has a primary care provider 
and, if so, notify the provider that the patient was dispensed nPEP or, if not, provide the 
patient with a list of primary care providers and clinics. If an available standing order is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1150/ Page 4 
not appropriate for the patient, the pharmacist must refer the patient to a primary care 
provider. A pharmacist may dispense nPEP in accordance with a drug therapy management 
contract.  
 
Chapter 684 of 2022 prohibits carriers and Medicaid managed care organizations from 
applying a prior authorization requirement for a prescription drug used as postexposure 
prophylaxis (or PEP) for the prevention of HIV if the prescription drug is prescribed for 
use in accordance with CDC guidelines.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Board of Pharmacy 
 
The Board of Pharmacy advises that expanding the scope of practice for pharmacists under 
the bill requires additional staff for oversight. Thus, board special fund expenditures 
increase by $112,808 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective 
date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) licensing specialist and 
one part-time (50%) inspector to assist the board in developing a statewide written protocol 
for the testing and treatment of minor conditions by pharmacists and to oversee the 
additional responsibilities of pharmacists and ensure public safety. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Full-time Equivalent Positions 
1 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$96,609 
Operating Expenses 
    16,199 
Total FY 2027 Special Fund Expenditures 
$112,808 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The board advises that, as it is self-funded, it may need to increase fees to cover the impact 
of the bill. Thus, special fund revenues may increase sufficient to cover these expenses. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH’s Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA) advises that it would be 
required to dismantle the nPEP Standing Order Program and create statewide written 
protocols for the delivery of pre-exposure and postexposure prophylaxis medications. For 
this, PHPA advises it would require additional staff in fiscal 2027 only. Therefore, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $42,145 in fiscal 2027 only, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2026, effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring  
one part-time (50%) contractual pharmacist to develop statewide protocols for the delivery 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1150/ Page 5 
of pre-exposure and postexposure prophylaxis medications. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$33,469 
Operating Expenses 
    8,676 
Total FY 2027 General Fund Expenditures 
$42,145 
 
Future year expenditures reflect the termination of the position on June 30, 2027.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect: Pharmacists at small business pharmacies can perform additional 
duties under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 506 (Senator Lewis Young) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5