START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1252 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1252 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development - Montgomery County 
Study  
MC 19-26 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
study and make recommendations regarding housing availability and affordability in 
Montgomery County. DHCD must submit a preliminary report of its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly, Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning 
Commission, Montgomery County Planning Department, Montgomery County Executive, 
and Montgomery County Delegation by February 1, 2027, and again the following year. 
DHCD must submit a final report of its findings and recommendations by  
February 1, 2029. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2027 through FY 2029, to hire a consultant to complete the required study. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1252/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study and making recommendations, as specified, 
DHCD must:   
 
 
identify the makeup of available housing in Montgomery County by unit type; 
 
identify any development prospects in Montgomery County; and 
 
determine the impact of regulations and market forces on Montgomery County’s 
housing supply.  
 
DHCD must confer with the Montgomery County Department of Housing and Community 
Affairs, Department of Permitting Services, and Planning Department regarding data 
collection and analysis. Before issuing each report, DHCD must provide each of these 
agencies with the opportunity to provide a written response to its findings and 
recommendations and include the responses as appendices in the report. 
 
Current Law:  Among other responsibilities, DHCD administers several programs that 
provide financial assistance related to affordable housing. Among these are the Partnership 
Rental Housing Program and the Rental Housing Program, which award grants and loans 
for affordable single-family or multifamily housing:   
 
 
Partnership Rental Housing Program:  The Partnership Rental Housing Program is 
intended to expand the supply of affordable housing for low-income households. 
Among other potential program participants, DHCD is authorized to provide 
financial assistance to political subdivisions or housing authorities to acquire, 
construct, reconstruct, renovate, or rehabilitate rental housing that is affordable to 
households of limited income. The fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes 
$8.0 million in general obligation (GO) bonds for the program. 
 
Rental Housing Program:  The Rental Housing Program is intended to, among other 
things, stimulate the production of rental housing and use available resources 
efficiently to serve households that are in need of quality affordable housing 
opportunities, including families, the elderly, and persons with disabilities or special 
needs. Loans may be issued to private or nonprofit sponsors, political subdivisions, 
or local housing authorities on behalf of sponsors of proposed rental housing units. 
The fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes $65.0 million in GO bonds, 
$19.5 million in special funds, and $9.0 million in federal funds for the program. 
 
State Expenditures:  DHCD advises that it does not have enough staff to conduct the 
study and analysis in the timeframe set forth in the bill. Therefore, DHCD advises that it 
intends to use a combination of existing staff from the Division of Policy, Strategy, and 
Research and an outside vendor. Based on information provided by DHCD, the Department 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1252/ Page 3 
of Legislative Services estimates that general fund expenditures increase by approximately 
$50,000 in fiscal 2027, and annually through fiscal 2029, for DHCD to hire a consultant to 
conduct the study and perform the analysis required by the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  In July of 2025, DHCD published the Maryland Housing Needs 
Assessment Update, which can be found here. The report contains a detailed analysis 
regarding the extent of the problem of housing shortages and high housing costs, 
contributing factors, and impacts on Maryland residents. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Montgomery County; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3