START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1221 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1221 
(Delegates Foley and Hutchinson) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Safety - Short-Term Rental Units - Safety (Jillian and Lindsay Wiener 
Short-Term Rental Safety Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the inclusion of specified fire prevention and detection equipment in all 
short-term rental units offered for short-term rental for less than 30 consecutive days. By 
July 1, 2028, each county and Baltimore City in which short-term rentals are allowed must, 
by local law or regulation, require the annual inspection of all short-term rental units in the 
jurisdiction for compliance, as specified. By October 1, 2028, the State Fire Marshal must 
report to the General Assembly on the information reported to the State Fire Marshal by 
the counties and Baltimore City in accordance with the bill. The bill may not be construed 
to (1) require a county or Baltimore City to authorize the use of short-term rentals in the 
jurisdiction or (2) preempt or prohibit a county or Baltimore City from enacting other 
measures regarding short-term rentals in the jurisdiction in addition to the measures 
required by the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Fire Marshal can likely comply with the bill’s requirements with 
existing resources, as discussed below. The application of existing criminal penalty 
provisions to violations of the bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase to the extent local governments must inspect 
short-term rental units and hire additional inspectors, as discussed below. Local revenues 
increase to the extent local governments establish fees to cover the cost of short-term rental 
unit inspections. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1221/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Selected Definitions 
 
“Booking service” means a person who, directly or indirectly, (1) provides specified 
platforms that generally list and advertise short-term rentals and accept offers for 
short‑term rentals or allow reservation or payment for short-term rentals and (2) receives a 
fee for the use of the platform or any other service provided in connection with a short‑term 
rental. “Booking service” does not include a platform that solely lists or advertises offers 
for short-term rentals. 
 
“Short-term rental host” means a person in legal possession of a short-term rental unit who 
rents the unit to guests. 
 
Short-term Rental Units – Required Evacuation Plans and Safety Equipment 
 
In a short-term rental unit, a short-term rental host must (1) conspicuously post an 
evacuation diagram identifying all exits from the short-term rental unit and, if applicable, 
the exits from the building in which the short-term rental unit is located; (2) conspicuously 
post a list of emergency telephone numbers for law enforcement and fire rescue services; 
(3) provide a working fire extinguisher; and (4) provide working smoke and carbon 
monoxide alarms. 
 
A smoke alarm or a carbon monoxide alarm must be installed and maintained in accordance 
with State, county, and municipal fire codes. If multiple smoke alarms are required to be 
installed and maintained in the short-term rental unit, each smoke alarm must (1) be 
interconnected with other smoke alarms so that the activation of one smoke alarm activates 
all smoke alarms in the unit or (2) comply with an alternative requirement authorized by 
the State Fire Marshal in consultation with the State Fire Prevention Commission (SFPC). 
When activated, a smoke alarm or carbon monoxide alarm must sound a specified alarm. 
A smoke alarm or a carbon monoxide alarm must be replaced if the smoke alarm or smoke 
detector stops functioning, is more than 10 years old based on the production date marked 
on the back of the device or has no production date on the back of the device. 
 
A booking service must (1) electronically notify all short-term rental hosts that use the 
booking service of the fire safety requirements established under the bill and (2) require 
each short-term rental host that uses the booking service to provide to the booking service 
confirmation documentation, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1221/ Page 3 
Local Inspections and Report 
 
The bill’s provisions regarding local inspections and reporting requirements does not apply 
to a county or Baltimore City that prohibits short-term rentals in the jurisdiction. 
 
A county or Baltimore City that requires inspections of short-term rentals may establish a 
fee to cover the cost of inspections of short‑term rental units. In consultation with the 
State Fire Marshal, a county or Baltimore City may delegate the inspection of short-term 
rental units to a third-party inspector who (1) meets the qualifications, insurance 
requirements, and procedures established by the State Fire Marshal and (2) is certified by 
a nationally recognized fire safety organization. 
 
Each county and Baltimore city must submit a report to the State Fire Marshal by  
July 1, 2028, summarizing (1) each local law or regulation adopted on or after  
October 1, 2026, governing the inspection of short-term rental units; (2) each local law or 
regulation in effect before October 1, 2026, governing the inspection of short-term rental 
units, including the effective date of the law or regulation; (3) the number of short-term 
rental units in the jurisdiction that are inspected; and (4) the number of short-term rental 
units in the jurisdiction that are in compliance with the provisions established under the 
bill, as specified. 
 
If the person conducting the inspection finds a short-term rental unit to be in compliance, 
the person must provide to the short-term rental host a certificate, receipt, or other 
documentation of compliance. 
 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) must establish the minimum qualifications, 
certifications, and licensing for a third-party inspector. 
 
Current Law:  “Short-term rental” means the temporary use of a short-term rental unit to 
provide accommodation to transient guests for lodging purposes in exchange for 
consideration. “Short-term rental unit” means a residential dwelling unit or a portion of the 
unit designed for short-term rentals. “Short-term rental unit” includes a single-family house 
or dwelling, a multifamily house or dwelling, an apartment, a condominium, or a 
cooperative. 
 
State Fire Prevention Code 
 
The State Fire Marshal must enforce all laws of the State relating to, among other things, 
the prevention of fire and the installation and maintenance of equipment intended to 
control, detect, or extinguish fire. The State Fire Marshal must also enforce regulations 
adopted by SFPC. SFPC within the Department of State Police (DSP) must adopt 
comprehensive regulations as a State Fire Prevention Code. The commission adopted by 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1221/ Page 4 
reference, subject to some exceptions noted in the regulations, the National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) 1 Fire Code (2024 Edition), the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2024 
Edition), and some requirements of the International Building Code as the State Fire 
Prevention Code. The State Fire Prevention Code has the force and effect of law in the 
political subdivisions of the State, and enforcement is the responsibility of the State Fire 
Marshal, a legally designated fire official of a county or municipality of the State, or other 
persons legally appointed by the State Fire Marshal (as specified under the Public Safety 
Article). 
 
Generally, NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2024 Edition) includes provisions regarding the 
placement of portable fire extinguishers throughout specified health care facilities, 
detention and correctional facilities, and businesses. However, it does not include such 
provisions regarding short-term rental units. 
 
A person may not knowingly violate Title 6 of the Public Safety Article (SFPC and State 
Fire Marshal) or a regulation adopted by SFPC. A person who does so is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 days and/or a fine 
of up to $1,000. 
 
Smoke Alarms Required in Sleeping Areas 
 
An automatic smoke alarm must be provided in each sleeping area within each residential 
occupancy, including one- and two-family dwellings, lodging or rooming houses, hotels, 
dormitories, and apartment buildings, as defined in NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, as adopted 
by the SFPC. Beginning July 31, 2025, smoke detectors must be installed in accordance 
with location and spacing requirements established by NFPA in each interior public 
corridor in a residential rental high-rise building. 
 
Smoke alarms must be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 (National Fire Alarm and 
Signaling Code), be listed and labeled by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, be 
suitable for sensing visible or invisible products of combustion, and sound an alarm 
suitable to warn the occupants, as specified. Local jurisdictions may adopt smoke alarm 
regulations that are more stringent. 
 
A person may not knowingly violate these provisions. A person who does so is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 days and/or a fine 
of up to $1,000. 
 
Carbon Monoxide Alarms 
 
Chapters 174 and 175 of 2016 require all rental dwelling units to install carbon monoxide 
alarms outside of and within the immediate vicinity of each separate sleeping area and on 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1221/ Page 5 
every level of each unit (including the basement). A carbon monoxide alarm may be 
combined with a smoke alarm if the combined device complies with specified standards. 
Except as part of routine maintenance, a person may not render a carbon monoxide alarm 
inoperable. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DSP advises that the OSFM can likely handle the bill’s requirements 
regarding the establishment of minimum qualifications, certifications, and licensing for 
third-party inspectors with existing resources, but only if the bill’s reference to licensing 
means that OSFM must specify licensing requirements for each inspector. To the extent 
the bill instead requires OSFM to establish a licensure program for third-party inspectors, 
DSP advises that it must hire additional staff and general fund expenditures increase to 
administer a licensure program. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local expenditures increase to the extent counties must hire 
additional inspectors to inspect all short-term rental units in their jurisdiction and ensure 
compliance with the bill’s requirements. However, those expenditures may be offset to the 
extent local governments choose to establish a fee for the inspection of short-term rental 
units, as authorized under the bill. Montgomery County advises that as of January 2026 it 
has 721 short-term rental units in the county and must therefore hire one code inspector at 
an estimated cost of $152,460 in fiscal 2027. Harford County advises that it does not know 
how many short-term rental units are in the county but estimates it must hire two new staff 
to perform inspections at an estimated cost of $200,000 in fiscal 2027. 
 
It is assumed local governments can submit the required report to OSFM with existing 
resources. 
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill does not 
materially affect local expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that owns short-term rental units must procure 
smoke alarms and portable fire extinguishers for affected units, subject units to annual 
inspection by local governments, and potentially pay a fee for the inspection established 
by the local government. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 624 (Senator Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1221/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of State Police; National Fire Protection Association; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6