START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1218 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1218 
(Delegates Wilkins and Phillips) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development - Severe Health and Safety 
Risk Properties - Intervention Plan 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of Tenant and Landlord Affairs (OTLA) within the Department 
of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), in collaboration with the Office of the 
Attorney General, to develop a plan to (1) identify “severe health and safety risk properties” 
in the State; (2) expand the structure of OTLA to address severe health and safety risk 
properties in the State; and (3) provide effective interventions to mitigate predatory, 
noncompliant, and negligent landlords of multi‑unit rental properties in the State. DHCD 
must submit the plan and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly by 
August 31, 2027. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates December 31, 2027.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2027 only for 
contractual services, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1218/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines “severe health and safety risk property” as a rental 
property that routinely fails to meet basic health and safety standards. It includes the 
following:  
 
 
a rental property that is in continued noncompliance with local housing codes, 
resulting in chronic unsafe housing conditions;  
 
a severely distressed rental property;  
 
a rental property that has repeated cycles of violations, citations, and failures to 
remediate; and 
 
a persistently hazardous rental property. 
 
The plan must: 
 
 
create a process for identifying severe health and safety risk properties and 
predatory landlord practices; 
 
develop methods for the referral of properties to OTLA, including by residents that 
currently live in a property and through coordination with municipal and county 
agencies, by tenant associations, and by other organizations that serve renters and 
communities; and  
 
determine appropriate interventions to protect the health and safety of residents 
living in severe health and safety risk properties, as further specified (e.g., required 
tenant escrow, mandatory follow‑up inspections, temporary relocation plans for 
tenants in units that are unsafe for occupancy, etc.).  
 
Current Law:  In addition to other actions, Chapter 124 of 2024, established OTLA within 
DHCD. The purpose of OTLA is to (1) ensure that tenants have access to educational 
resources to aid in understanding and exercising the tenants’ rights under State law;  
(2) provide tenants with information on how to report a violation of their legal rights as 
tenants and facilitate referrals of reported violations to appropriate enforcement agencies; 
(3) provide tenants with information on how to obtain financial counseling; and (4) notify 
appropriate authorities regarding housing discrimination and other unfair or illegal housing 
practices. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for DHCD increase by an estimated 
$100,000 in fiscal 2027 only, which reflects the cost of acquiring contractual services to 
complete the planning required under the bill. DHCD advises that it does not currently have 
the staffing capabilities to develop and submit the plan along with recommendations by the 
August 31, 2027 deadline; thus, additional resources are required.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1218/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  For more information on OTLA and the services it provides 
(including resources available to tenants and landlords) – See OTLA’s web page.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 941 (Senator Henson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; Office of 
the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3