START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1290 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1290 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child in Need of Assistance - Proceedings - Child's Right to be Present 
 
 
This bill specifies that a child who is the subject of a Child in Need of Assistance (CINA) 
proceeding has the right to be present at the proceeding. However, the court may exclude 
a child from a CINA proceeding if (1) the child’s attorney determines that the child’s 
presence at the proceeding is not in the best interest of the child and notifies the court that 
the child has waived the right to be present, or (2) the court, after consideration and findings 
on the record, determines that the child’s presence at the proceeding is not in the best 
interest of the child. Before excluding a child from a CINA proceeding, the court must 
consider less restrictive alternatives, including adjustment of the court’s schedule, remote 
participation for any party to the proceeding, trauma-informed support for the child, or 
limiting the time the child is physically in the courtroom. The child’s attorney may not 
waive the child’s right to be present at a consultation required by § 3-823 of the Courts and 
Judicial Proceedings Article, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1290/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Child In Need of Assistance Proceedings – Generally  
 
A CINA is a child who requires court intervention because (1) the child has been abused 
or neglected, has a developmental disability, or has a mental disorder and (2) the child’s 
parents, guardian, or custodian are unable or unwilling to give proper care and attention to 
the child and the child’s needs. Statutory provisions outline numerous requirements for 
CINA proceedings. 
 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article § 3-823 – Permanency Plan for Out-of-Home 
Placement 
 
At least every 12 months at a hearing to review the permanency plan of a CINA in 
out‑of‑home placement, the court must consult on the record with the child in an 
age‑appropriate manner to obtain the child’s view on permanency. If, after a hearing or 
with the agreement of all parties, the court determines that the child is medically fragile 
and that it is detrimental to the child’s physical or mental health to be transported to the 
courthouse, the court may (1) visit the child at the child’s placement and use appropriate 
technology to document the consultation for the record or (2) use video conferencing to 
consult with the child on the record during the hearing. The court must give notice to each 
party and an opportunity to attend a visit or video conference, unless the court determines 
that it is not in the best interest of the child for a party to attend the visit or video conference. 
Additional provisions address situations where a child’s placement is out‐of‐State. 
 
Maryland Rule 11-109 
 
Maryland Rule 11-109 specifies that, unless a child’s presence is excused by the court for 
good cause, the child’s custodian must bring the child to all hearings under the Rules for 
juvenile causes. An attorney for the child may waive the child’s presence in any proceeding 
other than a delinquency proceeding or a child consultation as required by § 3-823 of the 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1290/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3