START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1211 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1211 
(Delegate Tomlinson) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Condominiums - Unit Owner Responsibility for Damage or Destruction 
 
 
This bill alters the responsibility for repairing or replacing damaged or destroyed portions 
of a condominium when the damage originated from a particular unit. Specifically, the bill 
repeals an owner’s $10,000 maximum liability and instead establishes that the owner of 
the unit in which the damage originated is liable for the full cost of all repair or replacement. 
The bill also makes various conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent that the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) requires 
new filings to ensure that policy forms and rates conform with the bill’s requirements, 
special fund revenues increase minimally. MIA can use existing resources to accommodate 
any additional document review necessary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  No later than the first conveyance of a condominium unit 
to a person other than the developer, the council of unit owners must maintain, to the extent 
reasonably available:   
 
 
property insurance in amounts determined by the council of unit owners, but no less 
than any amount specified in the declaration or bylaws (1) for attached, multifamily 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1211/ Page 2 
dwelling units, or detached units located within a condominium not composed 
entirely of similarly detached units, on the common elements and units, exclusive 
of improvements and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the 
developer and (2) for detached units located within a condominium composed 
entirely of similar detached units, on the common elements only; and 
 
comprehensive general liability insurance, as specified. 
 
If any portion of the common elements and the units (generally exclusive of 
improvements/betterments installed in the units by owners) is damaged or destroyed, it 
must promptly be repaired or replaced by the council of unit owners unless (1) the 
condominium is terminated; (2) repair or replacement would be illegal under any State or 
local health or safety statute or ordinance; or (3) 80% of the unit owners, including every 
owner of a unit or assigned limited common element which will not be rebuilt, vote not to 
rebuild. 
 
Generally, the cost of repair or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds and reserves 
is a common expense. A property insurance deductible is not a cost of repair or replacement 
in excess of insurance proceeds. When damage or destruction within the condominium 
originates from a unit, the owner of that unit is responsible for the council of unit owners’ 
property insurance deductible, up to a maximum of $10,000. The bill eliminates this limit 
and instead establishes that the owner is responsible for the full cost of repair or 
replacement of the damaged or destroyed portion of the condominium.  
 
Under current law, unit owners must be informed annually in writing of their responsibility 
for the council of unit owners’ property insurance deductible and the deductible’s amount. 
Any deductible amount exceeding the $10,000 for which a unit owner is responsible 
constitutes a common expense. Under the bill, the council must inform the owners of  
(1) the unit owner’s responsibility for the full cost of repair or replacement for damage or 
destruction that originated from the owner’s unit; (2) the unit owner’s responsibility for a 
portion of the council’s insurance deductible if damage or destruction of any portion of the 
condominium originates from the common elements or an event outside the condominium; 
and (3) the amount of the deductible. 
 
Under current law, if the damaged or destroyed portion of the condominium is not repaired 
or replaced, the insurance proceeds attributable to the damaged common elements must be 
used to restore the damaged area to a condition compatible with the remainder of the 
condominium. The insurance proceeds attributable to units and limited common elements 
that are not rebuilt must be distributed to the owners of those units and the owners of the 
units to which those limited common elements were assigned. Any remaining proceeds 
must be distributed to all the unit owners in proportion to their interest in the common 
elements. The bill specifies that the application of this distribution method is limited to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1211/ Page 3 
instances in which the damage or destruction originated in the common elements or 
resulted from an event occurring outside the condominium. 
 
Under the bill, if the damage or destruction to the condominium originated from a unit and 
the condominium is not repaired or replaced (1) the damage or destroyed area must be 
restored to a condition compatible with the remainder of the condominium, and (2) the 
owner of the originating unit is responsible for the cost to restore the damaged area.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 633 (Senator Ready) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3