START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1282 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1282 
(Delegate Young, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Tobacco Products, Other Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking Devices - 
Advertising to Minors - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person licensed to sell cigarettes, other tobacco products (OTP), or 
electronic smoking devices (ESD) from directly or indirectly advertising or marketing 
tobacco products, OTP, or ESD or vaping liquid, respectively, to individuals younger 
than 21, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission (ATCC) increase by at least $506,600 in FY 2027 for personnel to oversee 
advertising by licensees, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and 
ongoing costs. General fund revenues increase to the extent existing penalties are imposed 
on OTP or ESD licensees, beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$506,600 
$594,300 
$622,000 
$650,200 
$678,600 
Net Effect 
($506,600) 
($594,300) 
($622,000) 
($650,200) 
($678,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Application of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to materially 
impact local revenues or expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1282/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A person licensed under Title 16 of the Business Regulation Article 
(cigarettes) is prohibited from advertising or marketing tobacco products to individuals 
younger than 21. A person licensed under Title 16.5 of the Business Regulation Article 
(OTP) is prohibited from advertising or marketing OTP to individuals younger than 21. A 
person licensed under Title 16.7 of the Business Regulation Article (ESD) is prohibited 
from advertising or marketing ESD or vaping liquid to individuals younger than 21. 
 
For cigarette, OTP, and ESD licensees, it is a violation of the bill’s prohibitions to use any 
of the following in the advertising, promotion, packaging, or labeling of a tobacco product, 
OTP, or ESD, respectively:   
 
 
a cartoon; 
 
a superhero; 
 
a video game reference; 
 
an image of a food product intended for minors; 
 
a trademark that imitates or mimics the trademark of a product that has been 
advertised or marketed to minors; 
 
a symbol or celebrity that is primarily associated with minors or media primarily 
directed to individuals younger than 21; and  
 
an image of an individual who appears to be younger than 27. 
 
In addition, a person licensed to sell cigarettes, OTP, or ESD may not advertise or promote 
a tobacco product, OTP, or ESD, respectively:   
 
 
in a newspaper, magazine, periodical, or other publication for which individuals 
younger than 21 constitute 15% or more of the total audience; 
 
at a concert, stadium, sporting event, or other public event for which individuals 
younger than 21 constitute 15% or more of the total audience; or 
 
on an outdoor billboard or sign board that is within 500 feet of a school. 
 
Current Law:  Titles 16, 16.5, and 16.7 of the Business Regulation Article govern tobacco 
licensing and the sale and distribution of cigarettes, OTP, and ESD. 
 
“ESD” is defined as a device that can be used to deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine 
to an individual inhaling from the device. It includes (1) an electronic cigarette, an 
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, a vape 
pen, and vaping liquid and (2) any component, part, or accessory of such a device 
regardless of whether or not it is sold separately, including any substance intended to be 
aerosolized or vaporized during use of the device. “ESD” excludes a drug, device, or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1282/ Page 3 
combination product authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or a battery or battery charger when sold 
separately. 
 
“OTP” is defined as any product that is intended for human consumption or likely to be 
consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested in 
any manner that is made of, derived from, or contains tobacco or nicotine, with specified 
exclusions. “OTP” (1) includes cigars, premium cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, filters, 
rolling papers, pipes, and hookahs and (2) excludes cigarettes, ESD, tobacco pipes (as 
defined in the Tax – General Article), or drugs, devices, or combination products 
authorized for sale by FDA under the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
 
ATCC is responsible for monitoring and enforcement activities related to tobacco licenses. 
 
Existing Penalties for Violations 
 
A person that violates any provision of Title 16.5 (OTP) or 16.7 (ESD) of the Business 
Regulation Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up 
to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 30 days. 
 
Required Signs for Retail Licensees 
 
A cigarette, OTP, or ESD retailer must post a sign in a location that is clearly visible to the 
consumer that states, in letters that are at least one half-inch high, “No person under the 
age of 21 may be sold tobacco products.” 
 
Criminal Provisions – Sale to a Minor  
 
A person who distributes tobacco products for commercial purposes may not distribute a 
tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or a coupon redeemable for a tobacco product to 
an individual younger than 21. In addition, a person may not purchase for, sell to, or 
distribute to an individual younger than 21 a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. A 
violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500 for a first violation, 
$1,000 for a second violation within two years, and $3,000 for each subsequent violation 
within two years after the preceding violation. 
 
If a licensee violates these provisions, a court must order ATCC to (1) suspend the license 
for up to 90 days for a second violation; (2) suspend the license for up to 180 days for a 
subsequent violation; and (3) revoke the license for each subsequent violation. Upon the 
court’s determination above, the clerk of the court must send a copy of the final order 
issued by the court to the Executive Director of ATCC. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1282/ Page 4 
Sales Requirements  
 
A licensed retailer or vape shop vendor may not sell cigarettes, OTP, or ESD to an 
individual without verifying the individual is at least age 21 by means of a  
government-issued identification in a direct face-to-face exchange. A licensed retailer or 
vape shop vendor is not required to verify the age of an individual at least 30 years old.  
 
State Revenues:  The bill does not establish specific penalties or fines for a violation. 
Therefore, this analysis assumes that enforcement would be limited to existing penalties 
against OTP or ESD licensees (a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
30 days). ATCC advises that the only penalties that cigarette licensees would be subject to 
would be an administrative hearing held by ATCC.  
 
Thus, to the extent existing penalties are imposed against OTP or ESD licensees for 
violations of the bill, general fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
State Expenditures:  ATCC advises that the bill significantly expands the scope of its 
enforcement to include oversight of advertising by licensees and that it does not have the 
expertise to evaluate audience composition or other similar advertising violations. 
Therefore, additional staffing is required. ATCC anticipates needing at least the same 
staffing structure as the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) currently has to 
oversee cannabis advertising, but notes that MCA has fewer than 200 licenses, while ATCC 
regulates more than 6,000. 
 
Thus, ATCC general fund expenditures increase by at least $506,597 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost to hire 
six full-time positions, including one division chief, four administrators, and 
one administrative aide to oversee and evaluate advertising by licensees. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
6.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$451,752 
Other Operating Expenses 
    54,845 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$506,597 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
To the extent that the bill requires ATCC to monitor advertisements placed by national 
firms who do business in Maryland, ATCC would require additional personnel and 
resources beyond those included in this analysis. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1282/ Page 5 
Small Business Effect:  ATCC advises that many of its licensees are small businesses that 
may incur administrative expenses to comply with the bill. Small business OTP and ESD 
retailers may also be subject to existing penalties for violations of the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  ATCC advises that the bill may conflict with, be duplicative of, 
or be redundant with the existing network of regulations and restrictions governing certain 
tobacco manufacturers. For example, the Master Settlement Agreement imposes 
restrictions on billboards, cartoons, and other advertising, while ESD and OTP are subject 
to FDA marketing restrictions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5