START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1263 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1263 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Workgroup on Postoperative Cosmetic Care 
 
   
This bill establishes the Workgroup on Postoperative Cosmetic Care to study the regulation 
of postoperative cosmetic and body-altering services provided by nonphysician 
practitioners with a focus on patient safety, consumer protection, and continuity of care. 
Members of the workgroup representing government entities must designate staff from 
their respective government entities to staff the workgroup. The workgroup is not a 
regulatory board and may not establish a licensure program without legislative approval. 
The workgroup must submit (1) by December 1, 2026, an interim report and (2) by 
December 1, 2027, a final report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and 
the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase 
by $88,200 in FY 2027 and $38,400 in FY 2028 for contractual staff, as discussed below. 
Future years reflect the elimination of contractual staff. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
88,200 
38,400 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($88,200) 
($38,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1263/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup consists of:  (1) the Secretaries of Health and Labor (or 
their designees); (2) the President of the Maryland Board of Nursing (MBON) (or their 
designee); (3) the chair of the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners (or their 
designee); (4) the chair of the State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners (or their 
designee); and (5) the following members, appointed by the Secretary of  
Health:  one licensed physician specializing in cosmetic or plastic surgery, one consumer 
or patient advocate with experience in postsurgical care, one representative of a 
postoperative care or recovery services organization, and any additional stakeholders 
determined appropriate by the Secretary.  
 
The members of the workgroup must elect the chair of the workgroup from among its 
members. Members of the workgroup may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The workgroup must:   
 
 
examine how postoperative cosmetic care is currently regulated or overseen in the 
State;  
 
identify any gaps in patient access to qualified providers of cosmetic care; 
 
review conflicts between existing scope-of-practice laws; 
 
evaluate risks posed by unrecognized or unregulated practitioners that provide 
cosmetic care services; 
 
assess training and education requirements for postoperative cosmetic care; 
 
review best practices and regulatory models from other states; 
 
consider options for certification, registration, or professional recognition for 
providers of postsurgical cosmetic care, including alignment with existing licensing 
boards;  
 
make recommendations that prioritize consumer protection and patient safety; 
 
avoid recommending the creation of a new licensure program unless necessary;  
 
consider low-cost and nonbureaucratic options; and 
 
focus on consumer protection, patient safety, and continuity of care over industry 
expansion.  
 
Current Law:  Twenty health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating 
various health professions in Maryland. However, postoperative cosmetic and  
body-altering services provided by nonphysician practitioners is not directly regulated in 
the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1263/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Representatives from the Maryland Department of Labor, MBON, 
the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners, and the State Board of Physical Therapy 
Examiners can serve on the workgroup and likely provide supplemental staff support with 
existing budgeted resources. The workgroup must submit an interim report by  
December 1, 2026, and a final report by December 1, 2027. 
 
While the bill requires all of the State agencies represented on the workgroup to jointly 
provide staff to the workgroup, MDH advises that it would likely take the lead. Therefore, 
MDH general fund expenditures increase by $88,227 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the 
bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time 
contractual health policy analyst to provide staff to the commission and complete the 
required reports. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. This estimate assumes that the contractual position terminates 
December 31, 2027, following the completion of the study’s final report. 
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
-1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$78,392 
$36,989 
Operating Expenses 
9,835 
1,403 
Total State Expenditures 
$88,227 
$38,392 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1263/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4