START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1247 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1247 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means and Economic Matters 
 
 
Prince George's County - Tax Increment Financing - Extraordinary 
Development District - Alterations  
PG 425-25 
 
 
This bill authorizes the proceeds from bonds that Prince George’s County or the revenue 
authority of Prince George’s County issues to be used for the acquisition, construction, or 
rehabilitation of an “immersive entertainment venue” located within an extraordinary 
development district. The bill authorizes the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning 
Commission (M-NCPPC) to pledge specified tax revenue as security for bonds issued by 
Prince George’s County. The bill also establishes that M-NCPPC may not pledge as 
security specified property taxes until both it and the governing body of  
Prince George’s County adopt specified resolutions. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures and revenues increase beginning as 
early as FY 2026, and a portion of M-NCPPC property tax revenues may be redirected, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Immersive entertainment venue” means an entertainment venue that 
(1) is owned by a private entity; (2) has at least 3,000 seats; (3) has an aggregate 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1247/ Page 2 
development cost of at least $500.0 million; and (4) has an immersive experience with 
advanced display technology, including 4D visual effects and spherical LED screens. 
 
The bill makes a related change to the definition of “extraordinary development district” 
to include the site of an immersive entertainment venue. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Tax Increment Financing 
 
All counties and municipalities in Maryland, except Baltimore City, are authorized to 
utilize tax increment financing (TIF) under Title 12, Subtitle 2 of the Economic 
Development Article (the Tax Increment Financing Act). Baltimore City has separate 
authority to use TIF as provided in the city charter. Counties and municipalities (including 
Baltimore City) may issue bonds to finance the development of an industrial, commercial, 
or residential area. 
 
TIF is a public financing method that uses future gains in tax revenues to finance current 
improvements. The increase in the property tax revenue generated by new commercial 
development in a specific area, the TIF district, pays for bonds issued to finance site 
improvements, infrastructure, and other project costs located on public property. In a 
TIF district, the local government “freezes” the existing property tax base and uses the 
property tax revenue from this base as it would normally use such funds. The difference 
between the current tax base and the frozen base in each future year is termed the 
incremental valuation. The local government apportions the property tax revenue on the 
incremental valuation to a special account for certain purposes, including to pay debt 
service on the bonds and to potentially pay for additional public expenditures in the 
TIF district. The TIF district ceases to exist upon the retirement of the bonds, and after that 
time, all property tax revenue may be appropriated by normal means. 
 
Under the Tax Increment Financing Act, a development district must be a contiguous area 
and authority to issue bonds is generally limited to the local governing body. However, the 
revenue authority of Prince George’s County may issue bonds in accordance with an 
ordinance adopted by the governing body of the county, and local revenues may be pledged 
to debt issued by the Maryland Economic Development Corporation in specified 
circumstances. 
 
Extraordinary Development District 
 
An “extraordinary development district” is a development district that is designated as such 
by resolution and contains at least 50 acres, on all or part of which a federal law 
enforcement agency will be located. M-NCPPC may enter into an agreement with 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1247/ Page 3 
Prince George’s County to deposit all or a portion of M-NCPPC property taxes levied by 
the county on the tax increment in an extraordinary development district into a special fund 
for the extraordinary development district. M-NCPPC may not enter into an agreement 
until the governing body of Prince George’s County has adopted a resolution designating 
the extraordinary development district and M-NCPPC has adopted a resolution approving 
the agreement. M-NCPPC may not be an obligor for any bonds issued by  
Prince George’s County for an extraordinary development district. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2026 from bond revenues and/or taxes imposed under existing authorities for the 
purposes authorized under the bill. Prince George’s County expenditures increase 
beginning as early as fiscal 2026 as any bond proceeds and/or tax revenues are spent, 
followed in future years by debt service payments and/or continued tax revenue spending. 
 
A portion of M-NCPPC property tax revenues imposed within the established 
extraordinary development district may be redirected under the bill. If so, M-NCPPC can 
handle related administrative requirements with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Planning; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3