START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1280 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1280 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Supporting Our Caregiver Infrastructure Program - Feasibility Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of the Comptroller, with assistance from the Department of 
Human Services (DHS), to study and make recommendations on the feasibility of 
establishing and operating a Supporting Our Caregiver Infrastructure Program to provide 
universal monthly payments to a caregiver for each dependent for whom a caregiver 
provides care. The Comptroller must examine the economic impact on the State and local 
economies, including potential increased labor force participation; enhanced tax revenues; 
potential decreased participation in public benefits programs in the State; and the overall 
economic vitality of the State. By July 1, 2027, the Office of the Comptroller must submit 
a final report of its findings, conclusions, and recommendations to specified committees of 
the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Qualified family member” means an individual who requires assistance 
with one or more daily living activities, as certified by a licensed physician, physician 
assistant, or a registered nurse practitioner, and (1) is at least 60 years old and is cared for 
by an adult relative or informal caregiver who it at least 18 years old; (2) has Alzheimer's 
disease or a related disorder and is cared for by an adult relative or informal caregiver who 
is at least 18 years old; (3) is a child with developmental or functional disabilities and is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1280/ Page 2 
cared for by a parent, grandparent, or other relative; or (4) is an adult with developmental 
or functional disabilities and is cared for by a parent, grandparent, or other relative. 
 
DHS must assist the Comptroller in conducting the study by (1) identifying available and 
potential federal, State, and local funding sources for the program; (2) identifying the 
administrative needs, administrative costs, and operating costs associated with the 
program; (3) exploring appropriate amounts for caregiver stipends that maximize the 
benefit to the State economy and minimize the fiscal impact on the State budget; 
(4) consulting with the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA), the Maryland 
Department of Health, and local agencies on aging and disabilities, including a unit of local 
government or a private, nonprofit corporation.  
 
Current Law:  The Comptroller of Maryland is the State’s chief fiscal officer and is 
responsible for collecting tax revenue and enforcing compliance with the State’s tax laws. 
 
Caregiver Expense Grant Program 
 
Chapter 161 of 2024 established a Caregiver Expense Grant Program in MDOA to award 
grants for qualified expenses (including adult day care, specialized transportation, legal or 
financial services, or assistive care technology, among other things) paid or incurred by an 
individual who provides care to a qualified family member and whose federal adjusted 
gross income does not exceed a specified amount.  
 
Under the program, a “qualified family member” is an individual who requires assistance 
with one or more daily living activities, as certified by a licensed physician, physician 
assistant, or registered nurse practitioner, and (1) is at least 60 years old or has 
Alzheimer’s Disease or a related disorder and is cared for by an adult relative or informal 
caregiver who is at least 18 years old or (2) is a child or an adult with developmental or 
functional disabilities and is cared for by a parent, grandparent, or other relative that is at 
least 55 years old. 
 
Family Caregiver Assistance Program  
 
Chapter 224 of 2006 established the Family Caregiver Assistance Program in MDOA. 
Under the program, a maximum grant of $500 per year can be provided to eligible 
individuals who provide long-term care to certain individuals. Grants may be used to defray 
the cost of goods and services required to provide long-term care, including durable 
medical equipment, medical bills, medical supplies, prescription or over-the-counter 
medications, home repairs or modifications, and respite care. Eligible individuals must 
provide care to an individual age 18 or older who is a spouse, parent, stepparent, 
grandparent, child, stepchild, sibling, aunt, uncle, son-, daughter-, mother-, or 
father-in-law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1280/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 809 (Senator King) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3