START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1219 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1219 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Judiciary 
 
 
Climate Change, Homeowner's Insurance, and Emergency Management - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the University System of Maryland (USM) to conduct a study to evaluate 
the relationship between climate change, the availability and price of homeowner’s 
insurance, and emergency and disaster preparedness. USM must submit a report of its 
findings and recommendations to the General Assembly by January 1, 2027. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Higher education expenditures increase, by as much as a couple hundred 
thousand dollars, primarily in FY 2027, although some costs may be incurred in FY 2026, 
for USM to complete the study required by the bill, as discussed below. Higher education 
revenues and general fund expenditures increase correspondingly to the extent that general 
funds are used to reimburse USM for any costs incurred. Other affected State agencies can 
coordinate with and oversee USM using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government representatives can coordinate with and oversee USM 
using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  USM must conduct the study in coordination with and oversight by 
(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President; (2) one member of 
the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the House; (3) the Department of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1219/ Page 2 
Natural Resources; (4) the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE); (5) the 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM); (6) the Maryland Insurance 
Administration; (7) a county emergency manager, appointed by the Maryland Association 
of Counties; and (8) a municipal emergency manager, appointed by the 
Maryland Municipal League. The study must evaluate:   
 
 
the extent to which climate change has contributed to the decreasing availability of 
and increasing costs associated with homeowner’s insurance;  
 
the impact of recent and future changes in federal policies and grant funding streams 
related to disaster preparedness, response, recovery, mitigation, and resilience;  
 
how federal funding has supported emergency management capabilities across the 
five emergency management mission areas identified by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA); and  
 
existing local resources or reserve funds available for disaster recovery needs.  
 
The report submitted by USM must include an overview of the current state of the National 
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), Community Rating System, and the private flood 
insurance market and make recommendations on:   
 
 
how the State can incentivize residents to invest in improvements to protect homes 
or mitigate damage from extreme weather events using specified incentives; 
 
potential modifications to the Insurance Article to better ensure that insurers 
adequately adjust rates for certain policyholders; 
 
best practices for funding emergency management capabilities based on an 
evaluation of similar practices in other states; 
 
potential modifications to the State Disaster Recovery Fund; 
 
recurring, dedicated funding mechanisms; 
 
annual per capita funding levels; and 
 
allocation ratios between emergency management programming, including training 
and staff, and disaster response funds for recovery assistance.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Notice Required Related to Flood Insurance  
 
The Insurance Article includes very few provisions related to flood insurance. Most 
notably, a homeowner’s insurer must provide an applicant, at the time a policy is initially 
purchased, with a written notice that states that a standard homeowner’s insurance policy 
does not cover losses from flood. The notice must include, among other things, specified 
information about the availability of flood insurance from NFIP. Additionally, the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1219/ Page 3 
Insurance Commissioner is required to adopt, by regulation, a notice that must be provided 
to insureds or policyholders at each homeowner’s insurance policy renewal on specified 
areas of concern, including floods. The notice states the following:   
 
The standard homeowner’s insurance policy does not cover loss caused by 
flood. Ask your producer (who is your agent or broker) or your insurance 
company about flood coverage. Visit the National Flood Insurance Program 
(“NFIP”) at www.floodsmart.gov or by phone 888-379-9531 to learn more. 
 
National Flood Insurance and Flood Management  
  
NFIP is managed by FEMA and provides flood insurance directly and through a network 
of 47 insurance companies. Through the program, flood insurance is available to anyone 
living in one of the 22,600 participating communities.  
 
In order to participate in NFIP, local communities must adopt and enforce a floodplain 
management ordinance containing minimum requirements specified by federal law, which 
apply in floodplain areas mapped by FEMA. More specifically, in conjunction with FEMA, 
MDE updates the State’s regional flood risks and takes into account river flow, storm tides, 
rainfall, and coastal storm surges, and this information is used to create flood insurance 
rate maps that, among other things, are used for floodplain management and insurance 
purposes. All Maryland counties and 92 municipalities participate in NFIP. 
 
Additionally, pursuant to the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976, MDE is responsible 
for various initiatives designed to address flood hazards, including (1) assisting in the 
development of guidance to minimize the impacts of flooding; (2) providing 
State guidelines and technical assistance to local governments to manage flood areas; and 
(3) administering the Comprehensive Flood Management Grant Program. MDE and local 
governments that have the authority to adopt and enforce land use and control measures 
for the areas within their jurisdictions must coordinate flood management activities with 
all related programs, including NFIP, the Sediment Control Program, and the State water 
pollution control and abatement programs. 
 
State Disaster Recovery Fund  
 
Chapter 549 of 2023 established the State Disaster Recovery Fund, administered by 
MDEM. Generally, the purpose of the fund is to provide disaster recovery assistance when 
disasters occur, but a federal disaster declaration is not made. The fund is a special, 
nonlapsing fund and must be available in perpetuity for the purpose of providing disaster 
recovery assistance in accordance with the specified provisions. The fund may only be used 
if (1) the Governor has declared a state of emergency, or (2) a local organization for 
emergency management requests assistance from the fund. However, a portion of the fund 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1219/ Page 4 
may be used to administer the fund, including providing disaster case management 
resources.  
 
Additionally, Chapter 559 of 2025 authorizes funding from the Catastrophic Event 
Account, which is administered by the Department of Budget and Management, to be 
transferred to the State Disaster Recovery if (1) the balance of the fund has been depleted 
due to use or transfer, or (2) the estimated costs for providing adequate disaster relief for a 
natural disaster or catastrophic situation are in excess of the fund’s balance. 
 
State Climate Change Goals and Activities  
 
Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) made broad changes to the State’s 
approach to reducing statewide greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and addressing climate 
change. Among other things, the Act accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions 
reduction targets originally established under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction 
Act by requiring the State to develop plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to 
(1) reduce GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero 
statewide GHG emissions by 2045. In December 2023, MDE published Maryland’s 
Climate Pollution Reduction Plan, which was developed to implement Chapter 38.  
 
Pursuant to Executive Order 01.01.2024.19, various other State agencies have prepared 
their own individual climate implementation plans.  
 
State Expenditures:  USM advises that it cannot provide an estimate for the total cost to 
conduct the study required by the bill at this time. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) advises, however, that the cost to complete the required study may total as much as 
a couple hundred thousand dollars between fiscal 2026 and 2027. Most costs are likely 
incurred in fiscal 2027; however, costs in fiscal 2026 are possible given the June 1, 2026 
effective date of the bill. This estimate is based on estimated costs for other climate change 
studies in recent years, which often require technical modeling and/or economic analysis. 
The costs for these studies generally range from $200,000 to $300,000.  
 
DLS also notes that the issues that must be addressed by the study required by the bill (i.e., 
the links between climate change, insurance prices, and damage to communities and 
property) have been well-researched and documented by various entities in recent years 
and, as a result, USM may be able to synthesize available information for, at least, a portion 
of the study. Nevertheless, in conducting the study, USM must coordinate with and take 
instruction from eight different individuals and entities, potentially resulting in substantial 
administrative costs. Furthermore, the study and related report must be completed within a 
seven-month period. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1219/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 739 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5