START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1242 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1242 
(Delegate Allen) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Transportation of Persons With Disabilities - Transportation Network 
Companies - Requirements 
 
 
This bill exempts a transportation network company (TNC) that contracts with the 
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) to facilitate the provision of transit services to 
persons with disabilities through transportation network operators (TNOs) from the general 
requirement that individuals who provide transit services to persons with disabilities 
receive a State and national criminal history records check (CHRC) through the Criminal 
Justice Information System Central Repository (CJIS-CR). Instead, the bill requires the 
contracting TNC to conduct an annual background screening of each TNO that provides 
transit services to persons with disabilities; the background screening must meet specified 
requirements in existing provisions of the Public Utilities Article that require a national 
CHRC and a driving record check as a condition of licensure as a TNO. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances; 
however, the bill provides MTA with flexibility to contract with additional TNCs for its 
Mobility service, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1242/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Transit Administration  
 
MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit system throughout the Baltimore-Washington 
metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, 
such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter buses, Maryland Area Regional 
Commuter trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Aside from the District of Columbia 
transit system, MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies responsible for the construction 
and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
Mobility is MTA’s paratransit service. The service is offered to people who, because of a 
disability, are functionally unable to get to a bus stop, wait unassisted at a stop, or board or 
ride a bus or train by themselves. Mobility provides door-to-door service by picking up 
participating riders at the first exterior door of the rider’s home or pick up location and 
dropping the rider off at the first exterior door of the rider’s destination. MTA contracts 
with various entities to provide this service; the TNC UZURV, which specializes in 
paratransit and assisted mobility transportation services, is a subcontractor under two of 
those contracts, specifically for MTA’s Call-A-Ride service. 
 
When providing transit service to meet the special needs of persons with disabilities 
(through Mobility or in general), MTA must apply to CJIS-CR for State and national 
CHRCs of MTA employees who are or will be employed to provide transit service to 
persons with disabilities; this requirement also applies to the employees of entities that 
contract with MTA to provide transit service to persons with disabilities. Among other 
requirements, as part of the application for a CHRC, MTA or the contractor must submit 
to CJIS-CR two complete sets of the employee’s legible fingerprints, as specified. In 
addition, any such employee or contractor employee must complete a course, jointly 
developed by the Maryland State Department of Education and the Department of 
Disabilities, and approved by MTA, on matters relating to the appropriate accommodation, 
including customer service, sensitivity, and respectful and courteous treatment of all 
passengers, including persons with disabilities. 
 
Transportation Network Companies  
 
Chapter 204 of 2015 established a regulatory framework for transportation network 
services that encompasses TNCs (i.e., companies such as Uber and Lyft) and TNOs  
(i.e., the drivers), including licensing, CHRCs, insurance requirements, and assessments. 
A TNC may not operate in the State unless the Public Service Commission (PSC) has 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1242/ Page 3 
issued a permit to the company. Generally, a TNO may not provide transportation network 
services unless PSC has authorized the operator to operate on a provisional basis or has 
issued a valid temporary or permanent transportation network operator’s license to provide 
transportation network services. 
 
PSC may approve an applicant to be a TNO and issue a license if the applicant provides all 
information PSC requires for the application and PSC is satisfied with the successful 
submission of the applicant’s (1) national CHRC that is conducted by a consumer reporting 
agency, as specified, or a comparable entity approved by PSC and that includes specified 
searches and (2) driving record check that includes a driving history research report. (These 
are the requirements that – under the bill – the annual background screening of an affected 
TNO must meet.) 
 
Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository 
 
CJIS-CR within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services collects, 
manages, and disseminates Maryland criminal history record information for criminal 
justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. Each individual 
subject to a State and national CHRC is generally required to pay $50, which includes a 
$20 fingerprinting fee, a $12 FBI fee, and an $18 fee to CJIS-CR. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MTA advises that the TNC UZURV is the only TNC that meets the 
CHRC requirements under current law for drivers that provide transit services to persons 
with disabilities because the CJIS-CR process includes a fingerprinting requirement that is 
not required under the background check process for the licensing of TNOs by PSC. 
However, the bill exempts TNCs and TNOs from the requirement to apply to CJIS for a 
State and national CHRC (and the related fingerprinting requirements) and, instead, 
authorizes TNOs to provide transit services to persons with disabilities if the TNO receives 
the same CHRC and driving check that is required under the Public Utilities Article to be 
licensed as a TNO by PSC. 
 
As a result, under the bill, MTA is able to contract with any TNC, instead of only UZURV, 
to provide transit services to persons with disabilities. While the bill enables additional 
TNCs the option to bid on MTA’s Call-A-Ride contract, the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect MTA finances. 
 
The bill is also not anticipated to materially affect CJIS-CR. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1242/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 786 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of People’s 
Counsel; Public Service Commission; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; UZURV; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4