START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1241 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1241 
(Delegate Acevero, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Labor and Employment - Bereavement Leave and Leave for Family Illness - 
Qualifying Relationships and Type of Leave 
 
   
This bill expands authorized uses of leave under the Maryland’s Flexible Leave Act by 
requiring a private-sector employer with at least 15 employees who provides paid leave to 
its employees to allow an employee to use earned paid leave to care for a family member 
who is ill, instead of only for an immediate family member, or for bereavement leave upon 
the death of the employee’s family member, instead of only for an immediate family 
member. Additionally, an employee of a private-sector employer with at least 
15 employees may use leave without pay in accordance with the employer’s unpaid leave 
policy for a family member’s illness or for bereavement leave. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor can implement the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. The bill does not apply to the State as an employer. Revenues are not 
affected.      
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill pertains exclusively to private-sector employers.     
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines “family member” as a child (as defined under current 
law), a parent, a spouse or domestic partner, a spouse’s or domestic partner’s parent, a 
child’s spouse or domestic partner, a sibling, a sibling’s spouse or domestic partner, a 
grandparent, a grandparent’s spouse or domestic partner, a grandchild, a grandchild’s 
spouse or domestic partner, and an individual related by blood or affinity whose association 
with an employee is the equivalent of a family relationship. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1241/ Page 2 
The bill repeals the definition of “immediate family”. 
 
Current Law:  A private-sector employer with at least 15 employees who provides paid 
leave to its employees must allow an employee to use earned paid leave to care for an 
immediate family member who is ill or for bereavement leave upon the death of an 
immediate family member. Immediate family member is a child, spouse, or parent.  
 
For purposes of taking leave to care for a family member under the Maryland Flexible 
Leave Act, “child” is defined as an adopted, biological, or foster child; stepchild; or legal 
ward who is either younger than 18 or at least 18 years old and incapable of self-care due 
to a mental or physical disability. For bereavement leave only, “child” also includes an 
adult child (adopted, biological, or foster child; stepchild; or legal ward). 
 
An employer is prohibited from taking action against an employee who exercises the rights 
granted or against an employee who files a complaint, testifies against, or assists in an 
action brought against the employer for a violation of these provisions.  
 
Employees who earn more than one type of paid leave from their employers may elect the 
type and amount of paid leave to be used in caring for their immediate family members. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Office of the Attorney General; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2