START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1257 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1257 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Baltimore County Board of Education - Financial Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the Baltimore County Board of Education to provide to the Baltimore 
County Executive and County Council, with its annual budget, personnel data on full-time 
equivalent positions by job title and department, as well as expenditures disaggregated by 
specified categories. The bill also requires the board of education to provide, in a publicly 
available online format, (1) historical budget data, vendor contract awards, and 
school‑level enrollment data; (2) quarterly reports with current monthly expenditures 
compared to the annual budget; and (3) the status of all capital improvement projects, 
current spending, and project competition dates. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  None. Baltimore County Public Schools can handle the bill’s requirements 
with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each county board of education must prepare an annual budget according 
to the major categories listed in § 5-101 of the Education Article as well as any other major 
categories required by the State Board of Education. The annual budget for each local 
school system must include certain revenue and expenditure categories for the current 
expense fund and school construction fund. Expenditure categories for the current expense 
fund include:   
 
 
administration; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1257/ Page 2 
 
mid-level administration; 
 
instructional salaries; 
 
textbooks and classroom instructional supplies; 
 
other instructional costs; 
 
special education; 
 
student personnel services; 
 
health services; 
 
student transportation; 
 
operation of plant and equipment; 
 
maintenance of plant; 
 
fixed charges; 
 
food services; and 
 
capital outlay. 
 
County boards must also prepare their annual budget to include as major categories 
(1) specified current funds held in reserve; (2) the amount of any federal funds received in 
the last fiscal year; and (3) the amount of funds held in trust or otherwise dedicated toward 
long-term obligations for retiree health care costs or other postemployment benefits, and 
information used to calculate the county board’s obligation for those costs. 
 
The annual school budget must be submitted in writing to the county commissioners, 
county council, or the county executive. The budget must be submitted not less than 
45 days before the date for levying local taxes or on an earlier date on or after March 1, as 
may be requested by the county fiscal authority. Copies of the budget as proposed and the 
budget as approved by the county commissioners or county council must be posted on the 
county board’s public-facing website in an easily identifiable location.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore County government indicates that the bill will not have a 
material impact on county operations but would increase reporting requirements on the 
public school system. Baltimore County Public Schools should be able to handle the 
additional reporting requirements with existing resources, not having received information 
from the school system indicating otherwise.  
 
Funding the public school system is the largest component of the Baltimore County 
government’s annual budget accounting for 37% of general fund revenues in fiscal 2026 
as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1257/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Baltimore County Local School Appropriations 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Local Appropriation 
$889.3 
$918.0 
$953.9 
$979.7 $1,016.1 
County GF Revenue1 
2,476.6 
2,601.9 
2,663.0 
2,750.8 
2,755.4 
Appropriation % of GF 
Revenue 
36% 
35% 
36% 
36% 
37% 
 
1 FY 2026 amounts are as approved in the operating budget, FY 2025 represents estimated revenues, 
FY 2024 and earlier are actuals. 
 
Sources:  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State and Local Funding for Public Schools 
 
Total per pupil State and local funding for public schools in fiscal 2026 averaged 
$21,814 statewide, ranging from $18,569 in Carroll County to $24,705 in Baltimore City. 
In Baltimore County, State and local per pupil funding totaled $20,464. Of this amount, 
State funding totaled $10,845 per pupil and local funding totaled $9,619 per pupil. The 
State and local per pupil funding amounts for fiscal 2026 for each public school system is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 18, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3