START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1267 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1267 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Economic Matters and Environment and 
Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Patuxent Research Refuge and Beltsville Agricultural Research Center - Zoning 
Classification (Protecting Patuxent Research Refuge Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes land use provisions relating to the Patuxent Research Refuge and the 
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center that (1) require the lands of the refuge and center 
to be maintained in specified zoning classifications and land uses and (2) protect specified 
central natural areas within the refuge and center. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances.   
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes the following land use provisions relating to the 
Patuxent Research Refuge and the Beltsville Agricultural Research Center: 
 
 
Any federally owned land that is part of the refuge and the federally owned property 
of the center or any other USDA property in Beltsville or its vicinity must be 
designated and maintained in a zoning classification that restricts the uses to open 
space or reserved open space (or, in the case of the refuge, other resource 
conservation uses). 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1267/ Page 2 
 
If the federal government or any assignee sells, leases, licenses, or otherwise 
encumbers any portion of those lands, the local zoning authority (in the case of the 
refuge) or the district council (in the case of the center) must continue a zoning 
classification for the property that (1) restricts the uses to open space or reserved 
open space (or, in the case of the refuge, other resource conservation uses) and 
(2) does not permit commercial, industrial, or residential uses. 
 
A central natural area in the refuge property or center property may not be converted 
to be used for agriculture, active recreation, forestry, or other plant harvesting. 
“Central natural area” means an area within the refuge or center that provides habitat 
for native flora and fauna, including forests, woodlands, wetlands, meadows, and 
early successional grasslands and shrublands. 
 
Prior to any development on land in the refuge property or center property, the local 
zoning authority (in the case of the refuge) or the district council (in the case of the 
center) must (1) hold a public hearing and (2) make a final decision, in consultation 
with the Department of Natural Resources and the Maryland Department of the 
Environment, that the proposed development will not have a substantial impact on 
any land in a central natural area. 
 
“Local zoning authority” means (1) for land located in Anne Arundel County, the 
Anne Arundel County Council or other body with authority to designate zoning 
classifications or (2) for land located in the Maryland-Washington Regional District, a 
district council. 
 
These provisions replace an existing requirement that, if USDA sells any portion of the 
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center property, the district council must place and 
permanently maintain the land in a zoning classification of agricultural open space 
immediately after the transfer of the land to the buyer.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Zoning Classification of Beltsville Agricultural Research Center Land 
 
State law requires that, if USDA sells any portion of the Beltsville Agricultural Research 
Center, the district council of Prince George’s County must place and permanently 
maintain the land in a zoning classification of agricultural open space immediately after 
the transfer of the land to the buyer.  
 
District Councils  
 
The county councils of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties are the district councils 
for that portion of the Maryland-Washington Regional District located within the 
respective counties (the regional district consists of (1) the entire area of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1267/ Page 3 
Montgomery County, subject to certain limitations and (2) the entire area of 
Prince George’s County, except for the City of Laurel as it existed on July 1, 2013). The 
district councils have the authority to adopt and amend the zoning law and any map for the 
portion of the regional district within the counties. 
 
Land Use – Generally  
 
The regulation of land use in the State, through planning and zoning, is implemented by 
local governments, subject to applicable State law. Planning and zoning authority is 
delegated by the State to local governments primarily under the Land Use Article and, for 
certain counties, the Express Powers Act (Title 10 of the Local Government Article).  
 
Both the Land Use Article and Express Powers Act contain the State’s policy statement 
that (1) the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive 
regulation through implementation of planning and zoning controls and (2) planning and 
zoning controls must be implemented by local government.  
 
The Maryland Supreme Court distinguishes “planning” and “zoning” by describing 
planning as focused on the long-term development of a community with respect to land 
use, streets, parks, civic beauty, industrial and commercial undertakings, residential 
developments, and other matters, while zoning is focused on the territorial division of land 
within a jurisdiction and dedication of the divided areas to particular uses (e.g., residential, 
commercial, industrial). See Cnty. Council of Prince George’s Cnty. v. Zimmer Dev. Co., 
444 Md. 490, 505, 520 (2015). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel and Prince George’s counties; Maryland-National 
Capital Park and Planning Commission; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1267/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4