START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1292 
(Delegates Bagnall and Cullison) 
Appropriations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child Advocacy Centers - Continuity of Care Standards for Health Care 
Professionals and Reports of Violations 
 
 
This bill requires the standards established by the Maryland Statewide Organization for 
Child Advocacy Centers to require (1) an individual employed by or contracted with a child 
advocacy center providing mental health services as defined by national accreditation 
standards to be licensed or certified by the appropriate health occupations board, if 
applicable, and provide services within the scope of the provider’s license or certification 
(or practice under lawful supervision as authorized by State law) and (2) each child 
advocacy center to establish a specified continuity of care plan. Each child advocacy center 
must report a complaint resulting in a finding by child protective services that is based on 
the established standards to the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
(GOCPP) for referral to the Attorney General for investigation and further action, if 
necessary. GOCPP may issue a grant to assist a child advocacy center with technical 
assistance to implement standards. By June 1 each year, beginning in 2028, GOCPP must 
publish specified information on the department’s website for the immediately preceding 
year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially impact local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1292/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Each continuity of care plan at minimum must: 
 
 
if known by the child advocacy center and the former provider is employed by or 
contracted with the child advocacy center, in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and applicable federal and State 
confidentiality laws, and only if it does not present a danger to the child, provide 
written notification to the child and legal guardian when there is a change in a 
provider of mental health services that includes the name and contact information 
of the new and former provider or practice to provide a means through which the 
child and legal guardian can contact the new and former provider; and 
 
allow the former provider, in accordance with the provider’s professional ethics and 
standards of care, to contact the child and legal guardian to conduct a termination 
session and when indicated as clinically appropriate and presenting no additional 
risk to the child as determined by the child advocacy center supervisor to assist in 
the transfer of care (subject to the provision above). 
 
By June 1 each year beginning in 2028, GOCPP must publish on its website, for the 
immediately preceding year, a summary of complaints related to compliance of child 
advocacy center standards, if applicable, and the resolution of any complaint received by 
GOCPP, unless such information is confidential or otherwise protected under federal law. 
 
Current Law:  GOCPP must establish and sustain child advocacy centers and ensure that 
every child in the State has access to a child advocacy center. In general, a child advocacy 
center provides services to children who have been abused. 
 
The centers (1) may be based in private nonprofit organizations, local departments of social 
services, local law enforcement agencies, or a partnership among any of these entities; 
(2) must be developed and located to facilitate their use by alleged victims residing in the 
surrounding area; (3) must assist in the response to or investigation of allegations of sexual 
crimes against children and sexual abuse of minors; (4) may assist in the response to or 
investigation of allegations of child abuse and neglect and allegations of a crime of violence 
in the presence of a minor; (5) must provide a level of care that meets or exceeds the 
national accreditation standards for child advocacy centers; and (6) must be included in all 
joint investigation procedures, as specified. 
 
GOCPP may contract with public or private nonprofit organizations to operate child 
advocacy centers. GOCPP must contract with a nonprofit organization that represents 
urban, rural, and suburban child advocacy centers in the State to establish a statewide 
organization. The purpose of the statewide organization is to provide training, technical 
assistance, data collection, and capacity building to meet local, State, and national 
requirements for child advocacy centers. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1292/ Page 3 
The Maryland Statewide Organization for Child Advocacy Centers must establish 
standards for child advocacy centers that meet national accreditation standards for child 
advocacy standards and must include: 
 
 
multidisciplinary teams that include representation from law enforcement, 
prosecutors, child protective services, the medical and mental health fields, and 
victim advocacy; 
 
cultural competency and diversity; 
 
forensic interviews that are neutral, fact-finding, and avoid duplicative 
interviewing; 
 
victim support and advocacy for children and caregivers, including appropriate 
counseling, legal, and medical services or referrals; 
 
medical evaluations; 
 
mental health services; 
 
a formal case review process; 
 
a case tracking, monitoring, and outcomes process; 
 
organizational capacity; 
 
creating a child-focused setting that is comfortable, safe, and private; and 
 
any additional necessary standards. 
 
Money for child advocacy centers (1) must be distributed in accordance with a formula 
agreed on by the Maryland Statewide Organization for Child Advocacy Centers and 
GOCPP; (2) must be used to supplement, and not supplant, money that the program 
receives from other sources; and (3) may be used to assist centers in meeting the required 
standards. 
 
State Expenditures:  GOCPP advises that it requires additional staff to monitor child 
advocacy centers for compliance and to manage the processing of complaints, with 
associated expenditures of approximately $177,000 on an annual basis. GOCPP notes that 
it has no oversight authority over child advocacy centers and only monitors for compliance 
with programmatic and fiscal grant standards. However, according to information 
previously provided by the Department of Human Services (DHS), between 2019 and 
2024, only two formal complaints were received by child advocacy centers. Further, DHS 
does not anticipate any increase in formal complaints as a result of the bill because, 
generally, child advocacy centers refer children to long term mental health services and 
treatment rather than provide the services directly. Accordingly, DHS does not anticipate 
an issue with maintaining continuity of care within child advocacy centers.  
 
Even if the bill facilitates the additional reporting of complaints, the Department of 
Legislative Services advises that the bill’s requirements can likely be handled by GOCPP 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1292/ Page 4 
using existing staff resources. Further, GOCPP can likely incorporate information on many 
of the standards that are to be evaluated for compliance (e.g., whether there is a formal case 
review process, the availability of mental health services, etc.) into its existing grant 
process. To the extent a more meaningful volume of complaints is consistently received, 
additional staff can be requested by GOCPP during the annual budget process. The Office 
of the Attorney General anticipates it can likely handle any additional complaints it 
receives from GOCPP using existing resources. 
 
While GOCPP is explicitly authorized to issue grants to assist a child advocacy center with 
technical assistance to implement standards, this analysis assumes there is no additional 
impact on State expenditures and that the provision simply expands purposes for which 
awarded grants may be used. 
 
Additional Comments:  GOCPP provides grants to the Maryland Children’s Alliance 
(MCA) and 24 local child advocacy centers to ensure that every child in the State has access 
to a child advocacy center. 
 
MCA is a nonprofit organization aimed to promote the well-being of children by supporting 
the development, growth, and continuation of children’s advocacy centers throughout the 
State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1480 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4