START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1294 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1294 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Child Sexual Abuse Material - Artificial Intelligence Software 
 
  
This bill (1) replaces references to “child pornography” with “child sexual abuse material” 
in various statutory provisions and (2) specifies that for purposes of § 11-208 of the 
Criminal Law Article (possessing or accessing and viewing child pornography), a 
“computer-generated image” includes images created through the use of artificial 
intelligence software. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 11-208 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from 
(1) knowingly possessing and intentionally retaining or (2) knowingly or intentionally 
accessing and intentionally viewing a film, videotape, photograph, or other visual 
representation showing an actual child or a computer-generated image that is 
indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child younger than age 16 engaged as a 
subject of sadomasochistic abuse, engaged in sexual conduct, or in a state of sexual 
excitement. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a $2,500 maximum fine for a first offense. A person who has previously 
been convicted under § 11-208 is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to 
10 years and/or a $10,000 maximum fine. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1294/ Page 2 
Section 11-208 does not prohibit a parent from possessing visual representations of the 
parent’s own child in the nude unless the visual representations show the child engaged as 
a subject of sadomasochistic abuse or in sexual conduct and in a state of sexual excitement. 
 
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating § 11-208 that the person promptly and 
in good faith (1) took reasonable steps to destroy each visual representation or (2) reported 
the matter to a law enforcement agency. 
 
“Indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child” means an ordinary person would 
conclude that the image is of an actual and identifiable minor. “Indistinguishable from an 
actual and identifiable child” includes a computer-generated image that has been created, 
adapted, or modified to appear as an actual and identifiable child. It does not include images 
or items depicting minors that are drawings, cartoons, sculptures, or paintings. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 5 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2