START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1216 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1216 
(Delegate Phillips) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Insurance – Certificates of Guarantee for County Bond Requirements – All 
Counties 
 
 
This bill authorizes, but does not require, any county in the State, instead of only specified 
counties, to honor certificates of guarantee issued by a nonprofit association of contractors, 
or its wholly owned subsidiary in order to satisfy certain county bond requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland Insurance Administration can enforce the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill authorizes, but does not require, counties to honor certificates of 
guarantee issued by a nonprofit association of contractors. Any impact on county 
government finances is expected to be minimal. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “certificate of guarantee” means an instrument that is issued on behalf 
of a contractor for the purpose of satisfying county bond requirements for public 
improvements or other county bond requirements. A “contractor” means a person that, for 
a fixed price, commission, fee, or percentage, undertakes to bid on or accepts or offers to 
accept orders or contracts to perform or supervise the construction, improvement, or 
maintenance of a building, structure, or road.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1216/ Page 2 
Counties that are authorized but are not required to honor certificates of guarantee include 
Baltimore, Calvert, Charles, Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, St. Mary’s, and 
Washington. Baltimore City is also authorized but is not required to honor certificates of 
guarantee. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Department of Legislative Services does not anticipate the bill 
to materially affect local finances or operations, since the bill authorizes, but does not 
require, counties to honor certificates of guarantee issued by a nonprofit association of 
contractors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Anne Arundel, Cecil, Frederick, Harford, and Somerset counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
me/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2