START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1284 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1284 
(Delegate Guzzone) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Residential Service Agencies - Private Duty Nursing - On-Site Nurse Training 
Programs 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to adopt regulations that 
authorize a residential service agency (RSA) to provide training to a specified licensed 
nurse after hire. An RSA that provides private duty nursing (PDN) services may employ a 
licensed nurse who does not meet clinical experience requirements if the RSA provides 
specified training and a competency evaluation. A training program and competency 
evaluation are subject to approval by MDH. The bill may not be construed to affect 
requirements relating to occupational licensure, scope of practice, or standards of care.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $99,700 in FY 2027 for 
additional staff. Medicaid expenditures increase by $105,100 (50% general funds,  
50% federal funds) in FY 2027 for additional staff; federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$52,600 
$62,400 
$65,300 
$68,300 
$71,200 
GF Expenditure 
$99,700 
$118,200 
$123,600 
$129,200 
$134,800 
GF/FF Exp. 
$105,100 
$124,900 
$130,600 
$136,500 
$142,500 
Net Effect 
($152,300) 
($180,600) 
($188,900) 
($197,400) 
($206,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1284/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An RSA must (1) establish and implement a training program designed to 
ensure safe and competent care based on patient needs; (2) ensure the nurse receives 
clinical supervision by a registered nurse (RN) qualified in PDN services; (3) assign the 
nurse to a qualified preceptor or clinical supervision until competency is demonstrated; 
(4) document satisfactory completion of required competency standards in the nurse’s 
personnel file; and (5) conduct competency evaluations of the nurse annually or on a more 
frequent schedule as required by MDH for disciplinary purposes. 
 
Current Law:  An RSA is an agency that employs or contracts with individuals to provide 
at least one home health care service for compensation to an unrelated sick or disabled 
individual. Some RSAs have nurses that provide skilled care and certified caregivers that 
provide assistance with activities of daily living. Other RSAs provide physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, or speech therapy, or durable medical equipment. RSAs are licensed 
by the Office of Health Care Quality in MDH. As of March 2, 2026, there were  
2,986 licensed RSAs in Maryland. 
 
MDH must adopt regulations that set standards for the care, treatment, health, safety, 
welfare, and comfort of individuals who receive home health care services through an RSA. 
The regulations must provide for the licensing of RSAs and include provisions that: 
 
 
provide for the establishment of RSAs; 
 
establish qualifications for licensure; 
 
set minimum standards for individuals who provide home health care services 
through an RSA; and 
 
require the RSA to screen and verify the character references of all home health care 
providers that are employed by the RSA.  
 
Private Duty Nursing 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.09.53.01), PDN services means skilled nursing 
services for recipients who require more individual and continuous care than is available 
under the home health program, and which are provided by an RN or a licensed practical 
nurse, in a recipient's own home or another setting when normal life activities take the 
recipient outside his or her home. A “home health aide” (HHA) means an individual, 
regardless of title, who meets all the conditions of participation specified in specified 
federal regulations and the Maryland Nurse Practice Act. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1284/ Page 3 
Nurses rendering or supervising the provision of PDN services must be licensed, certified, 
or otherwise legally authorized to practice or deliver services in the state in which the 
service is provided.  
 
To participate in Medicaid, each RSA must meet specified requirements including 
verifying the credentials and required work experience of nursing professionals providing 
PDN services. A provider must ensure that each nurse, certified nursing assistant (CNA), 
or HHA rendering services to a participant, among other things:   
 
 
has a valid, nontemporary, nursing license or certification to provide nursing, CNA, 
or HHA services in the jurisdiction in which services are rendered; 
 
has completed a skills checklist and demonstration of competency on an annual 
basis that was observed, documented, and verified by the signature of the RN 
supervisor or an RN designated by the supervisor; 
 
demonstrates to the provider’s nurse supervisor sufficient specialized training and 
experience to deliver the level of service required by each participant to whom the 
nurse, CNA, or HHA renders direct care; and 
 
demonstrates to the provider’s nurse supervisor, on a continuing basis, the ability to 
carry out competently the services specified in a participant's care plan, subject to 
review by MDH or its designee. 
 
A provider must maintain a personnel folder for each nurse, CNA, and HHA which must 
include the following:  (1) verification of current nursing license or certification; (2) a copy 
of current CPR certification; (3) documentation related to, among other things, verification 
that any nurse who serves a participant younger than age 19 has past employment of at 
least one year of clinical experience which includes pediatric direct patient care within the 
last three years and verification of past employment which must include at least one year 
of clinical experience within the last three years; (4) written verification of a criminal 
background check; and (5) documentation of a completed skills checklist.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires MDH to adopt regulations that authorize an RSA 
that provides PDN services to provide training to a specified licensed nurse and approve 
specified training programs and competency evaluations. 
 
Medicaid  
 
Medicaid advises that there are 1,247 Medicaid enrolled RSAs providing personal 
assistance services in the State, of which 94 provide PDN services. In fiscal 2025, MDH 
reimbursed $513.3 million for personal assistance services provided to 16,151 Medicaid 
participants. Therefore, Medicaid advises that additional staff are required to promulgate 
regulations and conduct on-site provider audits to ensure compliance with the bill.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1284/ Page 4 
Thus, Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) increase by $105,121 
in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one nurse consultant to promulgate regulations and conduct 
provider audits of 94 RSAs providing PDN services to Medicaid recipients. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$95,980 
Operating Expenses 
     9,141 
Total FY 2027 Medicaid Expenditures 
$105,121 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Office of Health Care Quality 
 
MDH advises that the Office of Health Care Quality will approve specified training 
programs and competency evaluations, and that additional staff with expertise in PDN are 
required. Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $99,736 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one nurse surveyor to approve training programs and competency evaluations and 
conduct complaint investigations related to the bill’s training and evaluation requirements. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$90,595 
Operating Expenses 
9,141 
Total FY 2027 MDH Expenditures 
$99,736 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1284/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5