START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1276 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1276 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
West North Avenue Development Authority - Neighborhood Social Connection 
and Development Program - Establishment (WNADA Neighborhood Social 
Connection and Development Act) 
 
   
This bill establishes the Neighborhood Social Connection and Development Program in 
the West North Avenue Development Authority (WNADA). The purpose of the program 
is to foster social connections to support neighborhood development within the West North 
Avenue Corridor by providing technical support to specified entities and awarding grants, 
as specified. The bill requires WNADA to award grants to implement the program, though 
WNADA may set aside existing funds totaling no more than $500,000 for such grants. The 
bill terminates September 30, 2029, concurrent with the termination date of 
Chapters 215 and 216 of 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  WNADA expenditures in total are likely not affected but may be redirected 
from other priorities as it must award grants under the program, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not directly affected.  
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City operations and finances are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  While WNADA must award grants under the bill, it may only do so for 
(1) social gatherings, including block parties, cultural festivals, parades, speaker series, and 
service or recreational events; (2) outreach initiatives, including neighborhood newsletters, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1276/ Page 2 
community bulletins, or digital content, to raise awareness of social events and connect 
residents with available resources and services; (3) stipends to compensate volunteers for 
the time used to organize projects, refreshments at program designated events, rental and 
event spaces, and materials for program events; (4) operating support for participating 
organizations; (5) social connection projects to create and maintain green spaces or other 
community gathering spaces; (6) resources for training and hiring community organizers; 
and (7) resources for grant application efforts.  
 
Participating organizations must collaborate with residents of the West North Avenue 
Corridor in the planning and implementation of events and projects to ensure that activities 
reflect neighborhood priorities and, to the extent practicable, that events and activities are 
led by residents.  
 
By July 1, 2029, WNADA must compile evaluations and outcomes of programs to develop 
a template for neighborhood building and provide scaling recommendations to similar 
organizations in the State and across the United States. By December 1, 2027, and annually 
thereafter (in 2028 only, under current termination provisions), WNADA must report to 
the Governor and the General Assembly on its comprehensive grant-awarding activities.  
 
Current Law:  Chapters 80 and 81 of 2021 established WNADA for the purpose of 
developing a comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy for the benefit of a 
specified “target area” and “buffer zone” in Baltimore City, generally defined as  
West North Avenue and the surrounding area in Baltimore City. The Acts establish 
provisions governing the membership, procedures, and duties of WNADA. Under 
Chapter 136 of 2023, the authority is generally exempt from State procurement law, 
although WNADA is still subject to written policy and procedure requirements  
for exempt units and the State’s Minority Business Enterprise program. By  
December 15, 2023, WNADA was required to report its comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization strategy, including any procurement activities undertaken by the authority, 
to the Governor and specified committees of the General Assembly.  
 
Chapters 215 and 216 altered the composition, powers, and duties of WNADA. Among 
other things, the Acts created a special fund to carry out the purposes of WNADA, 
exempted WNADA from specified provisions of State law, and generally modified the 
statutory authority of WNADA to more closely align with that of a State economic 
development authority. The Acts also extended the authorization for WNADA until 
September 30, 2029, authorized the Governor to include an appropriation to WNADA, and 
required WNADA to be self-sustaining beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  WNADA must award grants under the program, but the amount for 
them is capped at $500,000. This analysis assumes that grants can be awarded in 
fiscal 2027 within the appropriation for WNADA; the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1276/ Page 3 
includes $19.8 million for WNADA. However, as the authority must be self-sustaining in 
its final two years (given the current termination date), the requirement may necessitate 
funding needed for other purposes being used for program grants instead. The Department 
of Legislative Services advises that the bill does not specify if WNADA is limited to 
issuing $500,000 in total for grants under the program or may issue up to $500,000 for 
grants each fiscal year. For the purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that WNADA awards 
grants each year but the total amount awarded across all three years is within the $500,000 
limit. WNADA advises that it can administer the program and complete other requirements 
under the bill (develop a template and report annually) with existing staff.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 816 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  West North Avenue Development Authority; Department of 
Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3