START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1259 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1259 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Zoning Authorities - Operation of Family Child Care Homes - Prohibitions and 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill specifies that a local jurisdiction, by local ordinance, resolution, law, or rule 
(1) may not deny or restrict the operation of a family child care home or large family child 
care home that meets the licensing requirements established by the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) and (2) must designate the operation of a family child 
care home or large family child care home as a residential activity, and a permitted use 
under residential zoning requirements. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local government finances, but 
may have an operational impact, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Subject to limited exception, family child care homes and large family 
child care homes may not operate in the State unless they are registered. The State Board 
of Education is required to adopt regulations that relate to the registration of family child 
care homes and large family child care homes. A family child care home is a residence in 
which family child care is provided for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is 
a residence in which family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 
12 children. Statute and regulation include additional provisions regarding the ages of 
children in care. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1259/ Page 2 
Chapter 375 of 2025 established that a local jurisdiction may not, by local ordinance, 
resolution, law, or rule, limit the number of children for which a family child care home or 
large family child care home provides family child care to below the number authorized by 
MSDE.  
 
Chapter 375 also established that the governing documents of a common ownership 
community (COC) may not prohibit or restrict (1) the establishment and operation of a 
family child care home or large family child care home or (2) the use of the roads, 
sidewalks, and other common elements of the COC by users of the family child care 
home/large family child care home. The operation of a family child care home or 
large family child care home must be considered a residential activity and a permitted 
activity by a COC. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Association of Counties advises that the bill may limit 
a county’s ability to enforce specific standards for family child care homes in residential 
areas intended to protect public health and safety and ensure neighborhood compatibility. 
Further, counties may be unable to enforce certain regulations related to road capacity. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may increase opportunities for family child care providers 
that qualify as small businesses by the restrictions imposed on a local zoning authority 
regarding their operation and zoning classification.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2