START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1245 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1245 
(Delegate Edelson) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Baltimore First Responders Child Care Support and Accessibility Program - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Baltimore First Responders Child Care Support and Accessibility 
Program within the Maryland State Department of Education’s (MSDE) Office of Child 
Care to support and expand a pilot program in Baltimore City that provides monthly  
child care allowances to first responders to access quality child care that aligns with the 
demands of a career in public safety. Beginning in fiscal 2028, the Governor must include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $600,000 to the program. MSDE must report 
annually to the Governor and the General Assembly on the program beginning 
September 1, 2028, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No assumed effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $718,900 in FY 2028 for staff and due to the mandated appropriation. Future 
years reflect inflation, mandated funding, and ongoing operating costs. State revenues are 
not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028.     
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
718,900 
717,100 
722,300 
727,700 
Net Effect 
$0 
($718,900) 
($717,100) 
($722,300) 
($727,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City did not respond to multiple requests for information on 
the fiscal and operational impact of the bill. Therefore, the Department of Legislative 
Services is unable to reliably estimate any fiscal and/or operational impacts on 
Baltimore City agencies. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1245/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MSDE must administer the program in consultation with (1) the Baltimore 
Police Department; (2) the Baltimore City Fire Department, including emergency medical 
services personnel; and (3) any nonprofit organization partners. 
 
The funds must be used to provide child care allowances to first responders in 
Baltimore City to (1) support dependent children in early childhood development;  
(2) recruit and retain first responders; and (3) promote public safety.  
 
The annual report must provide information on the following: 
 
 
the number of first responders who received a child care allowance under the 
program during the immediately preceding fiscal year disaggregated by local public 
safety agency that provides emergency response services;  
 
the number of children served during the immediately preceding fiscal year;  
 
impacts on first responder recruitment and retention and public safety, including 
attendance, reliability, and wellness; and  
 
any other relevant information. 
 
Current Law:  The State oversees a variety of early education services that are provided 
to Maryland children and their families in cooperation with local governments, local school 
systems, and private child care providers. The Division of Early Childhood coordinates the 
State’s early childhood care and education system and is composed of three subdivisions:  
(1) the Office of Child Care; (2) the Office of Early Learning and Instruction; and (3) the 
Office of Family Support Services.        
 
Child Care Centers 
 
Subject to limited exception, child care centers may not operate in the State unless they are 
licensed. The State Board of Education is required to adopt regulations that relate to the 
licensing and operation of child care centers. A child care center is an agency, institution, 
or establishment that, for part or all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, 
and at least twice a week, offers or provides child care to children who do not have the 
same parentage except as otherwise provided for in law or regulation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1245/ Page 3 
Family Child Care Homes and Large Family Child Care Homes 
 
Generally, family child care homes and large family child care homes may not operate in 
the State unless they are registered. The State Board of Education is required to adopt 
regulations that relate to the registration of family child care homes and large family child 
care homes. A family child care home is a residence in which family child care is provided 
for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in which family child 
care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that the payment model established by the bill (direct 
payments to individuals) differs from its experience managing a provider-based model 
(e.g., the model used for the Child Care Scholarship Program, which provides payments 
directly to child care providers). Therefore, additional staff are likely necessary to 
determine eligibility and issue monthly child care allowances directly to eligible 
first responders in Baltimore City. Despite the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date, this 
estimate assumes that the program isn’t implemented until fiscal 2028 when the mandated 
funding becomes available. General fund expenditures therefore increase by $718,948 in 
fiscal 2028, which accounts for the grant program commencing operation on July 1, 2027 
once the mandated funding is available. 
 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager to assist with managing the 
new program. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. The estimate also reflects the bill’s mandated appropriation of 
$600,000 that must be used to provide child care allowances to first responders in 
Baltimore City.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$109,085 
Operating Expenses 
9,863 
Grant Expenditures 
  600,000 
Total FY 2028 State Expenditures 
$718,948 
 
Future year expenditures reflect continued mandated funding and a full salary with annual 
increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide child care likely benefit under the 
bill, as grant funds provided to first responders must be used for child care expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1245/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4