START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1271 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1271 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections and 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Reparations - Board, Fund, and Excise Tax on Endowments - Establishment 
 
 
This bill imposes a 4% excise tax on endowments of nonpublic institutions. After 
administrative cost recovery, the proceeds of the endowment excise tax are deposited in 
the newly-established Maryland Reparations Fund to provide grants to persons impacted 
by historic inequality. A nonpublic institution with an endowment, including principal and 
interest earnings, of less than $2.0 billion is exempt from the excise tax. The bill also 
establishes the Maryland Reparations Board to make recommendations to the Governor 
and the General Assembly to provide grants to persons impacted by historic inequality. 
The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2026. Endowment excise tax provisions apply to 
tax year 2026 and beyond.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase significantly, potentially by more than 
$500.0 million annually, beginning in FY 2027. Special fund expenditures increase 
beginning as early as FY 2027 for administrative expenses and grants. General fund 
revenues and expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by at least $0.5 million in 
FY 2027 and may increase in future years, as discussed below.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful to the extent grants are provided to small 
businesses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1271/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Endowment Excise Tax 
 
A taxable institution must annually file an endowment excise tax return by April 15 and on 
any other dates specified by the Comptroller in regulation. A taxable institution must 
maintain monthly records of the endowment account statements, including deposits, 
withdrawals, interest earnings, and any other information the Comptroller requires. The 
bill establishes personal liability for the endowment excise tax and related interest and 
penalties.   
 
The Comptroller may require an institution subject to the endowment excise tax to post 
security for the tax in an amount determined by the Comptroller. An institution that is 
required to file an endowment excise tax return and that willfully fails to file the return as 
required under the bill is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $5,000, 
imprisonment for up to five years, or both. Certain other existing prohibitions and other 
provisions relating to the administration of the tax law apply to the endowment tax.  
 
Maryland Reparations Board 
 
The board may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses 
under the standard State travel regulations. To achieve its stated purpose, the board must 
examine reparations payments made and benefits offered in the United States by the federal 
government, states, cities, religious institutions, and colleges and universities and use any 
other information necessary to recommend grants under the bill. The board must report to 
the Governor and the General Assembly on its recommendations for grants by 
October 1, 2026, and annually thereafter.  
 
Maryland Reparations Fund  
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that consists of endowment tax revenues distributed 
to the fund in accordance with the bill, money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, 
interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of 
the fund. The fund may be used only for grants to persons impacted by historic inequality 
and the administrative expenses of the board, which may not exceed 20% of the money in 
the fund annually. Money expended from the fund is supplemental to and is not intended 
to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for a similar purpose. 
Grants must be used for initiatives that have the explicit goal of repairing inequities that 
derive from historic discrimination and may not be used for law enforcement activity.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1271/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Reparations Commission 
 
Chapter 9 of the 2025 special session established the Maryland Reparations Commission 
to study and make recommendations relating to appropriate benefits to be offered to 
individuals impacted by historical inequality. The commission must submit a preliminary 
report to the Governor and the General Assembly by January 1, 2027, and a final report by 
November 1, 2027. The commission terminates June 30, 2028.  
 
In conducting the required study, the commission must examine (1) reparations payments 
made and benefits offered in the United States by the federal government, states, cities, 
religious institutions, and colleges and universities; (2) types of benefits appropriate for 
reparations, including official statements of apology, monetary compensation, property tax 
rebates, social service assistance, licensing and permit fee waivers and reimbursement, 
down payment assistance for the purchase of residential real property, business incentives, 
child care, debt forgiveness, and higher education tuition payment waivers and 
reimbursement; (3) the history of slavery in Maryland and the number of individuals whose 
ancestors were enslaved in the State; (4) inequitable government policies, the size of 
impacted populations, and how public and private institutions benefited from these 
policies; and (5) any other topic deemed appropriate by the commission.  
 
The commission’s recommendations must include specified procedures for determining 
eligibility and approving applications for benefits and an estimate of the costs associated 
with awarding recommended reparations. If monetary compensation is a type of reparation 
recommended by the commission, the commission must recommend, among other things, 
potential sources of funding and the feasibility of creating and administering a reparations 
fund.  
 
Federal Excise Tax on Net Investment Income of Private Colleges and Universities  
 
The federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 imposed a 1.4% excise tax on the net investment 
income of certain private colleges and universities that enroll at least 500 tuition-paying 
students during the preceding tax year and have endowment assets (other than those used 
directly in carrying out the institution’s exempt purpose) exceeding $500,000 per student. 
The federal One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) of 2025 modifies the excise tax for  
tax years after 2025. Among other changes, OBBBA exempts from the tax institutions that 
enroll less than 3,000 tuition-paying students during the preceding tax year and establishes 
tiered excise tax rates ranging from 1.4% to 8.0% based on an institution’s student-adjusted 
endowment (1.4% if at least $500,000 per student but not more than $750,000 per student; 
4.0% if more than $750,000 per student but not more than $2.0 million per student; and 
8.0% if more than $2.0 million per student).  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1271/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  It is assumed that the bill’s endowment excise tax provisions primarily 
impact Johns Hopkins University, which reported endowment net assets totaling 
$13.7 billion as of June 30, 2025. Thus, special fund revenues for the newly-created 
Maryland Reparations Fund potentially exceed $500 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027. However, it is unclear how the university or any other affected institution will 
respond to the tax. (The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) is unaware of any other 
affected institutions at this time.) 
 
Special fund expenditures increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027 as the Maryland 
Reparations Fund is used for expenses of the Maryland Reparations Board and for 
authorized grants. DLS notes that the bill does not specify an agency responsible for 
providing staff for the board or expressly authorize the board to hire staff. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office reports one-time programming costs ranging from $0.5 million 
to $2.0 million in fiscal 2027; thus, general fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office 
increase by at least $0.5 million in fiscal 2027. General fund revenues increase by a 
corresponding amount, reflecting endowment excise tax proceeds retained by the 
Comptroller for administrative costs. The Comptroller’s Office further advises that as 
many as five additional regular, full-time staff are needed in order to implement the bill. 
DLS is unable to independently verify the Comptroller’s personnel needs at this time but 
assumes that the bill’s requirements can be handled with fewer than five additional 
full‑time staff, if not with existing personnel resources. To the extent the Comptroller 
requires an additional full-time revenue examiner, related general fund expenditures may 
total $62,200 in fiscal 2027 and upward of $71,000 annually thereafter, and general fund 
revenues increase by corresponding amounts.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Johns 
Hopkins University; National Center for Education Statistics; CCH AnswerConnect; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4