START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1205 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1205 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
 
 
Education - Minimum Wage for Education Support Professionals 
 
 
This bill requires local school boards to pay education support professionals (ESPs) a 
minimum wage of $25 per hour by July 1, 2028. “Education support professionals” are 
noncertificated public school employees designated as part of a nonsupervisory bargaining 
unit. The State Board of Education (SBE) may adopt regulations to carry out the bill. By 
December 1, 2026, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must submit a 
report to the Governor and General Assembly with an estimate of the total cost of 
implementing the bill’s requirement, disaggregated by local school system. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. SBE can adopt regulations, if necessary, with existing budgeted 
resources. The bill otherwise affects only local school systems. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase significantly, likely by 
hundreds of millions of dollars, beginning in FY 2029, but a more reliable estimate is not 
feasible, as discussed below. No effect on local revenues. This bill imposes a mandate on 
a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State minimum wage is $15 per hour, which is not adjusted annually 
for inflation. There is no minimum wage rate for ESPs. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1205/ Page 2 
A “public school employee” means a noncertificated individual who is employed for at 
least nine months per year on a full-time basis by a public school employer. In 
Baltimore City, a public school employee includes a noncertificated employee who does 
not work for at least nine months per year. A “noncertificated employee,” in 
Montgomery County, means only a full-time employee, but is otherwise not defined in 
State law. 
 
Public school employees may form, join, and participate in the activities of employee 
organizations of their own choice to be represented on all matters that relate to salaries, 
wages, hours, and other working conditions. In general, and subject to specified exceptions, 
each county may not have more than three bargaining units for public school employees, 
and each unit may not include both supervisory and nonsupervisory employees, as defined 
in statute. 
 
Joint Chairmen’s Report 
 
The 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) required MSDE to submit a report to the budget 
committees by August 1, 2025 with:   
 
 
the number of ESPs by local school system and job classification; 
 
the number of vacant ESP positions by local school system; and 
 
the number of ESPs statewide that earn less than $25 per hour, by local school 
system and job classification. 
 
The request specified that ESPs are considered to include, but are not limited to, the 
following job categories:  food service, transportation, custodial and maintenance workers, 
skilled trades, student health services, clerical services security services, and paraeducators 
or other individual student aides. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The report submitted by MSDE in response to the JCR request 
identified 46,884 ESP positions in local school systems. MSDE advises that its staff data 
collection system does not distinguish between supervisory and nonsupervisory personnel, 
so the count may include some supervisory staff. Exhibit 1 shows the total number of 
ESP positions in each local school system and the number identified as not earning at least 
$25 per hour.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1205/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Educational Support Professionals Earning Less than $25 per hour, 
by Local School System 
 
Total ESP 
Positions 
Vacant 
Positions 
Filled 
Positions 
ESPs Earning 
Less Than 
$25 per hour 
% Below 
$25 per hour 
Allegany 
429 
23 
406 
272 
63% 
Anne Arundel 
3,362 
125 
3,237 
1,314 
39% 
Baltimore City 
3,145 
354 
2,791 
958 
30% 
Baltimore 
5,288 
202 
5,086 
1,678 
32% 
Calvert 
851 
83 
768 
362 
43% 
Caroline 
382 
6 
376 
274 
72% 
Carroll 
1,128 
33 
1,095 
550 
49% 
Cecil 
684 
38 
646 
262 
38% 
Charles 
1,597 
56 
1,541 
638 
40% 
Dorchester 
314 
8 
306 
192 
61% 
Frederick 
2,848 
127 
2,721 
1,568 
55% 
Garrett 
189 
1 
188 
104 
55% 
Harford 
1,891 
102 
1,789 
1,002 
53% 
Howard 
2,875 
107 
2,768 
1,008 
35% 
Kent 
120 
5 
115 
67 
56% 
Montgomery 
9,831 
370 
9,461 
1,087 
11% 
Prince George’s 
7,534 
848 
6,686 
2,023 
27% 
Queen Anne’s 
290 
4 
286 
123 
42% 
St. Mary’s 
862 
8 
854 
367 
43% 
Somerset 
221 
33 
188 
162 
73% 
Talbot 
231 
17 
214 
156 
68% 
Washington 
1,391 
82 
1,309 
958 
69% 
Wicomico 
993 
32 
961 
645 
65% 
Worcester 
428 
6 
422 
247 
58% 
Totals 
46,884 
2,670 
44,214 
16,017 
34% 
 
ESP:  Education Support Professional 
 
Source:  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
As Exhibit 1 shows, there are approximately 16,000 ESPs earning less than $25 per hour 
in the State. Without additional information about their wages and hours worked, a reliable 
estimate of the cost of increasing their hourly wage to $25 is not feasible. Responses from 
a small number of local school systems confirm the significant fiscal effect.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1205/ Page 4 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools estimates a total cost of approximately $46 million, 
which includes the cost of adjusting the wage scale to reflect a new base wage of  
$25 per hour. Frederick County Public Schools estimates a first-year cost of $77.3 million. 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools estimates a first-year cost of nearly $21 million. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, if all of the ESPs earning less than $25 per hour earn the 
State minimum wage ($15 per hour) and work an average of 6 hours per day for 180 days, 
the total cost of raising their wages to $25 per hour would be nearly $173 million, which 
does not account for fringe benefit payments tied to wages or the cost of increasing the 
wages of employees currently earning $25 per hour to account for rebasing the wage scale. 
To the extent that ESPs earn more than minimum wage or work for fewer hours and/or 
days, the total costs are less but likely in the hundreds of millions of dollars, divided across 
all 24 local school systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 892 and HB 1369 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 764 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Talbot County Public 
Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4