START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1208 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1208 
(Delegate Fisher) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Calvert County - Payment in Lieu of Taxes Agreements - Emergency Services 
 
   
This bill authorizes Calvert County to use revenue collected from any payment in lieu of 
taxes (PILOT) agreement in effect on or after October 1, 2026, in an amount that the county 
commissioners deem appropriate to support services organizations and support services 
programs in the county. Support services must comply with specified criteria in order to 
receive funding. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not alter the amount of revenue received by Calvert County 
through PILOT agreements but rather authorizes the county commissioners to distribute 
revenue received through these agreements to various support services organizations and 
support services programs in the county. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A first due area is defined as a delineated geographical area approved by 
the Calvert County Fire and Rescue Commission in which a volunteer fire company or 
rescue squad normally provides fire or rescue services in the event of a fire or another 
emergency. 
 
A support services organization includes:  (1) Calvert County fire companies and rescue 
squads; (2) the Calvert Advanced Life Support Unit; (3) the Calvert County Rescue Dive 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1208/ Page 2 
Team; and (4) other volunteer fire, rescue, and medical entities and emergency service 
providers designated by the county commissioners. 
 
A support services program includes:  (1) debt service for fire-fighting and rescue 
equipment, apparatuses, and facilities; (2) the Calvert County Length of Service  
Award Program; (3) Calvert County volunteer recruitment and retention programs;  
(4) Calvert County property tax incentive programs for volunteers; and (5) other volunteer 
fire, rescue, medical, and other emergency service programs designated by the county 
commissioners. 
 
Current Law:  A PILOT is an agreement between a jurisdiction and a developer, business, 
or landowner that substitutes a negotiated payment for annual real estate taxes that are 
traditionally due on a property. Calvert County public local laws authorize PILOTs for 
certain local utilities. Calvert County has two PILOT agreements; an agreement with 
Constellation, the Calvert Cliff’s nuclear power plant; and an agreement with Cove Point, 
the liquid natural gas (LNG) plant at Cove Point. Both of these agreements expired  
June 30, 2023; however, the county commissioners were able to renegotiate the agreements 
during fiscal 2025 resulting in the PILOT revenues becoming retroactive to July 1, 2023, 
for the entirety of fiscal 2024. Exhibit 1 shows the amount of revenue Calvert County 
receives from the two PILOT agreements for fiscal 2024 through 2026. Exhibit 2 shows 
the county general fund expenditures for emergency medical services for those same 
fiscal years. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Calvert County PILOT Revenues 
 
PILOTs 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Constellation  
$17,628,371 
$20,500,000 
$21,500,000 
Cove Point LNG  
60,000,000 
58,689,570 
60,000,000 
Total 
$77,628,371 
$79,189,570 
$81,500,000 
 
LNG:  liquid natural gas 
PILOT:  payment in lieu of taxes 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services; FY 2026 Calvert County Budget 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1208/ Page 3 
Exhibit 2 
Calvert County Expenditures for EMS 
Public Safety 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Fire-Rescue-EMS Division  
$709,389 
$701,657 
$652,374 
Volunteer Fire-Rescue-EMS Departments 
4,779,742 
5,071,692 
5,222,892 
Career EMS Department 
6,430,024 
5,480,573 
6,594,163 
Total 
$11,919,155 
$11,253,922 
$12,469,429 
 
EMS:  emergency medical services 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services; FY 2026 Calvert County Budget 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1540 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
me/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3