START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1230 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1230 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission - Procurement - Alterations  
PG/MC 102-26 
 
 
This bill expands an existing small business preference program in the Washington 
Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC) to include nonlocal small businesses and other 
businesses. WSSC may accept as a registered vendor in the program any person that is 
registered as a vendor through a vendor registration process in another jurisdiction or that 
self-certifies as a vendor in accordance with regulations that WSSC adopts. Finally, the bill 
repeals the name of WSSC’s Office of Supplier Diversity and Inclusion and authorizes 
WSSC to provide a name for the office.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. This bill affects only local government operations. 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill’s changes are procedural in nature and do not directly affect 
local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands WSSC’s preference program for local, small business 
enterprises to include nonlocal small businesses and other businesses that further the 
WSSC’s contracting, subcontracting, and economic objectives. As a result, it repeals 
requirements for WSSC to adopt specific criteria requiring businesses to (1) meet criteria 
defining a small business under State law and regulations and (2) either have their principal 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1230/ Page 2 
place of business be in Montgomery or Prince George’s counties or have at least 25% of 
their employees residing in those counties. 
 
Current Law:  The Office of Supplier Diversity and Inclusion within WSSC is required 
to (1) administer WSSC programs created to remedy discrimination against minority 
business enterprises (MBEs) and promote participation by local small business enterprises; 
(2) promote and coordinate WSSC plans, programs, and operations to remedy 
discrimination against MBEs and its effects; (3) promote the use of WSSC, local 
government, and private entities to remedy discrimination against MBEs and its effects; 
and (4) ensure compliance with certified MBE subcontract participation goals. The head 
of the Office is the Director of Supplier Diversity and Inclusion. 
 
WSSC may establish a local small business enterprise program by resolution or by adopting 
regulations, and the Office of Supplier Diversity and Inclusion must administer the 
program. The purpose of the program is to assist small businesses in Montgomery County 
and Prince George’s County by establishing a sheltered market or other appropriate 
preference or by facilitating the award of WSSC contracts or procurement contracts for 
goods and services to small businesses in the counties.  
 
WSSC must adopt administrative procedures for conducting the program, as well as 
eligibility criteria for businesses to qualify for the program, including (1) a requirement for 
small businesses to meet the criteria for a “small business” as defined in State regulations; 
(2) a requirement that the business’s principal place of business be in Montgomery County 
of Prince George’s County or that at least 25% of employees of the business reside in either 
of the counties; and (3) any other eligibility criteria WSSC determines to be necessary or 
appropriate for the promotion of small businesses in WSSC’s service area.  
 
A business may qualify as a local small business enterprise under the program without 
regard to the race, ethnicity, or gender of the participants in the business. WSSC must 
establish criteria for graduation from the program for a local small business that it 
determines no longer requires the assistance or benefits offered by the program. WSSC 
must review the eligibility criteria and administrative procedures of the program each year 
to assess their effectiveness in furthering the purpose of the program.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The changes made to the business participation and vendor 
development program allow WSSC to support additional small businesses, particularly 
those not located in Montgomery and Prince George’s counties, that were previously 
ineligible under the current program. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1230/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Washington 
Suburban Sanitary Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3