START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1279 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1279 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Catalytic Revitalization Project Tax Credit - Alterations 
 
 
This bill makes various alterations to the catalytic revitalization tax credit. Specifically, the 
bill (1) increases the aggregate limitation on initial tax credit certificates from $15.0 million 
every two years to $30.0 million annually; (2) expands project eligibility to include the 
substantial rehabilitation of property that is currently owned by the State, that is located 
within or adjacent to a transit-oriented development, or that is within a half-mile radius of 
a transit stop; (3) alters the manner in which the credit may be claimed for a workforce 
housing project; and (4) prohibits the Secretary of Housing and Community Development 
from accepting applications and awarding initial credit certificates for projects that are 
transit-oriented development projects or workforce housing projects unless the Secretary 
certifies that the State has not yet met continued production targets for housing units. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to initial credit certificates issued on or 
after July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, general fund revenues may decrease by an 
estimated $6.0 million in FY 2028 due to credits claimed against the income tax; 
future years reflect new and continued credits. To the extent credits are claimed against the 
corporate income tax, Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues and 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures also decrease (not shown 
below). General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $0.1 million in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($6.0) 
($9.0) 
($15.0) 
($18.0) 
GF Expenditure 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
Net Effect 
($0.1) 
($6.1) 
($9.1) 
($15.1) 
($18.1) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1279/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease, likely no earlier than FY 2028, to 
the extent the bill increases credits claimed against the corporate income tax. Local 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Workforce housing project” means a project in which at least 20% of the 
residential units produced are workforce housing units within the meaning of the 
Workforce Housing Grant Program. If a project is a workforce housing project, an 
individual, nonprofit organization, or business entity may claim the credit as follows (1) in  
each of the first two years for which the amount stated on a final tax credit certificate may 
be claimed, one-half of the certified amount attributable to the production of workforce 
housing units, and (2) in each of the three following tax years, one-third of the remaining 
certified amount. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 332 of 2021 established a refundable credit against the 
State income tax equal to 20% of the rehabilitation and new construction costs incurred for 
a qualified catalytic revitalization project in the State. The credit is administered by DHCD. 
DHCD may not issue additional tax credit certificates on or after January 1, 2031; after this 
termination date, previously issued tax credit certificates may continue to be claimed, 
refunded, carried forward, or transferred in accordance with existing provisions. 
 
Project Eligibility 
 
“Catalytic revitalization project” means the substantial rehabilitation of a property in the 
State (1) that was formerly owned by the State or federal government; (2) the rehabilitation 
of which will foster economic, housing, and community development within the 
community in which the property is located; and (3) that is out of service and was formerly 
used as a college or university, K-12 school, hospital, mental health facility, or military 
facility or installation. In consultation with the Department of Commerce, the Secretary of 
Housing and Community Development must develop regulations establishing a tax credit 
application process that emphasizes applications that promote affordable housing. 
 
Tax Credit Allowed; Aggregate Limitation on Tax Credit Certificates 
 
The Secretary of Housing and Community Development may not award initial credit 
certificates totaling more than $15.0 million within a two-year period. A final tax credit 
certificate is issued (1) on completion of a catalytic revitalization project for which an 
initial tax credit certificate has been issued or (2) for a phased project, on completion of a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1279/ Page 3 
phase, provided that the final tax credit certificate does not exceed 20% of the project’s 
eligible expenses to date or the aggregated limit of a project’s credit. For purposes of 
calculating the credit, new construction costs must be related to the construction of new 
structures that connect, expand, or integrate the existing structures to be rehabilitated and 
may not exceed 50% of the total costs of the catalytic revitalization project. An individual, 
nonprofit organization, or business entity awarded a tax credit certificate generally must 
claim the credit over the course of five consecutive tax years beginning with the tax year 
in which the final tax credit certificate is issued; however, a final tax credit certificate issued 
on completion of a phase of a catalytic revitalization project may be fully claimed in the 
tax year in which the certificate is issued. 
 
State Revenues:  Assuming that, both under the bill and current law, (1) initial tax credit 
certificates maximize available credits each year and (2) tax credits for which initial credit 
certificates are issued in fiscal 2027 are initially claimed for tax year 2027 (and so on) and 
for the following four consecutive tax years, general fund revenues decrease by an 
estimated $6.0 million in fiscal 2028, $9.0 million in fiscal 2029, $15.0 million in 
fiscal 2030, and $18.0 million in fiscal 2031. This estimate also assumes that tax credits 
awarded are claimed ratably over a five-year period and does not account for the impact of 
the bill’s alterations to the manner in which the credit may be claimed for a workforce 
housing project. Actual revenue losses under the bill may differ significantly from this 
estimate, as there is considerable uncertainty regarding the timing and amount of tax credit 
claims, both under the bill and current law. 
 
To the extent the bill results in an increase in credits claimed against the corporate 
income tax, HEIF and TTF revenues also decrease, likely no earlier than fiscal 2028. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill significantly increases the aggregate amount of credits 
available under the program and increases the frequency of program application periods 
from biennially to annually. This increase in program size necessitates additional personnel 
resources for DHCD. Thus, general fund expenditures for DHCD increase by an estimated 
$88,907 in fiscal 2027, which reflects a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 
effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring an additional program manager to 
assist in managing applications and monitoring compliance with program requirements. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$79,766 
Other Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 DHCD Expenditures 
$88,907 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1279/ Page 4 
TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants decrease, likely no earlier than 
fiscal 2028, to the extent the bill results in an increase in credits claimed against the 
corporate income tax. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local highway user revenues decrease, likely no earlier than fiscal 2028, 
to the extent the bill results in an increase in credits claimed against the corporate income 
tax. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4