START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1286 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1286 
(Delegate Behler, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - Barbershop and Beauty Salon 
License 
 
 
This bill expands and renames the barbershop beauty salon beer and wine license as the 
barbershop and beauty salon beer, wine, and liquor license in Anne Arundel County. The 
license authorizes the license holder to provide to a customer during any one visit up to 
1.7 ounces of liquor for on-premises consumption by the barbershop or beauty salon 
customer, as specified. The bill makes additional conforming changes. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Anne Arundel County 
expenditures or revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Each license authorizes the sale of alcoholic beverages in a different 
manner. The Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners issues 
several licenses for specific types of organizations and venues, including country club 
licenses, yacht club licenses, and country and golf club licenses, among others. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1286/ Page 2 
Chapter 551 of 2020 established the barbershop and beauty salon beer and wine license in 
Anne Arundel County. The board may issue the license to the holders of specified beauty 
salon or barbershop permits. A license holder may provide up to 12 ounces of beer or 
5 ounces of wine by the glass for on-premises consumption only while performing 
activities generally related to beauty salons or barbershops or while the customer is 
attending a fund-raising event at the barbershop or beauty salon. The license holder may 
provide beer and wine for on-premises consumption during normal business hours but not 
after 9:00 p.m. The annual license fee is $100. 
 
Additional Comments:  Anne Arundel County advises that there currently are  
two active barbershop and beauty salon beer and wine licenses in the county. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 852 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2