START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1270 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1270 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Notice of License Applications  
PG 322-26 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirements the Prince George’s County Board of License 
Commissioners publish notice of a license application hearing in at least two newspapers 
of general circulation in the county. The bill requires the board to publish notice of license 
application hearings on the board’s website, through social media, and by e-mail. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures decrease, likely minimally, beginning 
in FY 2027, due to a reduction in costs associated with publishing hearing information in 
local newspapers. Prince George’s County revenues are not affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners is required 
to publish notice of a license application hearing in at least two newspapers of general 
circulation in the county at least 30 days before the day on which license applications are 
required to be filed for consideration at the hearing.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1270/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2