START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1214 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1214 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Vehicle Manufacturers and Dealers - Dealer Associations - Administrative 
Hearings 
 
 
This bill allows a dealer association on behalf of itself, a dealer, or a group of dealers to 
request a hearing with the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to either (1) resolve a 
dispute between a dealer, a designated dealer successor, or a dealer association and a 
manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch or (2) seek clarification or interpretation of any 
provision of applicable law. The opportunity to request a hearing does not apply to a dispute 
involving a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch that does not have at least 
one franchised dealer in the State. “Dealer association” means a business entity that (1) is 
primarily owned by or composed of dealers that collectively represent a majority of the 
franchised dealers in the State and (2) primarily represents the interests of dealers. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances; any increase 
in caseload for MVA and the Office of Administrative Hearings can be handled with 
existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the operations or finances of the 
Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County, which is where any decisions or orders would be 
appealed. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1214/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A dealer, designated dealer successor, as specified, manufacturer, 
distributor, or factory branch may request a hearing under Title 12, Subtitle 2 of the 
Transportation Article to (1) resolve a dispute under any provision of Title 15 of the 
Transportation Article between a dealer or a designated dealer successor and a 
manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch or (2) seek clarification or interpretation of any 
provision of applicable law. A hearing held under the Maryland Vehicle Law must be 
conducted in accordance with the provisions governing contested cases under the 
Administrative Procedure Act. An aggrieved party to a hearing involving a dispute (as 
specified above) may appeal a decision or order of MVA to the Circuit Court for 
Anne Arundel County.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Dealers that are small businesses may benefit from having a dealer 
association act as an intermediary in a dispute with a manufacturer, distributor, or factory 
branch, with the association requesting a hearing with MVA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 968 and HB 1275 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 345 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2