START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1272 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1272 
(Delegate Acevero, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Kinship Care 
 
 
This bill requires a local department of social services, in selecting a placement that is in 
the best interest of a child in an out-of-home placement, to consider the child’s feelings 
and views about a prospective kinship caregiver. When determining whether to approve an 
individual as a kinship caregiver, the local department must also consider the individual’s 
(1) knowledge and understanding of the safety concerns that led to the need for the child’s 
placement; (2) previous involvement in helping or protecting the child; (3) previous 
involvement in preventing occurrences of abuse or maltreatment of the child; (4) current 
ability to protect the child; (5) ability to understand the need for the protection of the child; 
(6) willingness to cooperate with the local department; (7) whether there have been 
previous or current allegations of abuse or neglect alleged against the individual by the 
child, the child’s parent, or another relative of the child; (8) the individual’s willingness to 
abide by court orders; and (9) the individual’s willingness to cooperate with the child’s 
parents and facilitate contact as ordered by the court and guided by the safety plan. The bill 
also expands the definition of a kinship caregiver to include an individual identified by the 
child, as otherwise specified by statute. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1272/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Department of Human Services (DHS), through its Social Services 
Administration, has the primary responsibility for child welfare services throughout the 
State, which are provided primarily by the local departments of social services. 
 
DHS is required to establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor children 
(1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 180 days, by 
a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who are abused, 
abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that continued 
residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has committed the child 
to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with the approval of DHS, 
are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under a voluntary placement 
agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a mental illness, as 
specified. An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, group and residential 
care, kinship care, and a treatment foster care home. 
 
Kinship Caregivers 
 
Chapter 429 of 2024 altered statutory provisions relating to the kinship care program within 
DHS to further prioritize placing children in need of out-of-home placement with kinship 
caregivers. A “kinship caregiver” includes (1) a kinship parent; (2) an individual who is 
related to the child through blood or marriage, adoption, tribal law or custom, or cultural 
custom or practice; and (3) an individual who is unrelated to the child but has a strong 
familial or other significant bond with the child, or is a person identified by the child’s 
parent. A kinship caregiver may not be younger than age 18. 
 
A local department, in selecting a placement that is in the best interests of a child in need 
of out-of-home placement, must give preference to placement with a kinship caregiver, 
unless there is good cause to the contrary. If a local department cannot locate a kinship 
caregiver at the time of initial placement, preference must be given to a placement that 
most approximates a family in which the child’s special needs, if any, may be met, taking 
into account (1) the proximity of the placement to the child’s home, extended family, or 
siblings; (2) the child’s culture or language continuity; (3) the child’s age; and (4) the 
child’s developmental and educational needs. 
 
If a kinship caregiver is located after the placement of a child in a foster care setting, a 
local department must, in the best interest of the child, place the child with the kinship 
caregiver. A local department must approve an individual as a kinship caregiver if (1) the 
individual is related to the child through blood or marriage, adoption, tribal law or custom, 
or cultural custom or practice; (2) the individual has a strong familial or other significant 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1272/ Page 3 
bond to the child or the child’s family, or is a person identified by the child’s parent; and 
(3) placement with the individual is in the child’s best interest. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3