START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1232 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1232 
(Delegate Edelson, et al.) (By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Baltimore City - Economic Development Project in Downtown RISE District - 
Payment in Lieu of Taxes 
 
 
This bill authorizes Baltimore City to exempt or partially exempt specified economic 
development projects from the city real property tax under specified conditions. To qualify 
for the tax exemption, the owner of the economic development project and the 
Baltimore City Board of Estimates must enter into a payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) 
agreement. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.    
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.    
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 
to the extent the city enters into PILOT agreements with economic development projects. 
The amount of any revenue decrease depends on the number of economic development 
projects in the Downtown RISE District and the assessed value of real property of these 
projects. Property tax revenue decreases will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT agreements 
between the city government and economic development projects.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes Baltimore City to exempt or partially exempt an 
economic development project located in the Downtown RISE District from the city real 
property tax if (1) the owner of the economic development project demonstrates to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1232/ Page 2 
satisfaction of the Baltimore City Board of Estimates that the City of Baltimore or its 
designated agency has conducted an economic analysis of the project, including an 
assessment of the financial necessity for an exemption, and (2) the owner of the economic 
development project and the Baltimore City Board of Estimates enter into a PILOT 
agreement on or before June 30, 2036. The PILOT agreement must specify the amount that 
the owner must pay to the city each year in lieu of the payment of city property taxes during 
the term of the agreement. 
 
To be eligible for a PILOT agreement, the owner of the economic development project 
must (1) apply to enter into a PILOT agreement; (2) have building permits issued; and 
(3) have satisfied or waived all conditions for the financing required for the construction 
of the project. 
 
On or before January 1 each year, the City of Baltimore or its designated agency must 
report to the president of the Baltimore City Council and the General Assembly a 
description of each economic development project for which the city has entered into a 
PILOT agreement during the preceding fiscal year, including a statement of the economic 
analysis. For completed projects that have a PILOT agreement, the report must include 
(1) the number and types of jobs created during the preceding fiscal year and estimated to 
be created during the following fiscal year; (2) the total taxes that the project is estimated 
to have generated for the city during the preceding fiscal year and estimated during the 
following fiscal year; and (3) any other economic benefits of the project.  
 
An “economic development project” is defined as a real estate development project that 
consists of newly constructed or rehabilitated commercial or multifamily residential 
property if the real estate development project exists within the Downtown RISE District 
and includes at least one of the following:  (1) a hotel; (2) an office building; (3) a retail 
facility; (4) a multifamily residential facility; or (5) a mixed-use facility that contains one or 
more of the facilities described above. 
 
The “Downtown RISE District” in Baltimore City consists of:  (1) ward 4, precinct 1; 
(2) ward 4, precinct 2; (3) ward 4, precinct 3; (4) ward 22, precinct 1; (5) ward 22, 
precinct 2; and (6) ward 21, precinct 5. 
 
Current Law:  While local governments have limited ability to alter real property 
exemptions, they have been granted broad authority to exempt certain types of personal 
property from property taxation. The types of property exempt from local taxation are 
enumerated in Title 7 of the Tax – Property Article. Exemptions apply to State property 
taxation as well, although the State does not tax personal property. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1232/ Page 3 
Existing Authorization in Baltimore City  
 
Chapter 643 of 1999 authorized Baltimore City to provide a property tax exemption for 
specified economic development projects located in an urban renewal area. Subsequent 
legislation (Chapters 573 and 574 of 2013) expanded this authorization for economic 
development projects located in any part of the city. An economic development project is 
defined as a real estate development project for which a PILOT agreement was entered into 
prior to June 30, 1999, in accordance with the current PILOT for developing property 
located within urban renewal areas or that consists of newly constructed or rehabilitated 
commercial or multifamily residential property. In addition, the project must meet the 
following conditions:  (1) had or will have a certificate of occupancy issued on or after 
January 1, 1999; and (2) includes at least one of the following projects – a hotel, an office 
building, a retail facility, a multifamily residential facility, an off-street parking facility, 
and a mixed-use facility. These facilities have to meet specified employment and/or capital 
investment qualifications in order to qualify as an economic development project. An 
economic development project may qualify for the real property tax exemption or partial 
exemption if the owner or owners of the project: 
 
 
construct and operate a hotel, office building, retail facility, parking garage, 
apartment building, or condominium;  
 
invest from $2.5 million to $20.0 million in private capital in the development (the 
amount depends on the type of development), with an equity investment of at least 
10% for a hotel facility or an office building facility or at least $250,000 for a 
multifamily residential facility or an off-street parking facility;  
 
provide 100-150 new full-time job opportunities (or 250 parking spaces in the case 
of parking facilities), depending on the type of development;  
 
demonstrate to the City Board of Estimates that (1) Baltimore City has conducted 
an economic analysis of the project containing certain information including cash 
flow, sources of financing, and projected returns on investment; (2) the public 
benefit the project will provide; (3) the financial necessity for an exemption; and 
(4) the private capital investment for the project includes equity investment above 
specified levels based on the type of project;  
 
have authorization from the mayor and city council stipulating that the development 
will not involve gambling activities beyond the activities allowed by law as of 
January 1, 1999, or related to any game not authorized by the Maryland State 
Lottery; and  
 
enter into a PILOT agreement specifying the owner(s) will pay property taxes to 
Baltimore City each year of the agreement in an amount equal to (1) no less than 
the taxes on the property before the construction or rehabilitation of the project plus 
at least 5% of the Baltimore City real property taxes related to the economic 
development project that would have otherwise been due absent the agreement;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1232/ Page 4 
(2) 5% of the Baltimore City real property taxes related to the project that would 
have otherwise been due absent the agreement; or (3) the Baltimore City taxes on 
the property before the construction or rehabilitation of the project. The amount of 
taxes owed depends on when the owner(s) entered into the PILOT agreement with 
Baltimore City. 
 
The term of the agreement may not exceed 25 years from the date a certificate of occupancy 
for the project was issued. Full property taxes must be paid each year after the expiration 
of the agreement. In addition, if construction on the project has not commenced within 
18 months from the date of entering into the PILOT program agreement, the agreement 
will no longer be valid. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2027 to the extent the city enters into PILOT agreements with economic development 
projects. The amount of any decrease depends on the number of economic development 
projects in the Downtown RISE District and the assessed value of real property of these 
projects. For fiscal 2026, the city real property tax rate is $2.248 per $100 of assessed value. 
However, any property tax revenue decrease will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT 
agreements between the city government and economic development projects. In addition, 
city income tax revenues may increase to the extent that new jobs are created in the city. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 756 (Senator McCray)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Colin Maloney 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4