START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1207 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1207 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
State Lakes Protection and Restoration Fund - Alteration and Mandatory 
Appropriation 
 
 
This bill modifies the purpose of the State Lakes Protection and Restoration Fund to 
include the protection and/or restoration of State-managed (in addition to State-owned) 
lakes and restores (in statute) specified authorized uses of the fund (see Current Law) that 
were removed with the termination of Chapter 698 of 2018. The bill requires the Governor 
to include in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2028 and 2029 an appropriation of $500,000 
to the fund to be used solely for the protection and restoration of Deep Creek Lake. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in FY 2028 and 2029. 
Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly by $500,000 in FY 2028 
and 2029. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028 and 2029. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1207/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 404 and 405 of 2017 first established the State Lakes Protection 
and Restoration Fund, administered by the Secretary of Natural Resources, to protect and 
restore State-owned lakes. Under Chapters 404 and 405, the fund consisted of money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund and any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. Chapter 698 of 2018, however, required the Governor 
to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $1.0 million to the fund for 
fiscal 2020 and each fiscal year thereafter and expanded the authorized uses of the fund in 
the manner discussed in the following paragraph. Originally, Chapter 698 was subject to a  
June 30, 2022 termination date; however, Chapter 39 extended the termination date of 
Chapter 698 to June 30, 2025.  
 
Chapters 698 and 39 explicitly authorized the fund to be used to protect or restore  
State-owned and State-managed lakes by (1) removing sediment; (2) treating contaminated 
sediment; (3) preventing the spread of invasive species; (4) improving ecological and 
recreational value; and (5) taking any other action the Department of Natural Resources 
determined necessary. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in fiscal 2028 and 
2029, which reflects the mandated appropriations for the State Lakes Protection and 
Restoration Fund in fiscal 2028 and 2029.  
 
Special fund revenues to the fund and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly 
by $500,000 in fiscal 2028 and 2029, which reflects the receipt of the mandated funding 
and corresponding spending. It is assumed that the entire mandated appropriation is spent 
in each year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may meaningfully benefit from the opportunity 
to bid on protection and restoration projects funded by the additional funding provided 
under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 684 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1207/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3