START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1239 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1239 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Safety - Critical Infrastructure Protection 
 
 
This bill establishes a Critical Infrastructure Protection Branch in the Maryland 
Coordination and Analysis Center (MCAC) to identify current and potential threats to the 
State’s critical infrastructure and prioritize the State’s critical infrastructure assets, as 
specified. The executive director of MCAC must appoint a Chief Critical Infrastructure 
Officer for the branch and the Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM), 
in consultation with MCAC, must coordinate consequence management efforts and 
respond to an attack on the State’s critical infrastructure. The Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT), in consultation with MCAC, must (1) allow the owner or operator of 
critical infrastructure to become a member of the Maryland Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center, and (2) provide up-to-date cybersecurity reporting standards to an owner 
or operator of critical infrastructure. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $315,400 in FY 2027 for staffing; 
future years reflect annualization and ongoing operating expenses. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
315,400 
374,700 
391,900 
409,500 
427,400 
Net Effect 
($315,400) 
($374,700) 
($391,900) 
($409,500) 
($427,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1239/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Critical infrastructure” means assets, systems, and networks, whether 
physical or virtual, considered by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to be so vital 
to the United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have a debilitating effect 
on one or more of the following (1) security; (2) national economic security; (3) national 
public health; or (4) safety. 
 
The Chief Critical Infrastructure Officer must (1) administer and operate the branch; 
(2) implement the provisions of the bill; (3) direct critical infrastructure security efforts 
across the State; (4) coordinate with specified entities; (5) engage with critical 
infrastructure providers on voluntary cyber and physical assessments and provide critical 
infrastructure providers with best practices for security and the results of voluntary 
assessments; and (6) advise the Governor and the Director of the Governor’s Office of 
Homeland Security on critical infrastructure security issues.  
 
In carrying out its duties, the Critical Infrastructure Protection Branch must engage in 
specified activities, including coordinating with specified entities to determine threat levels 
of the State’s critical infrastructure, engaging and coordinating with specified stakeholders, 
and strengthening the State’s critical infrastructure priority assets, as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Fusion Centers and the Maryland Coordination and Analysis Center 
 
Fusion centers are a collaborative effort of two or more federal, State, or local government 
agencies that combine resources, expertise, or information with the goal of maximizing the 
ability of such agencies to detect, prevent, investigate, apprehend, and respond to criminal 
and terrorist activity. Generally, fusion centers receive information and intelligence from a 
variety of sources and disseminate the information to all levels of government to identify 
and address immediate and emerging threats. 
 
MCAC is the State’s only fusion center and is housed in the Department of State Police 
(DSP). Among other responsibilities, MCAC collects and distributes domestic terrorism 
intelligence and analysis to federal, State, and local stakeholders and law enforcement 
agencies. Additional information regarding MCAC can be found on its website.  
 
Governor’s Office of Homeland Security 
 
Established by regulation, the Governor’s Office of Homeland Security is responsible for 
directing homeland security efforts across State government and coordinating with federal 
and local governments, the private sector, academia, and the public to find solutions that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1239/ Page 3 
ensure public safety while protecting individual freedoms. Among other things, the director 
of the office is responsible for advising the Governor on policies, strategies, and measures 
to enhance and improve the ability to detect, prevent, prepare for, protect against, respond 
to, and recover from man-made emergencies or disasters, including terrorist attacks. The 
director is also generally responsible for coordinating homeland security activities within 
the State and coordinating with federal and local governments. 
 
Department of Information Technology – Generally  
 
DoIT and the Secretary of Information Technology are responsible for, among other things:  
(1) developing, maintaining, revising, and enforcing information technology (IT) policies, 
procedures, 
and 
standards; 
(2) 
providing 
technical 
assistance, 
advice, 
and 
recommendations to the Governor and any unit of State government concerning IT matters; 
(3) reviewing agency project plans to make information and services available to the public 
over the Internet; and (4) developing and maintaining a statewide IT Master Plan, as 
specified. “Information technology” means all electronic information processing, including 
maintenance, telecommunications, hardware, software, and associated services. 
 
Cybersecurity 
 
Chapters 241, 242, and 243 of 2022 expanded and enhanced the State’s regulatory 
framework for State and local government cybersecurity. Under the Acts, DoIT and 
MDEM are State agencies generally responsible for overseeing cybersecurity practices, 
policies, and infrastructure for the State and local governments. Among other things, the 
Acts required additional funding for cybersecurity, established leadership positions in State 
government for cybersecurity, codified existing cybersecurity requirements from a 
previous executive order, and required State and local governments to perform 
cybersecurity preparedness assessments. 
 
The Acts were modified by Chapters 164 and 165 of 2025 to distinguish and clarify the 
responsibilities established by Chapters 241, 242, and 243 between DoIT and MDEM. 
Notably, and among other things, Chapters 164 and 165 (1) transferred the responsibility 
for supporting local governments in developing vulnerability assessments and cyber 
assessments from MDEM to the Office of Security Management within DoIT and 
(2) clarified that OSM is not responsible for assisting local government entities in the 
development of cybersecurity preparedness and response plans. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DSP advises that while MCAC has already created a Critical 
Infrastructure Protection Branch and appointed an officer to oversee the branch, the bill 
establishes new cybersecurity requirements that neither the branch nor officer can 
accomplish with existing resources, necessitating at least three computer network 
specialists to support the branch and officer. The Department of Legislative Services notes 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1239/ Page 4 
that although the bill requires the branch and officer to coordinate with specified 
State entities, it also requires the branch and officer to accomplish certain cybersecurity 
functions independently.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $315,361 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring three computer network specialists to support the branch and officer in 
conducting the bill’s specified cybersecurity requirements. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$287,939 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$315,361 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
DoIT advises that the bill creates new operational responsibilities beyond its current 
cybersecurity functions, requiring four full-time cybersecurity subject matter experts at a 
cost that increases to more than $700,000 by fiscal 2031. PSC advises that its responsibility 
to coordinate threat level determinations with the new branch requires one full-time 
information technology systems technical specialist at a cost that increases to 
approximately $149,000 by fiscal 2031. DLS disagrees and advises that while the bill 
requires coordination among DoIT, PSC, and the branch on determining threat levels, the 
bill ultimately requires the branch to engage in these activities as part of the branch’s 
required duty to prioritize the State’s critical infrastructure assets. Therefore, it is 
anticipated that the branch will take the lead role in coordination, and DoIT and PSC can 
coordinate with the branch with existing resources. However, if coordination with the 
branch results in a significant operational impact, DoIT and PSC may request additional 
resources through the annual budget process. 
 
It is assumed that other State agencies can coordinate with the branch using existing 
budgeted resources. This analysis does not include potential impacts on State, local, and/or 
private entities that control “critical infrastructure,” although the activities of the branch 
may have a fiscal or operational impact on those entities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1239/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 825 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Public Service Commission; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5