START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1215 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1215 
(Delegate Stonko, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Maryland Stadium Authority - Sale of Shamrock Farms to Carroll County 
 
 
This bill establishes that the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) may not sell, transfer, or 
otherwise dispose of the property known as Shamrock Farms except as delineated. The bill 
authorizes the County Commissioners of Carroll County to purchase Shamrock Farms and 
requires MSA to sell it to the county under the conditions specified in the bill. The county 
commissioners must notify MSA by July 1, 2029, of their intent to purchase the property; 
if they do not, the requirement to sell and the terms of the sale are abrogated. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues may be affected as discussed below. State expenditures for 
ongoing maintenance of the property may be affected by the timing of any sale. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that Carroll County elects to purchase the property, it benefits 
from favorable terms in the bill. County revenues through donations to purchase the 
property may increase, as authorized under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Shamrock Farms is the real property located at 4926 Woodbine Road, 
Woodbine, Maryland 21797, the purchase of which was approved by the Board of Public 
Works (BPW) on May 7, 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1215/ Page 2 
The County Commissioners of Carroll County may purchase and MSA must sell 
Shamrock Farms to the county for $4,480,000. However, this price is to be increased by a 
reasonable amount for inflation (as determined by BPW) and decreased by any amount that 
Carroll County contributed to the State’s purchase. 
 
By July 1, 2029, the county commissioners must notify MSA of their intent to purchase 
Shamrock Farms. That purchase may be paid for in equal installments over a  
five-year period, funded with monies from the county’s general fund as well as any 
donations specifically for that purpose. If Shamrock Farms is transferred to Carroll County, 
all rights and authority over Shamrock Farms, including any zoning authority, transfer to 
the county. 
 
If the county commissioners do not notify MSA of their intent to purchase Shamrock Farms 
by July 1, 2029, the bill is abrogated and of no further force or effect. MSA must notify the 
Department of Legislative Services within 15 days after either (1) receiving the county’s 
notice of intent to purchase or (2) the county’s failure to provide such notice by the 
deadline. 
 
Current Law:  For State-owned real or personal property that was funded by an 
appropriation act of the General Assembly and has an appraised value over $100,000, 
specific disposal requirements are applied to the sale, transfer, grant, or exchange of the 
property. However, the requirements do not apply to (1) the leasing property; (2) the sale, 
transfer, grant, or exchange of a corrective or access easement on the property; or (3) an 
exchange conducted and specified by the Department of Natural Resources. 
 
MSA may acquire, lease as landlord or tenant, hold, encumber, or dispose of property. 
Generally, any real or personal property owned by the State or a unit of the State 
government may be sold, leased, transferred, exchanged, granted, or otherwise disposed 
of:  
 
 
to any person, to the United States, or any unit of the State government for a 
consideration that BPW decides is adequate; or 
 
to any county or municipal corporation in the State, subject to any conditions 
imposed by BPW. 
 
Generally, the governing body of a county may: 
 
 
acquire, by lease, purchase, gift, devise, bequest, condemnation, or any other 
method, an interest in any property that is needed for a public purpose; 
 
construct buildings on the property for the benefit of the county; 
 
sell surplus property at public sale, after advertising the sale for at least 20 days; or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1215/ Page 3 
 
provide wholly or partly for the financing of housing or a housing project and place 
a deed of trust, mortgage, or other instrument on the financed property to ensure 
repayment of money used to purchase, construct, rehabilitate, or develop the 
housing or housing project. 
 
Additionally, in Carroll County, the county commissioners or a public agency of the county 
may not take final action to purchase real property unless the action is taken at a public 
meeting. If the price of the property is $7,000 or more, the county must provide public 
notice of the intent to purchase the real property at least 15 calendar days before the 
meeting. These requirements do not apply to the procurement of an option to purchase real 
property. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State revenues from the sale of Shamrock Farms are likely affected; 
however, the impact depends on MSA’s plans for selling the property absent the bill. If 
MSA would otherwise sell the property, revenues are affected to the extent that the bill 
results in a different timeframe for the sale and a different sales price. For example, the bill 
could delay that sale – by three or more years – and the amount received for the property 
could be lower than could be obtained. Further, the bill’s authorization for payment by 
Carroll County to be made in equal installments over five years likely further delays receipt 
of proceeds from a sale. On the other hand, if MSA were to determine that it would 
otherwise retain the property, then a requirement to sell it – only to Carroll County, if the 
county wishes to make the purchase – results in an increase in State revenues. 
 
Likewise, State expenditures for maintenance of the property are affected to the extent the 
bill either spurs a sale that otherwise would not happen or delays a sale that could occur 
sooner. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Carroll County likely benefits from a more favorable set of terms to 
purchase Shamrock Farms than might happen in the absence of the bill. Assuming that the 
property may have become available for purchase anyway, the bill guarantees that the 
county is the purchaser and establishes the purchase price as well as the option for payment 
in five equal installments. Carroll County has at least three years before it must purchase 
the property – notification of the intent to purchase must be made within three years; 
however, the bill does not specify the timing for a purchase after that notification. Also, 
the bill authorizes Carroll County to use donations to purchase the property. 
 
Additional Comments:  On May 7, 2025, BPW approved the purchase by the  
State of Maryland of the property known as Shamrock Farms for $4,480,000. BPW 
identified the funding source for the purchase as the Racing and Community Development 
Financing Fund. At the time, the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority 
(MTROA) had selected the property to be developed as a new thoroughbred training 
facility in the State. However, MTROA was terminated by the Budget Reconciliation and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1215/ Page 4 
Financing Act of 2025, with MSA one of two successor agencies. Indeed, BPW identified 
MSA as the agency to assume ownership of all properties acquired by MTROA, including 
Shamrock Farms. MSA has since abandoned efforts to use Shamrock Farms as the training 
facility. 
 
It is unclear whether proceeds from the sale of Shamrock Farms would accrue to the 
special fund from which the purchase was made or to the general fund; that determination 
likely depends on the terms of sale to be approved by BPW. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 565 (Senators Ready and West) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Board of Public Works; Maryland Stadium 
Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4