START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1248 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1248 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Part-Time State Employment Pilot Program - Established (Maryland Workforce 
Retention, Recruitment, and Reentry Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes a Part-Time State Employment Pilot Program in the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM) to promote and support the inclusivity of State 
employment by increasing the availability of part-time positions with benefits in State 
government. DBM must select five agencies in the Executive Branch to participate in the 
program, and each selected agency must evaluate full-time position vacancies to determine 
whether those positions can be converted to two part-time positions with benefits. If so, the 
agency must convert the full-time position to two part-time positions and advertise and 
recruit for the vacancy as two part-time positions. DBM must report biannually on the 
program to the Governor and the General Assembly beginning December 1, 2026, as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates on June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $128,800 in FY 2027 for contractual 
staff, with ongoing costs through FY 2029. State expenditures (all funds) increase, 
potentially significantly, beginning in FY 2027 for personnel costs. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
128,800 
144,700 
150,800 
0 
0 
GF/SF/FF Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not apply to local governments as employers. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1248/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “part-time employee” is defined as an employee who works less than 
100% of full-time employment and whose position duties do not stem from a parent or 
originating position identification number and are not meant to be shared with another 
employee. 
 
If a participating agency determines a vacant position cannot be converted into 
two part-time positions with benefits, the agency must document the reasons for the 
determination. 
 
A participating agency may evaluate other (nonvacant) full-time positions for potential 
suitability for conversion to two part-time positions. A supervisor who normally supervises 
an individual in a full-time position that is converted to two part-time positions under the 
program may not have their supervisory duties increased by more than one individual as a 
result of the conversion of full-time positions. 
 
Current Law:  A part-time employee is defined as an employee who works an average of 
50% or more but less than 100% of the regular workweek. An individual who is a full-time 
employee in the State Personnel Management System (except a temporary employee) who 
is qualified for or desires to be a full-time employee may not be required to accept part-time 
employment as a condition of continued or new State employment. Conversely, an 
individual who is a part-time employee who is qualified for or desires to be a part-time 
employee may not be required to accept full-time employment as a condition of continued 
or new employment. In accordance with regulations, a part-time employee is entitled to 
receive all employment rights, privileges, and benefits that are normally available to a 
full-time employee in a similar position with a similar grade and length of service, except 
benefits must be prorated in proportion to the number of hours employed. 
 
The 2025 Joint Chairman’s Report requested that DBM establish a comprehensive 
feasibility study of job-sharing arrangements in State government, examining technical, 
administrative, financial, and operational aspects of job-sharing. DBM’s report can be 
found here. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Department of Budget and Management 
 
DBM has determined that four regular full-time human resource analyst positions are 
needed to implement this bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
advises that the added responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent and 
can likely be performed by two contractual human resource analysts. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1248/ Page 3 
Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $128,787 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 
90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring two contractual human resource analysts to support the development of the 
pilot program. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Positions 
2 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$110,505 
 Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$128,787 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) the termination of 
the contractual positions concurrent with the termination of the bill on June 30, 2029. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
To the extent that State agencies participating in the pilot program need additional support, 
DBM may need additional human resource analysts, and to the extent that positions created 
under the pilot program result in additional workload for DBM after the pilot program 
terminates, the contractual positions may need to convert into permanent positions. 
 
State Agencies 
 
For the five departments of the Executive Branch selected to participate in the program, 
State personnel expenditures (potentially all funds) increase beginning in fiscal 2027 to the 
extent that more part-time State employees are employed by the State. DLS estimates that 
State expenditures increase on average by $1,585 for a laptop and software configuration 
and by $5,473 if office furniture is needed for each additional State employee in the 
initial year of hiring. Additionally, State expenditures increase by more than $14,500 on 
an annual basis for health care costs to provide health coverage to two people instead of 
one. If vacant positions that are being converted to part-time positions under the bill require 
background investigations, expenditures may increase for each additional background 
investigation performed, which may include paying for fingerprints and performing a 
polygraph. 
 
The actual fiscal impact depends on (1) which five agencies are selected by DBM to 
participate in the program; (2) the number of vacant positions in the participating agencies; 
(3) the extent to which those vacant positions can be filled by two part-time employees 
instead of one full-time employee as determined by the participating agency; (4) when 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1248/ Page 4 
those positions are filled; and (5) any costs that are particular to an agency (such as 
expenses for background investigations). 
 
For illustrative purposes only, if 20 vacant positions are filled by 40 part-time employees 
half-way through fiscal 2027 (accounting for a six-month delay from the bill’s  
July 1, 2026 effective date to select agencies and for agencies to review, recruit, and fill 
positions), State expenditures increase by approximately $289,400 in fiscal 2027 for 
operating expenses and health care costs and by more than $319,000 annually thereafter 
(reflecting annualization and ongoing costs). If part-time employees do not require 
additional office furniture, then the increase in State expenditures is mitigated by 
approximately $5,500 for each additional employee not needing office equipment. 
 
Additionally, the bill increases the workload of human resources departments within the 
five agencies selected to participate in the program. Vacant positions must be analyzed to 
determine whether part-time employees can fill that position and agencies must document 
their justification if those positions cannot be filled with part-time employees. Recruitment 
for additional positions may become more labor intensive. While some participating 
departments may be able to meet these additional responsibilities with existing resources, 
others may need to hire additional human resources employees. Thus, State expenditures 
may increase further beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
To the extent that more part-time employees are employed, the workload of supervisors 
increases from having to manage more employees, though the bill limits the number of 
additional employees a supervisor may supervise. 
 
This analysis assumes that part-time employees hired under the pilot program continue to 
be employed with benefits after the program terminates on June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 880 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1248/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5