START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1222 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1222 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Prince George's County - State's Attorney Salary - Alteration  
PG 426-26 
 
 
This bill increases, from $199,000 to $250,000, the annual salary of the Prince George’s 
County State’s Attorney. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the salary increase takes 
effect at the beginning of the next term of office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by approximately $40,400 in 
FY 2027 and by approximately $69,200 annually thereafter. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Prince George’s County State’s Attorney receives an annual salary of 
$199,000.  
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public officer from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the Counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1222/ Page 2 
Local Expenditures:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by $40,371 in 
fiscal 2027, and by $69,207 annually thereafter. This estimate reflects the next term of 
office beginning December 2026 and the current fringe benefit rate as provided by the 
county. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2