START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1233 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1233 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Health 
 
 
Washington County - Mobile Food Service Facilities and Semipermanent Food 
Service Facilities - Toilet and Lavatory Facilities 
 
   
This bill exempts mobile food service facilities and semipermanent food service facilities 
located in Washington County from the requirement to have a convenient toilet and 
lavatory available to the public.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health can amend regulations with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County revenues and expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Mobile food service facility” means a food service facility that is a 
mechanically, electrically, manually, or otherwise propelled vehicle operating on land or 
water.  
 
“Semipermanent food service facility” means a food service facility that (1) is built at a 
location other than where it operates; (2) is transported as a complete unit that does not 
require a building permit to install on the location at which it operates; (3) has no indoor 
seating for patrons; and (4) when serving food, serves only foods cooked for immediate 
service. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1233/ Page 2 
“Food establishment” means a food service facility or a food processing plant. Every food 
establishment is required to provide:  
 
 
a convenient toilet, separated from any room containing or involving food, and kept 
in a sanitary condition; and  
 
a convenient lavatory that is (1) supplied with soap, water, and a method to dry 
hands; (2) kept in a sanitary condition; and (3) properly ventilated.  
 
Chapters 761 and 762 of 2025 permits certain food establishments – a business that 
conducts agritourism, Class 4 limited wineries, and Class 8 farm breweries – to comply 
with the requirement to have a convenient lavatory by providing a portable chemical toilet 
that is (1) supplied with soap, water, and a method to dry hands; (2) kept in sanitary 
condition; (3) properly ventilated; and (4) placed at least 25 feet from a well.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in Washington County may benefit from not 
incurring expenses associated with constructing or renting an on-site lavatory. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 714 (Washington County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers;  
Washington County; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2