START OF PAGE 1
HB1258/893829/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1258
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Smith” and substitute
“Delegates Smith, Moreno, Conaway, and Williams”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, strike beginning with “authorizing” in line 6 down through “Act” in
line 7 and substitute “making a violation of this Act an unfair, abusive, or deceptive
trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act”; and after line 8, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article - Commercial Law
Section 13-301(14)(xlvii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2025 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article - Commercial Law
Section 13-301(14)(xlviii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2025 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article - Commercial Law
Section 13-301(14)(xlix)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2025 Replacement Volume)”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1258/893829/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 1258
Page 2 of 2

AMENDMENT NO. 3
On page 1, after line 20, insert:

“Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xlvii) Title 14, Subtitle 50 of this article; [or]

(xlviii) Section 13–411.1(c)(2) of the Transportation Article; or

(XLIX) SECTION 5-508 OF THE FAMILY LAW ARTICLE;
OR”.

On pages 3 and 4, strike beginning with “ON” in line 23 on page 3 down through
“LAW” in line 3 on page 4 and substitute “A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION IS:

(1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN
THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

(2) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS
CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE”.
END OF PAGE 2