START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1249 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1249 
(Delegate Hill) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Certified Recovery Residences - Refusing Services to Individuals Receiving 
Medication-Assisted Treatment - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill specifies that the requirements established by a credentialing entity for certified 
recovery residences must prohibit a recovery residence from (1) refusing services to an 
individual based on the individual receiving medication-assisted treatment (MAT) for 
opioid use disorder (OUD) and (2) requiring an individual to cease or modify how the 
individual receives MAT for OUD before the individual may receive services at the 
recovery residence. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) advises that it already has 
nondiscrimination policies in place. As the bill codifies current practice, BHA revenues 
and expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Certified Recovery Residences 
 
A recovery residence is a service that provides alcohol- and drug-free housing to 
individuals with substance-related disorders or addictive disorders (including those that 
co-occur with mental disorders) and does not include clinical treatment services. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1249/ Page 2 
BHA is the approved credentialing entity for recovery residences, pursuant to Chapters 710 
and 711 of 2016. The Maryland Certification of Recovery Residences oversees the 
application, certification, recertification, monitoring, and inspection of recovery residences 
to improve the quality of services. Maryland RecoveryNet partners with service providers 
across the State to fund access to recovery support services for individuals seeking 
treatment for substance use and co-occurring disorders. 
 
Chapter 580 of 2017 (the Recovery Residence Residential Rights Protection Act) requires 
the Maryland Department of Health to publish a list of each recovery residence operating 
in each county of the State on its website with indicators as to whether the owner of a 
recovery residence has received a valid certificate of compliance. 
 
A certificate of compliance is valid for one year from the date of issuance. The 
credentialing entity may revoke the certificate of compliance if the credentialing entity 
finds that the recovery residence is not in compliance with requirements. 
 
Medication-assisted Treatment 
 
MAT is a comprehensive approach to treating substance use disorders and OUD that 
involves both medications and therapy to address psychological, emotional, and physical 
aspects of recovery. It involves using medications like Suboxone, buprenorphine, or 
vivitrol to address withdrawal symptoms, as well as therapy and counseling. 
 
MAT must be available to an incarcerated individual for whom such treatment is 
determined to be appropriate. Each local correctional facility must make available at least 
one formulation of each federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved full opioid 
agonist, partial opioid agonist, and long-acting opioid antagonist used for the treatment of 
OUD. 
 
Each local correctional facility must:   
 
 
following an assessment using clinical guidelines for MAT, make medication 
available, as specified, or begin withdrawal management services prior to 
administration of medication;  
 
make available and administer medications for the treatment of OUD;  
 
provide behavioral health counseling for incarcerated individuals diagnosed with 
OUD consistent with therapeutic standards in a community setting;  
 
provide access to a health care practitioner who can provide access to all 
FDA-approved medications, as specified; and 
 
provide on-premises access to peer recovery specialists.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1249/ Page 3 
If an incarcerated individual received medication or MAT for OUD immediately preceding 
or during the individual’s incarceration, a local correctional facility must continue the 
treatment after incarceration or transfer unless (1) the incarcerated individual voluntarily 
discontinues the treatment, verified through a written agreement that includes a signature 
or (2) a health care practitioner determines that the treatment is no longer medically 
appropriate. In addition, before the release of an incarcerated individual diagnosed with 
OUD, a local correctional facility must develop a plan of reentry that:   
 
 
includes information regarding post-incarceration access to medication continuity, 
peer recovery specialists, other supportive therapy, and enrollment in health 
insurance plans; 
 
includes any recommended referrals by a health care practitioner to medication 
continuity, peer recovery specialists, and other supportive therapy; and 
 
is reviewed and, if needed, revised by a health care practitioner or peer recovery 
specialist. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Recovery; 
Montgomery County Department of Health and Human Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3