START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1258 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1258 
(Delegate Smith) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child Placement Services - Advertising by Unlicensed Person - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from advertising adoption services in the State unless the person 
is a local department of social services or a child placement agency licensed by the  
Social Services Administration (SSA). The prohibition includes advertisements that 
originate in and outside the State and target State residents directly and indirectly through 
general distribution. SSA may (1) investigate alleged violations; (2) issue a cease and desist 
order to a person that SSA believes to be in violation; and (3) notify the Attorney General 
if there is reason to believe that a person has committed a violation. On receiving notice 
from SSA of a violation, the Attorney General may bring an action for relief in a court of 
competent jurisdiction, including an action seeking a civil penalty of $10,000 for each 
violation and any other damages authorized by law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is assumed that the Department of Human Services (DHS) and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) can implement the bill using existing resources, as 
discussed below. Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues from the civil 
penalty.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DHS, through SSA, has the primary responsibility for child welfare 
services throughout the State, which are provided primarily by the local departments of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1258/ Page 2 
social services. These services support the healthy development of families, assist families 
and children in need, and protect abused and neglected children. Programs include foster 
care, family preservation, adoption, child protective services, and family reunification. 
 
Except as otherwise provided, a person must be licensed by SSA as a child placement 
agency before the person may engage in the placement of minor children in homes or with 
individuals. A license is not required (1) for a person to place a child with an individual 
related to the child by blood or marriage within four degrees of consanguinity or affinity 
under civil law rule; (2) except as otherwise provided, for a parent or grandparent of a child 
to place the child directly, without the intervention of any other person except the recipient 
of the child; or (3) for a lawyer to prepare pleadings necessary to accomplish the adoption 
of a child or to perform any other function associated with the normal practice of law. 
 
Regulations require that to provide private adoption services, an agency must be licensed 
as a child placement agency by SSA and have a written service plan, as specified. An 
agency or individual must satisfy these requirements in order to (1) advertise adoption 
services through the media; (2) conduct public meetings for the purpose of soliciting 
potential clients; or (3) recruit in any other way potential adoptive parents or locate children 
for adoption in Maryland. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Department of Human Services 
 
This analysis assumes that DHS can use existing budgeted resources to investigate alleged 
violations of the bill that are made known to the department. If, however, SSA elects to 
take a more proactive approach of investigating potential violations, such efforts are likely 
not absorbable and additional expenditures are incurred. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
OAG did not respond to a request for information on the fiscal and operational impact of 
the bill. It is assumed that any civil actions OAG elects to bring based on potential referrals 
from SSA can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1258/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3