START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1389 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1389 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Health - Female Genital Mutilation 
 
 
This bill alters, in statutory provisions that govern the reporting and investigation of 
suspected child abuse and neglect, the definition of “abuse” to include “female genital 
mutilation,” as defined under the bill. The bill also alters current criminal prohibitions and 
increases criminal penalties for female genital mutilation, requires a health occupations 
board to revoke an individual’s professional license under specified circumstances, and 
authorizes a victim of female genital mutilation to file a civil action. The bill requires the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to submit an annual report to the 
General Assembly containing specified data, make the required report available to the 
public, and collaborate with community‐based organizations to develop, publish, and 
distribute educational materials on female genital mutilation, as specified.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $39,500 in FY 2027 for contractual 
personnel to assist with requirements under the bill. Future years reflect ongoing personnel 
costs and termination of the contractual position in FY 2029. Otherwise, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
39,500 
40,900 
17,900 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($39,500) 
($40,900) 
($17,900) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1389/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Female Genital Mutilation – Criminal Prohibition 
 
Except if medically necessary and performed by a licensed health practitioner, a person 
may not knowingly perform, attempt to perform, or conspire to perform female genital 
mutilation on an individual who is younger than age 18 or (2) transport an individual who 
is younger than age 18 out of the State for the purpose of performing or facilitating the 
performance of female genital mutilation on the individual. 
 
Except if medically necessary and performed by a licensed health practitioner, a parent, 
guardian, or other individual is guilty of female genital mutilation if the individual (1) is 
legally responsible and charged with the care or custody of a child younger than age 18 
and (2) knowingly consents to the performance of female genital mutilation on the child. 
The personal belief of any individual that the operation is required as a matter of custom 
or ritual may not be taken into account in making determinations of medical necessity for 
purposes of these prohibitions. 
 
Violators are guilty of a felony that is punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or 
a $10,000 fine. 
 
Mandatory Revocation of Professional Licenses 
 
If an individual who holds a license issued under the Health Occupations Article is 
convicted of, enters a plea of guilty or of nolo contendere for, or receives probation before 
judgment for a violation of these prohibitions, the applicable health occupations board must 
revoke the individual’s license. 
 
Civil Action 
 
A victim of female genital mutilation performed in violation of the bill’s prohibitions may 
file a civil action in the circuit court in the county in which the violation occurred or the 
victim resides. If the court finds that a person violated the prohibitions discussed above, 
the court may award the plaintiff specified types of damages and relief. The statute of 
limitations for this cause of action is the later of 10 years from the date the violation 
occurred or the date on which the victim reaches age 28. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1389/ Page 3 
Reporting Requirement 
 
On or before December 1 each year, beginning in 2027, MDH, in consultation with the 
Social Services Administration, State and local law enforcement agencies, and other 
appropriate government agencies and public and private organizations, must submit a 
report to the General Assembly, containing de‐identified and disaggregated data on the 
number of: 
 
 
reports of female genital mutilation submitted in accordance with § 5‐704 of the 
Family Law Article; 
 
individuals prosecuted for and individuals convicted of a violation of the bill’s 
provisions; and 
 
civil actions filed as authorized under the bill and civil actions in which a judgment 
was entered, whether by settlement or adjudication. 
 
MDH must make the report available to the public. 
 
MDH, in collaboration with community‐based organizations, must develop and publish 
culturally and linguistically appropriate educational materials on female genital mutilation, 
including the signs that an individual has been subjected to female genital mutilation, the 
physical and mental health risks caused by female genital mutilation, and the criminal 
penalties for a violation of the bill’s prohibitions. MDH and the organizations must 
distribute these educational materials to health care providers, law enforcement agencies, 
schools, the public, and any other professional or community‐based organizations that may 
work or interact with individuals who are at risk of female genital mutilation. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definition of “Abuse” in Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article generally defines abuse as the physical or 
mental injury of a child under circumstances that indicate that the child’s health or welfare 
is harmed or at substantial risk of being harmed by a parent; household member or family 
member; person who has permanent or temporary care or custody of the child; person who 
has responsibility for supervision of the child; or person who, because of the person’s 
position or occupation, exercises authority over the child. Abuse also means (1) the sexual 
abuse of a child, whether or not physical injuries are sustained and (2) labor trafficking of 
a child by any individual. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1389/ Page 4 
Mandatory Reporting of Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect – Generally  
 
Mandatory Reporters:  Under Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article, health care 
practitioners, police officers, educators, and human service workers who are acting in a 
professional capacity, and who have reason to believe that a child has been subjected to 
abuse or neglect must notify the local department of social services or the appropriate law 
enforcement agency. An “educator or human service worker” includes any teacher, 
counselor, social worker, caseworker, and parole or probation officer. If the worker is 
acting as a staff member of a hospital, public health agency, child care institution, juvenile 
detention center, school, or similar institution, then the individual must notify the head of 
the institution or the designee. 
 
Reporting by Other Individuals:  Although the term “mandatory reporters” refers only to 
individuals who must report suspected child abuse or neglect because of their professional 
capacity, State law generally requires all individuals to report suspected child abuse and 
neglect. 
 
Child Abuse and Neglect Investigations – Generally 
 
Generally, after receiving a report of suspected abuse or neglect of a child who lives in 
Maryland that is alleged to have occurred in the State, the local department of social 
services and/or the appropriate law enforcement agency must promptly and thoroughly 
investigate the report to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the child or children. 
Within 24 hours after receiving a report of suspected physical or sexual child abuse, and 
within five days after receiving a report of suspected child neglect or mental injury, the 
local department or law enforcement agency must (1) see the child; (2) attempt to have an 
on-site interview with the child’s caretaker; (3) decide on the safety of the child and of 
other children in the household; and (4) decide on the safety of the other children in the 
care or custody of the alleged abuser. The determinations and assessments that are required 
during an abuse or neglect investigation are specified in statute. The local State’s Attorney 
must assist in the investigations if requested to do so by a local department of social 
services. 
 
Statute includes additional requirements in regard to the investigations, including the 
timeframe by which investigations must be completed and findings reported to the local 
State’s Attorney. Reports of child abuse and neglect may also be referred for an alternative 
response in specified circumstances. An “alternative response” means a component of the 
child protective services program that provides for a comprehensive assessment of (1) risk 
of harm to the child; (2) risk of subsequent child abuse or neglect; (3) family strengths and 
needs; and (4) the provision of or referral for necessary services. An alternative response 
does not include an investigation or a formal determination as to whether child abuse or 
neglect has occurred. Only a low-risk report of abuse or neglect may be considered for an 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1389/ Page 5 
alternative response. Statutory provisions also set forth procedures for an alternative 
response, including timeframes by which assessments and written reports must be 
completed. 
 
Female Genital Mutilation – Criminal Prohibition 
 
Except if medically necessary and performed by a licensed health practitioner, a person 
who performs specified procedures on an individual younger than age 18 is guilty of female 
genital mutilation. Subject to the same exceptions, a parent, guardian, or other individual 
is guilty of female genital mutilation if the individual (1) is legally responsible and charged 
with the care or custody of a child younger than age 18 and (2) knowingly consents to 
specified procedures on the child. The personal belief on the part of any individual that the 
operation is required as a matter of custom or ritual may not be taken into account in 
making determinations of medical necessity for purposes of these prohibitions.  
 
Violators are guilty of a felony that is punishable by imprisonment for up to five years 
and/or a $5,000 fine.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $ 39,463 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date.  
 
MDH has determined that a permanent, part‐time contractual position is needed to 
implement the bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the bulk 
of added responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one part‐time health policy analyst in the initial years to establish 
collaborations and data collection practices and procedures, prepare the first two required 
reports, and develop educational materials. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$31,364 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$39,463 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and termination of the position 
on December 1, 2028, after submission of the second annual required report.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1389/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 907 (Senator Love) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel and Baltimore counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Maryland Health Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6