START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1320 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1320 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Victim Notification - Request at the Time of Charging 
 
   
This bill requires a prosecuting attorney, law enforcement officer, and District Court 
commissioner to inform a victim or victim’s representative of the ability to request 
notification through the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) system of a defendant’s 
custody status and court hearings. If a law enforcement officer receives a request, the 
officer must provide the request to the commissioner at the time of charging. On receiving 
a request for notification from a victim, representative, or law enforcement officer, the 
commissioner must enter the request into MDEC. After the commissioner enters the 
request into MDEC, the State’s Victim Information and Notification Everyday (VINE) 
vendor must notify the victim or victim’s representative of the defendant’s release by the 
commissioner, other release from custody, and scheduled court hearings. A prosecuting 
attorney must inform the victim (or a representative) of the ability to receive information 
regarding a defendant’s custody status and court hearings within 10 days after the filing of 
a criminal information in the District Court. The bill also requires a victim or victim’s 
representative’s telephone number to be kept confidential, as otherwise specified by statute.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $40,000 in FY 2027 
only for one-time programming costs. Any operational impact for commissioners is not 
anticipated to be significant or materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1320/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, a victim of a crime or delinquent act (or a 
representative in the event the victim is deceased, disabled, or a minor) has a broad range 
of specific rights during the criminal justice process. On first contact with a victim, a  
law enforcement officer, District Court commissioner, or juvenile intake officer must give 
an identified victim a pamphlet that advises the victim of the rights, services, and 
procedures available in the time before and after the filing of a charging document. 
 
As further specified in statute, many of the rights to which a victim of crime is entitled 
depend on a victim completing a notification request form or requesting notice by 
following MDEC system protocol. Through MDEC system protocol, a victim or victim’s 
representative may request for the address or electronic mail address to remain confidential 
and available only as necessary to (1) the court; (2) the prosecuting attorney; (3) the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; (4) the Department of Juvenile 
Services; (5) the attorney of the victim or victim’s representative; (6) the State’s VINE 
vendor; and (7) a commitment unit that a court orders to retain custody of an individual. 
 
If the victim followed MDEC system protocol to originally request notification, the victim 
may follow MDEC system protocol to terminate notice. If the victim originally filed a 
notification request form, the victim may discontinue further notices by filing a written 
request with (1) the prosecuting attorney, if the case is still in a circuit court or juvenile 
court or (2) the unit to which the defendant or child respondent has been committed, if a 
commitment order has been issued in the case. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, in calendar 2025, there were  
92,255 initial appearance hearings processed by commissioners, and 52,355 total 
applications for statement of charges processed.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Talbot counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1320/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3