START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1382 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1382 
(Delegate Young, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Prohibited Certifications - Boycotts of Foreign Countries 
 
   
This bill prohibits a procurement officer from requiring a bidder or offeror to affirm, as a 
condition of submitting a bid of proposal on a State procurement contract (or of signing a 
contract), that the bidder or offeror is not participating in or will not engage in a boycott of 
a foreign country for the duration of the contractual obligations, except as required by State 
or federal law. The bill also requires that by June 1, 2027, each unit of State government 
update its procurement policies, guidelines, and procedures to meet the requirements of the 
bill, as well as review and, if necessary, amend any contracts or solicitations in conflict 
with the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not meaningfully change State activities or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Executive Order 01.01.2017.25 of 2017, which remains in effect, prohibits 
Executive Branch agencies from executing a procurement contract with a business entity 
unless the entity certifies in writing when the bid is submitted or the contract is renewed 
that the business entity (1) is not engaging in a boycott of Israel and (2) will, for the duration 
of the contractual obligations, refrain from a boycott of Israel. The executive order provides 
specified language for the certification by bidders or offerors.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1382/ Page 2 
While State law does not preclude any potential bidder or offeror on a State contract from 
participating in the boycott of any other country, it does require the Board of Trustees of 
the State Retirement and Pension System to divest from any company whose shares are 
held in an actively traded separate account in its portfolio that is doing business in Iran or 
Sudan as well as any investments in specified Russian businesses.  
 
Furthermore, the Maryland Foreign Discriminatory Boycotts Act, codified in the 
Commercial Law Article, makes it unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in a 
discriminatory boycott or knowingly aid or assist any other person in participating in a 
discriminatory boycott. A “discriminatory boycott” is a boycott that occurs when a person 
makes a business agreement with a foreign government, person, or international 
organization – without authorization under federal law – that enforces restrictions on 
business relationships based on a domestic individual’s race, color, religion, sex, sexual 
orientation, disability, gender identity, or national origin. Any provision of a contract or 
other document or agreement that violates this law must be considered null and void as 
being against the public policy of the State of Maryland. Any person that willingly violates 
the law is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $50,000, 
imprisonment of up to six months, or both. 
 
Federal Law 
 
Federal law prohibits any person from participating in any boycott fostered or imposed by 
a foreign country against another foreign country that is friendly to the United States and 
which is not itself the object of any boycott under U.S. law. The federal law preempts any 
state law that pertains to participation in, compliance with, implementation of, or the 
furnishing of information regarding restrictive trade practices or boycotts fostered by 
foreign countries. 
 
Additional Comment:  The Office of State Procurement within the Department of  
General Services advises that, despite the requirements of the executive order, it does not 
currently include any of the provisions prohibited by the bill in contracts or contract 
templates used by Executive Branch agencies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1460 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of General 
Services; Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1382/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3