START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1324 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1324 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Baltimore City - Natural Resources - Sunday Deer Hunting and Archery Hunting 
Safety Zones 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources to allow, in Baltimore City, a 
person to hunt deer on private property on each Sunday of the deer bow hunting season. 
The bill also decreases the archery hunting “safety zone” in Baltimore City from 150 yards 
to 50 yards from a dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or camp 
occupied by human beings. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Sunday Hunting 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited in the State, with 
specified exceptions. For an overview of Sunday hunting laws in the State, please see the 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1324/ Page 2 
Archery Hunting Safety Zones 
 
Generally, a person, other than the owner or occupant, while hunting any wild bird or 
mammal may not shoot or discharge any firearm or other deadly weapon within 150 yards, 
known as the “safety zone,” of a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or 
camp occupied by human beings without the specific advance permission of the owner or 
occupant. Also, a person, other than the owner or occupant, may not shoot at any wild bird 
or mammal while it is within the safety zone without the specific advance permission of 
the owner or occupant. 
 
For archery hunters in Allegany, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, 
Montgomery, St. Mary’s, Washington, Worcester, and Wicomico counties, the safety zone 
extends for 50 yards from a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp 
occupied by human beings. For archery hunters in Anne Arundel County, the safety zone 
extends for 100 yards from a dwelling house, residence, church, or other building or camp 
occupied by human beings. 
 
An archery hunter in Harford County must use a tree stand when hunting within 50 to  
100 yards of a dwelling house, residence, church, or any other building or camp occupied 
by human beings. For archery hunters in Howard County hunting under the authority of a 
deer management permit or actively participating in a county-administered hunting 
program, the safety zone extends for 50 yards (from a dwelling house, residence, church, 
school, or other building or camp occupied by humans), and, when hunting within  
50 to 150 yards of those buildings/camps, archery hunters must be in an elevated position 
that allows the hunters to shoot in a downward trajectory. An archery hunter in 
Montgomery and Washington counties must be in an elevated position that allows the 
hunter to shoot in a downward trajectory when hunting within 50 to 100 yards of a dwelling 
house, residence, church, school, or other building or camp occupied by human beings. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 879 (Senator Attar) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Baltimore City; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1324/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1324/ Page 4 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland 
 
 
Sunday Hunting, Generally 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited, with specified 
exceptions. Chapter 95 of 2020 reorganized and clarified statutory provisions related to 
Sunday hunting in the State. Chapter 95 also (1) explicitly stated that a person may not 
hunt on public lands within the State park system on a Sunday and (2) authorized the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to set all of the seasons for Sunday hunting. 
 
Game Birds and Mammals on Private Property and Public Land 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Allegany, Cecil, Garrett, St. Mary’s, and Washington counties during the open 
season for these animals on private property and public land designated for Sunday hunting 
by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting in Frederick County from the first Sunday in October 
through the second Sunday in January of the following year on private property and public 
land designated for Sunday hunting by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Dorchester County during the open season for these animals on private property. 
DNR also may allow Sunday turkey hunting in Dorchester County during the spring turkey 
hunting season on public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting 
may only occur from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time 
restriction does not apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from the 
first Sunday in October through the second Sunday in January, inclusive, or (2) on each 
Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Calvert, Caroline, Charles, and Queen Anne’s counties during the open season for 
these animals on private property. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season; (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season; and (3) on 
each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1324/ Page 5 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Somerset County during the open season for these animals on private property and 
public land leased to a hunt club. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Wicomico County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur 
from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not 
apply (1) on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays 
in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Worcester County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur 
from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not 
apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in 
October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
Deer on Private Property 
 
All Seasons:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in 
Carroll County in all deer hunting seasons from the first Sunday in October through the 
second Sunday in January of the following year; (2) in Kent County on each Sunday in all 
deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer 
firearms season as designated by DNR, and on each Sunday during the deer bow hunting 
season and the deer muzzle loader season); (3) in Montgomery County on each Sunday in 
all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, and on one Sunday in the 
deer firearms season and the deer bow hunting season as designated by DNR); and (4) in 
Talbot County on each Sunday in all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior 
deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer firearms season as designated by DNR, and on the 
last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer 
bow hunting season). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1324/ Page 6 
Firearms Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in  
Harford County on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) in Anne Arundel 
County on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season. 
 
Bow Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in  
Harford County on the last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in 
November of the deer bow season and (2) in Anne Arundel County on the first Sunday in 
November of the deer bow season. 
 
Turkey on Private Property 
 
DNR may allow Sunday turkey hunting on private property on Sundays during the spring 
turkey hunting season in Carroll and Kent counties and from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. in Talbot County. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Junior Hunt:  DNR may allow a person who is age 16 or younger and is participating in a 
junior hunt to hunt on a Sunday. 
 
Traditional Sunday Hunting:  DNR may allow the following persons to hunt game birds 
and mammals on a Sunday:  (1) a person using State-certified raptors to hunt game birds 
or mammals during open season for these animals; (2) an unarmed person participating in 
an organized fox chase; and (3) a person using a regulated shooting ground to hunt 
pen-reared game birds or tower-released flighted mallard ducks. 
 
Deer Management Permit Holders:  DNR may allow a person with a deer management 
permit to shoot deer on any Sunday throughout the year in accordance with the terms of 
the permit. 
 
Express Prohibitions 
 
In general, a person may not hunt on a Sunday in Baltimore City or Baltimore, Howard, or  
Prince George’s counties. This prohibition in these counties does not apply to the 
above-described acts of traditional Sunday hunting. In addition, a person with a deer 
management permit may shoot deer under the permit on a Sunday in these counties. 
Further, a person may not hunt migratory game birds on a Sunday, and a person may not 
hunt on public land within the State park system on a Sunday. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1324/ Page 7 
Background on Deer Hunting in Maryland 
 
Because white-tailed deer thrive in habitat that is composed of woods and openings and 
because hunter access in those areas is limited, suburban development has provided 
excellent deer habitat in the State. This has resulted in growing deer populations in 
suburban areas. Higher populations of deer can lead to a greater number of negative 
interactions with suburban residents, such as deer-vehicle collisions and vegetation 
damage. Deer also cause agricultural damage. 
 

END OF PAGE 7