START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1365 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1365 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations, Public Health, and Insurance - Menopause - Provider 
Training Coverage Requirements, Policy Initiatives, and Access to Care 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively carriers) to provide coverage for the evaluation and 
management of menopause and menopause-associated symptoms as determined by the 
treating health care provider. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must identify at 
least one training program on the evaluation and management of menopause and 
menopause-associated symptoms. Certain health occupations boards must grant at least 
two continuing education credits for every one hour of such training. The bill also alters 
the membership of the State Advisory Council on Health and Wellness. Uncodified 
language adds reporting requirements for MDH and the Maryland Commission for 
Women. The bill has various effective dates as noted below; however, insurance 
provisions take effect January 1, 2027, and apply to all policies, contracts, and health 
benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of 
filings and complaints can likely be handled with existing resources. MDH general fund 
expenditures increase by $100,300 in FY 2027 and $30,200 in FY 2028 for contractual 
staff and vendors for reporting requirements. No material impact on the State Employee 
and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program (State plan), as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$100,300 
$30,200 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($100,300) 
($30,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1365/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in health care expenditures for local governments that 
purchase fully insured plans. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Training and Continuing Education for Health Occupations Professionals 
 
MDH must consult with specified professional associations to identify at least one training 
program for health occupations licensees and certificate holders on the evaluation and 
management of menopause and menopause-associated symptoms. 
 
Each health occupations board that requires continuing education as a condition of license 
or certificate renewal must grant at least two hours of continuing education credits for every 
one hour of continuing education on menopause and menopause-associated symptoms 
completed by a licensee or certificate holder who evaluates and manages menopause and 
menopause-associated symptoms within their scope of practice. A health occupations 
board may adopt regulations establishing the maximum number of these continuing 
education credits that may be granted. 
 
These provisions take effect October 1, 2026. 
 
State Advisory Council on Health and Wellness  
 
The membership of the advisory council is expanded to include the Executive Director of 
the Maryland Commission for Women (or their designee) and one representative with 
expertise in perimenopausal, menopausal, or postmenopausal evaluation and treatment. 
The bill also reduces the number of members of the public on the advisory council from 
18 to 17 and removes the specification that the advisory council contains 34 voting 
members.  
 
These provisions take effect October 1, 2026. 
 
Maryland Department of Health Reporting Requirements   
 
By October 1, 2027, MDH, in consultation with the State Community Health Worker 
Advisory Committee, must (1) evaluate and develop an action plan to increase access to 
perimenopausal, menopausal, and postmenopausal health care services through the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1365/ Page 3 
outreach of community health workers to consumers and (2) submit the evaluation and 
action plan to the General Assembly.  
 
By October 1, 2027, MDH, in consultation with health care provider professional 
associations and institutions of higher education, including community colleges, must 
(1) evaluate methods for increasing opportunities for clinical education, including 
postgraduate education, on perimenopausal, menopausal, and postmenopausal evaluation 
and treatment and (2) report its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly. 
 
These provisions take effect July 1, 2026. 
 
Maryland Commission for Women Reporting Requirement   
 
By October 1, 2027, the Maryland Commission for Women must (1) evaluate opportunities 
for State policy initiatives that improve the health and economic security of individuals in 
the State with perimenopausal, menopausal, and postmenopausal conditions and (2) report 
its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly. 
 
These provisions take effect July 1, 2026. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential 
health benefits (EHBs). 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 
For additional information on mandated health insurance benefits in Maryland, please see 
the Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1365/ Page 4 
Advisory Council on Health and Wellness 
 
Chapter 40 of 2017 created the Advisory Council on Health and Wellness by consolidating 
three existing advisory councils. The council must (1) promote evidence-based programs 
for healthy lifestyles and the prevention, early detection, and treatment of chronic disease 
and (2) make recommendations to MDH related to chronic disease prevention, health, and 
wellness. The council must create, at a minimum, committees on arthritis, diabetes, heart 
disease and stroke, and physical fitness.  
 
The advisory council consists of 34 voting members appointed by the Secretary of Health, 
including several representatives of MDH and other State agencies, as well as 
representatives of specified medical institutions, professional associations, and 
18 members of the public. 
 
Maryland Commission for Women   
 
The Maryland Commission for Women in the Department of Human Services works to 
advance solutions and to expand social, political, and economic opportunities for all 
women. The commission must:  
 
 
stimulate and encourage study and review of the status of women in the State;  
 
strengthen home life by directing attention to critical problems confronting women 
as wives, mothers, homemakers, and workers;  
 
recommend methods of overcoming discrimination against women in public and 
private employment;  
 
encourage women to become candidates for public office;  
 
promote more effective methods for enabling women to develop their skills, 
continue their education, and be retrained;  
 
secure appropriate recognition of women’s accomplishments and contributions to 
the State;  
 
work to develop healthy attitudes within the framework of the commission’s 
responsibilities; and 
 
inform the Executive and Legislative branches on issues concerning women, 
including offering testimony on these issues. 
 
The commission may (1) act as a clearinghouse for activities to avoid duplication of effort 
and (2) make surveys and appoint advisory committees in the fields of education, social 
services, labor laws and employment policies, law enforcement, health and safety, new and 
expanded services, legal rights, family relations, human relations, and volunteer services. 
The commission must submit an annual report to the Governor and General Assembly. The 
commission’s fiscal 2025 report can be found here. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1365/ Page 5 
State Expenditures:   
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The State plan is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, with the 
exception of the one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is not 
subject to this mandate. However, the program generally provides coverage for mandated 
health insurance benefits. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that the program currently 
covers services related to the evaluation and management of menopause and 
menopause-related symptoms. Thus, DBM does not anticipate any material impact on the 
program. In the past year, menopause and menopause-related services were utilized by 
5,700 program members, accounting for approximately $1.5 million in paid charges. 
 
Maryland Department of Health   
 
MDH can identify at least one training program on the evaluation and management of 
menopause and menopause-associated symptoms and relevant health occupations boards 
can update regulations with existing budgeted resources. 
 
MDH advises that additional expertise on perimenopausal, menopausal, and 
postmenopausal conditions is required to complete the reports, including additional staff 
and contractual support. Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $100,266 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the July 1, 2026 effective date of the bill’s reporting 
requirement provisions. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) health 
policy analyst to consult with the State Community Health Worker Advisory Committee 
to evaluate and develop the required action plan, consult with stakeholders to identify 
opportunities for clinical education, and produce the two reports by October 1, 2027. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, 
as well as a contractual vendor to support the development of an action plan.  
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$41,819 
Contractual Services 
50,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
      8,447 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$100,266 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The contractual employee and 
vendor contract both terminate on October 1, 2027.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1365/ Page 6 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and the ACA. 
 
Other Entities 
 
This analysis assumes that the Maryland Commission for Women can complete the 
required evaluation of policy options and report to specified committees of the 
General Assembly with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the bill does not apply to the nongrandfathered 
individual and small employer markets. Should the bill be amended to apply to all markets, 
the State would be required to defray the cost of the new mandate to the extent it applies 
to the individual and small group ACA plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse and 
Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1365/ Page 7 
Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
 
Overview 
 
Fully insured, large group plans and certain individual plans must cover Maryland’s 
mandated health insurance benefits. These mandates do not apply to most individual or 
small group plans, public health insurance, or plans issued outside of Maryland. However, 
individual and small group plans and plans sold through the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) must cover federal essential health benefits (EHBs). Thus, the type of 
plan an individual is enrolled in generally determines which benefits must be provided. 
 
Most Marylanders Are Insured by Employment-based Coverage 
 
Maryland residents generally obtain health insurance from one of three sources:  
(1) employment-based coverage; (2) private coverage in the individual market; or 
(3) public health insurance provided by the State and/or federal government (i.e., Medicaid, 
the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and military-related 
coverage). In calendar 2023 (the most recent data available), more than one-half (53.9%) 
of the State’s population had employment-based coverage, more than one-third (34.1%) 
were covered by public health insurance programs, and 5.7% purchased coverage in the 
individual market. The remaining 6.5% of Marylanders were uninsured. 
 
State Regulation of Insurance Applies Only to Certain Plans 
 
Employment-based coverage is either fully insured or self-insured. A fully insured plan is 
a traditional model for health insurance under which an employer pays a fixed premium to 
an insurer and the insurer assumes all financial risk and responsibility for paying claims. 
Fully insured plans are most common among small to mid-sized businesses as they offer 
more predictable costs and less administrative burden. In a self-insured plan, the employer 
assumes all financial risk and pays claims directly, usually through a third‑party 
administrator. Self-insured plans are more common among larger employers with the 
resources to assume the financial risk. 
 
The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act preempts states’ ability to require 
private employers to offer health insurance coverage and exempts self-insured plans from 
state insurance regulation. As a result, only fully insured plans are regulated by state 
insurance regulators. Thus, in Maryland, self-insured plans are not regulated by the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and are not subject to Maryland law. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1365/ Page 8 
In calendar 2024, 2.58 million Maryland residents younger than age 65 were insured 
through commercial health benefit plans, of which 890,245 were covered by a fully insured 
plan and 1.69 million were covered by a self-insured plan. Thus, only about one‑third 
(34.5%) of those covered through commercial plans were in fully insured plans subject to 
State regulation. Overall, only 17.4% of the State’s nonelderly population was covered by 
a plan subject to State regulation. 
 
Mandated Benefits Apply Only to Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
Maryland law requires insurers, health maintenance organizations, and nonprofit health 
service plans to cover more than 50 specific benefits. These “mandated benefits” apply to 
expense‑incurred contracts that provide “hospital, medical, and surgical benefits,” which 
include non-major medical products and federally excepted benefits (benefits outside of 
primary medical coverage that are not subject to certain federal requirements). These 
include fully insured, large group plans (≥50 employees), individual grandfathered plans 
in effect on or before March 23, 2010, when the federal Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) was enacted, and limited or specialty plans such as fixed-indemnity plans. 
Maryland’s State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
predominately self-insured and thus largely exempt from mandated benefits. However, the 
program generally provides coverage for these benefits as otherwise required under State 
law. 
 
Mandated benefits could apply to individual and small group policies. However, if the 
benefits go beyond those in the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that defines the 
minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group markets in 
Maryland), the State must cover the cost. Thus, mandated benefits are not typically applied 
to those policies. 
 
Mandated benefits do not apply to Medicaid/MCHP, Medicare, the Federal Employees 
Health Benefits Program, or military/Veterans Administration coverage. Mandated 
benefits also do not apply to health benefit plans issued outside of Maryland – such as when 
a Maryland resident works for an employer based in another state and the plan is issued in 
that state. In that instance, the plan is subject to the requirements (and mandated benefits) 
of the state in which it is issued. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes mandated benefits for large group and grandfathered plans. For 
further specifics on mandated benefits, see Title 15, Subtitle 8 of the Insurance Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1365/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland’s Mandated Health Insurance Benefits for 
Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
 Amino-acid elemental formula 
 Anesthesia for dental care 
 Biomarker testing 
 Blood products 
 Breast cancer screening 
 Breast prosthesis following a mastectomy 
 Child well visits and immunizations 
 Chlamydia screening 
 Cleft lip/palate treatment/management 
 Clinical trials 
 Colorectal cancer screening 
 Contraceptive drugs or devices 
 Diabetic equipment or supplies 
 Emergency room services 
 Fertility awareness-based methods 
 Fertility preservation due to medical 
treatment that may cause infertility 
 Gynecological care 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Human papilloma virus screening 
 Infertility benefits (including IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Laboratory services 
 Lung cancer screening 
 Lymphedema diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment 
 Male sterilization 
 Mastectomies 
 Medical foods 
 Mental health and substance use 
treatment 
 Morbid obesity surgical treatment 
 Osteoporosis prevention and treatment 
 Ostomy equipment and supplies 
 Physician services 
 Pregnancy and maternity benefits 
 Prescription benefits 
 Preventive services 
 Prosthetic devices 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Reconstructive breast surgery 
 Referrals to specialists 
 Second opinions and coverage of 
outpatient services 
 Smoking cessation 
 Surgical removal of testicles 
 Temporo-Mandibular Joint Syndrome 
treatment 
 X-rays 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Mandated benefits as of January 2025. Coverage of calcium score testing is required beginning 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1365/ Page 10 
Application of Mandated Benefits in Practice 
 
Legislation is frequently introduced to add new mandated benefits. For example, 
Senate Bill 518 of 2025 would have required coverage for preventive screenings for 
ovarian cancer for individuals aged 45 and older. The bill would have applied only to 
commercial health insurance, specifically fully insured large group plans and individual 
grandfathered plans. Coverage would not have applied to self-insured plans, 
nongrandfathered individual or small group plans, plans issued in another state to a 
Maryland resident, or any public health insurance program (in the same way that current 
mandated benefits do not apply to these plans). 
 
Essential Health Benefits Apply to Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Maryland law requires that EHBs be included in the State benchmark plan and in all 
qualified health plans offered through MHBE. Exhibit 2 summarizes the EHBs required 
as of September 2025. For further specifics, see MIA’s Essential Health Benefits Chart:  
Individual and Small Group Plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1365/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 2 
Essential Health Benefits for Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
 Allergy serum 
 Ambulance service 
 Bariatric surgery 
 Blood and blood products 
 Breast reconstructive surgery/prosthesis 
 Cardiac rehabilitation 
 Care in office for illness or injury 
 Case management 
 Chiropractic services 
 Controlled clinical trials 
 Diabetic treatment/equipment/supplies 
 Durable medical equipment 
 Emergency services 
 Family planning services 
 General anesthesia/associated care for 
dental care for children 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Hospice 
 Infertility services (excludes IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Medical food 
 Mental health and substance use 
benefits 
 Nutritional services 
 Outpatient hospital services 
 Outpatient laboratory/diagnostic 
services 
 Outpatient short-term rehabilitation 
 Patient centered medical homes 
 Pediatric dental 
 Pediatric vision 
 Pregnancy and maternity 
 Prescription drugs 
 Preventive services 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Pulmonary rehabilitation 
 Skilled nursing facility 
 Transplants 
 Wellness benefits
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Essential health benefits as of September 2025. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11