START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1395 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1395 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Agricultural Equipment Warranties 
 
 
This bill requires, for purposes of making a claim under a warranty for “agricultural 
equipment,” a consumer to provide written notice (i.e., to a manufacturer or factory branch) 
to report a nonconformity, defect, or condition occurring in the equipment. The bill also 
establishes numerous procedures for remedying a nonconformity, defect, or condition. A 
consumer who suffers a loss because of a violation of a provision of the bill may bring a 
civil action to enforce the provision, as specified. In addition to any other remedies that 
may be available under the bill, if a manufacturer or factory branch or its agent or 
authorized distributor is found to have acted in bad faith, the court may award the consumer 
damages up to $10,000. The bill may not be construed to limit or impair a right or remedy 
that is otherwise available to a consumer under any other law. The bill applies only to 
agricultural equipment sold on or after January 1, 2026. Violation of the bill is an unfair, 
abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), 
subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1395/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Agricultural equipment” means any self-propelled vehicle designed 
primarily for and used in the occupation or business of farming. It excludes certain vehicle 
and equipment types, such as an off-road vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, etc.  
 
If agricultural equipment does not conform to all applicable warranties during the warranty 
period, the consumer, during the warranty period, must report the nonconformity, defect, 
or condition by providing written notice to the manufacturer or factory branch by certified 
mail, return receipt requested. It must be the duty of a dealer to notify the manufacturer of 
any notice received under this requirement.  
 
The consumer must provide an opportunity for the manufacturer or factory branch (or its 
agent or dealer) to correct the nonconformity, defect, or condition. The nonconformity (or 
defect or condition) must be corrected (1) at no charge to the consumer regardless of 
whether the repairs are made after the expiration of the warranty period and (2) within 
30 days after the manufacturer’s or factory dealer’s receipt of the consumer notification. 
 
Generally, if, after a reasonable number of attempts, the manufacturer or factory branch, 
its agent, or its authorized dealer is unable to repair or correct any defect or condition that 
substantially impairs the use and market value of the agricultural equipment to the 
consumer, the manufacturer or factory branch, at the option of the consumer, must: 
 
 
replace the agricultural equipment with comparable agricultural equipment that is 
acceptable to the consumer; or 
 
accept return of the agricultural equipment from the consumer and refund to the 
consumer the full purchase price including all license fees, registration fees, and any 
similar governmental charges, less a reasonable allowance for (1) the consumer’s 
use of the equipment and (2) damage that is not attributable to normal wear or a 
nonconformity, defect, or condition. 
 
The manufacturer or factory branch must make refunds to the consumer and lienholder, if 
any, as the interests of the consumer and lienholder, if any, appear. It is an affirmative 
defense to a claim that the nonconformity, defect, or condition (1) does not substantially 
impair the use and market value of the agricultural equipment or (2) is the result of abuse, 
neglect, or unauthorized modifications or alterations of the agricultural equipment. 
 
It must be presumed that a reasonable number of attempts have been made to conform 
agricultural equipment to the applicable warranties if: 
 
 
the same nonconformity, defect, or condition has been subject to repair four or more 
times by the manufacturer or factory branch or its agents or authorized dealers 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1395/ Page 3 
within the warranty period, but the nonconformity, defect, or condition continues to 
exist; or  
 
the agricultural equipment is out of service during the season of use for a cumulative 
total of 30 or more days during the warranty period due to the repair or attempted 
repair (however, the 30-day period does not include a day on which a consumer has 
been offered or provided the use of other agricultural equipment that performs the 
same function). 
 
The term of a warranty, the warranty period, and the 30-day out-of-service period must be 
extended by any time during which repair services are not available to the consumer by 
reason of war, invasion, strike, or fire, flood, or other natural disaster. 
 
The presumption described above does not apply against a manufacturer if a consumer has 
not provided the required written notification and the opportunity to correct the issue. 
 
Current Law:  An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, 
among other acts, any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, 
visual description, or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or 
effect of deceiving or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, 
rental, loan, or bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; 
the extension of consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual 
purchase of consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose 
business includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may benefit small businesses that utilize agricultural 
equipment, to the extent they pursue a claim under a warranty under the procedures 
established by the bill. Conversely, a manufacturer, factory branch, or authorized dealer, 
to the extent they are small businesses, may be subject to a more robust warranty claims 
process than under current law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1395/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 990 and HB 1345 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 849 (Senator Gallion) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4