START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1325 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1325 
(Delegate McComas, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Workers' Compensation - Evaluation of Permanent Impairments - Licensed 
Social Worker-Clinical 
 
 
This bill authorizes a licensed certified social worker-clinical, instead of only a licensed 
psychologist or qualified physician, to perform the required evaluation and report that must 
take place for a workers’ compensation claim that includes a permanent impairment 
involving a behavioral or mental disorder.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To perform the evaluation and report, a licensed certified social 
worker-clinical must: 
 
 
meet 
the 
requirements 
for 
evaluation, 
diagnosis, 
and 
treatment 
of 
(1) biopsychosocial conditions; (2) mental and emotional conditions and 
impairments; and (3) behavioral health disorders including substance-related 
disorders, addictive disorders, and mental health disorders, as defined in § 7.5-101 
of the Health – General Article; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1325/ Page 2 
 
meet the requirements for registration for a rehabilitation counselor or a vocational 
evaluator established under § 9-6A-09 of the Labor and Employment Article;  
 
have met the above requirements for a minimum of two years following the initial 
issuance of the individual’s license; and 
 
be an authorized provider, as defined in COMAR 14.09.08.01. 
 
Current Law:  If an employee covered under workers’ compensation insurance has 
suffered an accidental personal injury, compensable hernia, or occupational disease, the 
employee is entitled to compensation benefits paid by the employer, its insurer, the 
Subsequent Injury Fund, or the Uninsured Employers’ Fund, as appropriate. 
Workers’ compensation benefits include wage replacement, medical treatment, death and 
funeral costs, and vocational rehabilitation expenses. 
 
For workers’ compensation claims that includes a permanent impairment that involves a 
behavioral or mental disorder, a licensed psychologist or qualified physician must 
(1) perform an evaluation of only the mental or behavioral portion of the permanent 
impairment and (2) report the evaluation to the Workers’ Compensation Commission 
(WCC), as specified. 
 
Vocational rehabilitation is a workers’ compensation benefit that provides disabled 
covered employees who cannot return to their former job (due to a work-related injury) 
assistance in re-entering the workforce. A specialist in vocational rehabilitation provides 
services that may include testing, job placement, vocational counseling, on-the-job 
training, and retraining to the injured worker to enable them to return to work. Generally, 
in order to provide vocational rehabilitation services in conjunction with a workers’ 
compensation case or claim, an individual must register with WCC. WCC must establish 
the application process and fee by regulation. The registration fee is currently 
$150 (whether for initial issuance or renewal), and the registration is valid for three years 
from the date of issuance. 
 
To qualify for registration as a rehabilitation practitioner, an individual must meet specified 
education, experience, and/or certification requirements. For example, to register as a nurse 
care manager, the individual must simply be certified as a nurse care manager by the 
State Board of Nursing. However, to register as a rehabilitation counselor, the individual 
may need a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree with relevant experience and/or be 
certified as a rehabilitation counselor, certified vocational evaluator, or certified disability 
management specialist, or hold an equivalent national certification. Additionally, under 
some circumstances, a rehabilitation counselor or vocational evaluator must work under 
the administrative supervision of another individual registered by WCC, as specified. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill neither modifies the definition of “rehabilitation practitioner” 
nor expressly requires a licensed certified social worker-clinical to register with WCC to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1325/ Page 3 
perform the evaluation and report. As such, this analysis assumes that registration is neither 
necessary nor required – just that a licensed certified social worker-clinical must be able to 
meet the requirements for registration. Thus, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
WCC operations or finances. (If registration were required, special fund revenues could 
increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2027.) 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that employ licensed certified social 
workers-clinical staff may experience increased business through the State’s workers’ 
compensation system. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Legislation with similar provisions has been introduced 
within the last three years. See HB 1210 of 2025 and HB 694 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 522 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Subsequent Injury Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
js/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3