START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1321 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1321 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
 
 
Child Care Scholarship Program - Enrollment and Copays - Alterations 
 
 
This bill prohibits an enrollment freeze in the Child Care Scholarship (CCS) Program from 
applying to certain individuals. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 
must establish a waitlist during any enrollment freeze, which must give priority to certain 
applicants. While an enrollment freeze is active, MSDE must also identify, inform, and 
assist CCS Program applicants who qualify for enrollment in publicly funded 
prekindergarten. The bill also temporarily alters provisions related to authorized 
CCS Program copayment levels. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2026; however, 
provisions related to copayment modifications terminate June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant impact on CCS Program expenditures beginning in 
FY 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Program Enrollment Freeze Modifications – Effective July 1, 2026 
 
A freeze in CCS Program enrollment may not apply to: 
 
 
a family or an individual who is enrolled in Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA); 
 
a family or an individual who is enrolled in the federal Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families Program; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1321/ Page 2 
 
a child who is enrolled in the federal Social Security Income (SSI) program; and 
 
a child who is homeless. 
 
An individual described above must otherwise meet the criteria for enrollment in the CCS 
Program (described below). If MSDE establishes an enrollment freeze, MSDE must 
establish a waitlist for eligible individuals who apply to the program after the freeze is in 
effect. The waitlist must remain in effect as long as there are fewer available awards under 
the program than eligible applicants for the program. The waitlist must give priority for 
enrollment to qualified applicants who (1) have the greatest financial need, based on 
household income and (2) apply to enroll a child younger than the age of three. 
 
If MSDE establishes an enrollment freeze, it must identify applicants to the CCS Program 
whose children qualify for the publicly funded prekindergarten program under  
Title 7, Subtitle 1A of the Education Article. MSDE must inform an applicant identified 
about the publicly funded prekindergarten program, including by providing information 
on: 
 
 
available prekindergarten slots in the county in which the applicant resides; 
 
contact information for private and public prekindergarten providers who have 
available slots; and 
 
how to apply for publicly funded prekindergarten. 
 
On request, MSDE must assist eligible families with the publicly funded prekindergarten 
enrollment process. The process for identifying and assisting eligible program applicants 
whose children qualify for the publicly funded prekindergarten program must continue as 
long as the waitlist is in effect. 
 
Copayment Level Modifications – Effective July 1, 2026, through June 30, 2028 
 
The bill establishes new requirements related to copayments for CCS Program participants 
by temporarily exempting MSDE from the general requirement under current law that 
prohibits increasing the copayment levels of the program that were in effect as of  
January 1, 2024. Under the bill, MSDE must award a scholarship in an amount sufficient 
to ensure that an individual who has an annual income of up to 50% of the regional median 
income where the individual resides is not required to pay a copay for child care. 
 
MSDE may award a scholarship in an amount that results in an individual paying a copy if 
the individual’s annual income is more than 50% of the regional median income where the 
individual resides. However, MSDE may not award a scholarship in an amount that results 
in an individual paying (1) 3% or more of the individual’s annual income as a copay, if the 
individual has an annual income of 65% (or less) of the regional median income where the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1321/ Page 3 
individual resides or (2) 7% or more of the individual’s annual income if the individual has 
an annual income of more than 65% of the regional median income where the individual 
resides. 
 
The copayment provisions above terminate June 30, 2028. Beginning July 1, 2028, MSDE 
is again prohibited from increasing copayment levels in effect as of January 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law:  The CCS Program provides financial assistance with child care costs to 
low-income families that meet applicable State or federal requirements. The program is 
funded through a combination of State funds and the federal Child Care and Development 
Block Grant. All participating parents or guardians must meet a variety of technical 
requirements and must be working or enrolled in school, a training program, or a 
work-related activity. 
 
To meet income requirements, an individual must meet income guidelines that vary based 
on family size or be a recipient of TCA or SSI. Beginning July 1, 2023, MSDE 
implemented a process for granting presumptive eligibility to individuals who attest to 
meeting the eligibility requirements for a scholarship, as required by Chapters 525 and 526 
of 2022. Effective May 2022, MSDE also increased the income eligibility threshold to 75% 
of the State median income (SMI) using federal assistance distributed to states during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
For each child needing care, eligible families receive a voucher with the scholarship rate, 
which is used to purchase child care directly from the provider of their choice. Families 
also receive access to information and referral services to assist them in finding appropriate 
child care. Scholarship rates are determined by the geographic region, type of provider, 
and age of the child. A family that does not receive TCA or SSI may be required to 
contribute a copayment, and any remaining balance between the actual rate charged by the 
provider and the voucher amount. In accordance with Chapters 525 and 526, MSDE must 
award scholarships in an amount sufficient to ensure that an individual will not be required 
to pay a copay if they participate in certain programs, such as the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program or the federal Housing Choice Voucher Program. Effective May 2022, 
MSDE also reduced copays for all other participating families to a range of $1 to  
$3 per week. 
 
MSDE determines provider reimbursement rates based on market rate surveys of the 
geographic regions conducted every two years.  
 
Under current law, MSDE is generally prohibited from making certain alterations to the 
CCS program. For example, it is prohibited from making the following alterations to the 
CCS Program in effect as of January 1, 2023:  (1) reducing the reimbursement rates; 
(2) reducing the income eligibility requirements; or (3) implementing a freeze in program 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1321/ Page 4 
enrollment. However, MSDE may do so if (1) it submits a notification to specified 
committees of the General Assembly on the intended program alterations, including the 
reason for, and expected duration of, the proposed actions and (2) the program alterations 
identified in the notification are not implemented until the completion of the regular 
legislative session immediately following the submission of the notification. If the 
Board of Public Works approves budget reductions for the program pursuant to its current 
statutory authority for a certain fiscal year, MSDE may reduce the reimbursement rates, 
reduce the income eligibility requirements, or implement a freeze in enrollment at any time 
during the fiscal year. MSDE is also prohibited from increasing the copayment levels of 
the program in effect as of January 1, 2024. 
 
State Expenditures:  The overall impact on CCS Program expenditures cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time, as while certain elements of the bill likely increase program costs, 
other provisions may allow MSDE to offset its costs, at least on a temporary basis. 
Additional information regarding the various impacts of the bill is provided below. 
 
Due to prior year budget shortfalls for the CCS Program, MSDE implemented an 
enrollment freeze to slow spending growth; a waitlist for program services was 
implemented beginning May 1, 2025. Under the bill, MSDE advises that the CCS Program 
must serve additional families who, under current law, would be placed on the waitlist. 
Certain exemptions related to the enrollment freeze, however, are not expected to have a 
fiscal impact. Specifically, families receiving TCA or SSI are already exempt from the 
waitlist. Therefore, there is no material impact from codifying these exemptions. However, 
MSDE notes that an estimated 4% of children on the waitlist are children experiencing 
homelessness. According to MSDE, if scholarships are awarded to all of these 
(218) children, general fund expenditures likely increase by approximately $3.0 million 
annually, using an average cost per child (without accounting for future payment rate 
increases, the age of the child, or differences in cost by geographic location across the 
State). 
 
MSDE further advises that 80% of children enrolled in the CCS Program have family 
incomes below 50% of SMI; under the bill, a copay may not be collected from these 
families. MSDE did not provide additional information on the overall amount of copays 
currently collected from families under this income threshold, although it expects to incur 
increased expenditures once the department is prohibited from requiring any copay. 
Conversely, under current law, copayments are also capped at $3 per week (based on the 
amounts in effect as of January 1, 2024). The bill effectively repeals this limitation for 
some families (i.e., those with annual incomes above 50% of SMI, as further specified). 
Accordingly, the expenditures referenced above are likely offset to some degree once 
higher contributions (in the form of copays) from other families are allowed. MSDE did 
not provide additional context to reliably estimate the impact of this authorization. The 
provisions associated with these impacts terminate at the end of fiscal 2028. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1321/ Page 5 
In addition, MSDE expects increased costs associated with higher caseloads, staffing and 
operational needs, and system modifications. Specifically, the agency’s CCS 
Administrative Tracking System and the CCS provider and family portals must be 
modified to comply with the bill’s changes. These costs are expected to total approximately 
$125,000 in fiscal 2027 only. 
 
MSDE also anticipates the need for additional staff to provide direct assistance to families 
on the waitlist seeking to apply for publicly funded kindergarten. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring one program manager to assist with higher workloads under the bill. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$90,595 
Operating Costs 
    9,141 
FY 2027 State Expenditures – Staff 
$99,736 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Private child care providers that qualify as small businesses and 
accept child care scholarships may benefit from the bill’s waitlist exemptions, which may 
result in an overall increase in the number of children receiving a scholarship. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5