START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1328 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1328 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means and Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Department of State Police - School Mapping Data Program 
 
 
This bill repeals the School Data Mapping Program in the Maryland Center for School 
Safety (MCSS) and reestablishes it in the Department of State Police (DSP), with funding 
still provided by the Safe Schools Fund. Under the reconstituted program, only local public 
safety agencies, rather than public school systems, may apply for funding from the 
program. DSP must adopt regulations to implement the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $200,700 in FY 2027 for contractual 
staff; out years reflect inflation, ongoing expenses, and the termination of contractual staff 
in FY 2028. No effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
200,700 
56,600 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($200,700) 
($56,600) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local public safety agencies may apply for grants under the program, but 
any resulting revenues or costs associated with being awarded a grant are discretionary. 
Local school system revenues and related expenditures from program grants decrease, as 
local school systems are no longer eligible to apply for program funding under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1328/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of the program in DSP is to provide oversight of, and 
technical assistance to, public safety agencies that receive funds from the Safe Schools 
Fund to produce school mapping data for each public school in a county (including charter 
schools) to facilitate efficient and effective emergency response by public safety agencies. 
The program must ensure that school mapping data meets or exceeds school mapping data 
standards developed and updated by the Interagency Commission on School Construction 
(IAC). 
 
School mapping data produced by a public safety agency with funding from the 
Safe Schools Fund must satisfy the same criteria established in current law for the MCSS 
program. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 166 and 167 of 2024 established the School Mapping Data 
Program in MCSS to provide funds to local school systems to produce school mapping 
data for each public school in the county, including charter schools. Local school systems 
can apply for funding from the program, and any school mapping data produced with 
funding from the program must comply with standards developed by IAC. The Acts further 
specified minimum requirements for school mapping data, including that it be: 
 
 
compatible with software platforms used by the school and public safety agencies 
that provide emergency services to the school, as specified; 
 
be in a printable format and, if requested, be in a digital file format that can be 
integrated into interactive mobile platforms; 
 
be verified for accuracy by a walk-through of the school buildings and grounds; 
 
be oriented true north; 
 
be overlaid on current aerial imagery; 
 
contain site-specific labeling that matches the structure of school buildings and 
school grounds, as specified; and 
 
be overlaid with gridded X and Y coordinates. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget, as enacted, included an appropriation of $3.0 million for the 
program. 
 
School Safety Subcabinet  
 
The School Safety Subcabinet consists of the following individuals or their designees:   
 
 
the State Superintendent of Schools; 
 
the Secretary of Health; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1328/ Page 3 
 
the Secretary of State Police; 
 
the Attorney General; 
 
the Secretary of the Department of Disabilities; and 
 
the Executive Director of the Interagency Commission on School Construction. 
 
The State Superintendent or designee chairs the subcabinet, and the Executive Director of 
MCSS provides staff. Among other responsibilities, the School Safety Subcabinet 
administers the Safe Schools Fund. 
 
Safe Schools Fund  
 
The purpose of the Safe Schools Fund is to provide grants to local school systems to 
enhance school safety. The fund consists of (1) $600,000 credited annually to the fund from 
penalties assessed against uninsured motorists; (2) money appropriated in the State budget 
to the fund; (3) money from any other source accepted for the fund; and (4) interest 
earnings. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Program Funding 
 
As noted above, the fiscal 2026 budget as enacted provided $3.0 million to the Safe Schools 
Fund for program grants. MCSS advises that $2.3 million of that amount has been awarded, 
covering 70% of Maryland schools. Additional funding for the program is not included in 
the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced, so the fund has $700,000 remaining from the original 
appropriation and, potentially, the $600,000 it receives annually from penalties on 
uninsured motorists to use for the program. Given the number of schools remaining to be 
mapped, $1.3 million should be sufficient to map all the remaining schools in the State that 
have not received grants. Therefore, no additional funding is needed. 
 
Department of State Police Administrative Costs 
 
DSP is not a grant-making agency and has no staff available to administer the grant 
program. As most schools have already received grants, and available funding is sufficient 
to cover the remaining schools, it is assumed that DSP can award grants to the remaining 
schools during fiscal 2027 but requires contractual staff to do so.  
 
This analysis assumes that once schools have completed the mapping process, maps do not 
need to be updated regularly since the basic layout of school grounds does not change very 
often and additional funding for that purpose is not provided. To the extent that new schools 
are built or schools undergo substantial renovations or additions, it is further assumed that 
local public safety agencies can request funding from DSP to update those maps and that 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1328/ Page 4 
DSP, working with the subcabinet, can provide funding from the $600,000 allocation that 
the fund receives each year for the limited number of updates that must be performed 
(MCSS estimates the cost of mapping one school to be less than $3,000). Therefore, 
DSP does not require staff in the out years. 
 
Therefore, general expenditures increase by $200,655 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost for DSP to hire 
one contractual grant administrator, one contractual fiscal auditor, and one contractual 
geographic information system (GIS) analyst to award grants, monitor grant expenditures, 
and assist local public safety agencies with GIS mapping technology. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$173,233 
Operating Expenses 
    27,422 
Total FY 2027 DSP Expenditures 
$200,655 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) termination of the 
contractual employees after one full year.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
MCSS staff currently working on the program are assumed to be reassigned to other duties, 
resulting in no effect on MCSS expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 895 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the Environment 
and Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Somerset counties; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Interagency Commission on School 
Construction; Maryland Center for School Safety; Department of State Police;  
Baltimore 
City 
Public 
Schools; 
Anne 
Arundel 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County 
Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1328/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
me/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5