START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1381 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1381 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Stopping, Standing, or Parking in a Bike Lane or Bicycle Path - 
Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle in a bike lane or 
bicycle path, unless authorized by a local jurisdiction. However, this prohibition does not 
apply to (1) an authorized emergency vehicle; (2) a transit vehicle; (3) a vehicle picking up 
or discharging individuals with disabilities; (4) a vehicle that has become so disabled while 
on the highway that the driver cannot avoid stopping and temporarily standing or parking 
the vehicle; and (5) a vehicle while loading or unloading goods for pick up or delivery, if 
specified requirements are met. A person who violates the prohibition is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and is subject to a maximum fine of $500 (the general penalty for violations 
of the Maryland Vehicle Law).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except as necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance 
with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, Maryland law 
prohibits stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle in/on specified places, including but not 
limited to (1) an intersection; (2) a crosswalk; (3) a sidewalk; (4) a bridge; (5) a highway 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1381/ Page 2 
tunnel; or (6) a place where stopping is prohibited by an official sign. A violation of any 
of these prohibitions is a misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of $500. The 
District Court has established a prepayment penalty of $60 or $70 for these violations. 
 
“Bike lane” means any portion of a roadway or shoulder designated for single directional 
bicycle flow. “Bicycle path” is defined as any travelway designed and designated by 
signing or signing and marking for bicycle use, located within its own right-of-way or in a 
shared right-of-way, and physically separated from motor vehicle traffic by berm, shoulder, 
curb, or other similar device.  
 
“Vehicle” is defined as any device in, on, or by which any individual or property is (or 
might be) transported or towed on a highway. “Vehicle” includes a low-speed vehicle and 
an off-highway recreational vehicle, but it does not include an electric personal assistive 
mobility device or a personal delivery device.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 178 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery and Worcester counties; City of 
Laurel; Maryland Municipal League; Town of La Plata; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2