START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1357 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1357 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Menstrual Hygiene Products - Labeling Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires, by April 1, 2028, manufacturers of menstrual hygiene products to include 
a list of all ingredients on each package of menstrual hygiene products sold in the State. 
The manufacturer must list the ingredients in order of predominance and display the list 
prominently in conspicuous type on each consumer-facing product. A manufacturer may 
list a proprietary ingredient (or combination of ingredients) by their common name to 
protect confidentiality. A manufacturer that violates the bill is subject to a civil penalty of 
up to $1,000, which must be collected and paid by the Office of the Attorney General 
(OAG) into the general fund with the intent that the penalties be used to fully offset any 
costs incurred in connection with enforcement of the bill. Violation of the bill is also an 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
(MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. General fund revenues may increase minimally 
from the new civil penalty established by the bill. OAG’s Consumer Protection Division 
can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1357/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, 
among other acts, any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, 
visual description, or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or 
effect of deceiving or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, 
rental, loan, or bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; 
the extension of consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual 
purchase of consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose 
business includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates 
MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each 
repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any 
person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2