START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1326 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1326 
(Delegate Wilson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child Abuse and Neglect - Disclosure of Reports and Records 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Human Services (DHS) to disclose a report or record 
concerning child abuse or neglect to (1) the administrator of a child care center operated 
by or on behalf of a unit of State or local government or in a State-occupied building, as 
specified; (2) the coach, team administrator, or manager of a youth sports program for 
recreational athletic competition or instruction for participants who are minors; and (3) the 
administrator or other appropriate personnel of any organization that has temporary care or 
custody of a child or responsibility for the supervision of a child. The disclosures must be 
for the purpose of determining the suitability of an individual for employment or voluntary 
service with the applicable entity.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures may increase, at least minimally, for DHS to handle an 
increased volume of report disclosures, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, under provisions in § 1‐202 of the Human Services Article, all 
records and reports about child abuse and neglect are confidential; however, records of 
child abuse or neglect must be disclosed pursuant to an order of the court or in other 
specified circumstances. Child abuse and neglect records may be disclosed on request to 
individuals or entities under circumstances specified in statute, including to local or State 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1326/ Page 2 
officials responsible for the administration of child protective services (CPS), juvenile 
services, child care, or foster care, as necessary to carry out their official functions. 
 
DHS is also permitted to disclose a report or record concerning child abuse or neglect to 
the operator of a child care center that is required to be licensed or to hold a letter of 
compliance or to a family child care provider who is required to be registered, as specified, 
to determine the suitability of an individual for employment in the child care center or 
family child care home. 
 
Unauthorized disclosure of child abuse or neglect records is a misdemeanor and is subject 
to up to 90 days imprisonment and/or a fine of up to $500. 
 
Child Abuse or Neglect Centralized Confidential Database – Generally 
 
Under § 5‐714 of the Family Law Article (unaffected by the bill), the Social Services 
Administration (SSA) within DHS maintains a centralized confidential database of cases 
of reported child abuse or neglect, accessible by each local department of social services. 
Information in the centralized confidential database must be accessible only to the CPS 
staff of SSA or local departments who are investigating or assessing a report of suspected 
abuse and an individual or entity specifically authorized by law to access the information. 
 
DHS or a local department may identify an individual as responsible for abuse or neglect 
in the centralized confidential database only if the individual (1) has been found guilty of 
any criminal charge arising out of the alleged abuse or neglect or (2) has been found 
responsible for indicated abuse or neglect and has unsuccessfully appealed the finding or 
failed to exercise the individual’s appeal rights within the allotted time period, as specified 
in statute. The centralized confidential database may not contain any information that is 
required to be expunged under statute. 
 
Unless an individual has been identified as responsible for abuse or neglect in the 
centralized confidential database in accordance with statute, information in the centralized 
confidential database may not be provided in response to any request for background 
information for employment or voluntary service. Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, an individual may not be identified as responsible for abuse or neglect in the database 
solely because (1) a child has been released from a hospital or other facility; (2) the child 
has been diagnosed with a mental disorder or developmental disability; and (3) the 
individual has failed to take the child home due to a reasonable fear for the safety of the 
child or child’s family. 
 
State Expenditures:  DHS advises it requires six additional full-time staff (five program 
administrators and one supervisor) to promptly respond to requests for reports and records 
of child abuse and neglect, with general fund expenditures therefore increasing by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1326/ Page 3 
$467,278 in fiscal 2027, and by approximately $580,000 annually thereafter. DHS bases 
its estimate on the anticipation of receiving an increase in requests due to the expanded 
eligibility of recipients under the bill; however, it did not provide details on the estimated 
number of additional requests that was used to formulate its staffing estimate. DHS also 
recommends centralizing disclosure of these reports in SSA’s central office, rather than 
through the local departments of social services and CPS investigators who currently 
handle disclosures/releases in accordance with statute. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS), while acknowledging that the bill expands 
eligible recipients of certain child abuse and neglect reports/records and may therefore 
result in additional requests for disclosures, is unable to independently verify the need for 
additional staff at the magnitude indicated by DHS without experience under the bill. 
According to DHS, although current administrative practice for disclosures is informal, 
implementation of the bill may necessitate a change in how such disclosures have 
historically been handled. However, regardless of any changes in procedures, the need for 
additional staff is primarily dependent on whether the bill results in a significant number 
of additional requests, which cannot be reliably estimated in advance. For illustrative 
purposes only, the costs associated with one additional program specialist are 
approximately $67,800 in fiscal 2027, and $83,800 on an annual basis. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill as written intends to make a corrective change, listing 
the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit as part of the Correctional Ombudsman. However, 
DLS assumes the corrective reference to statute is intended to reference Title 9, Subtitle 40 
(Office of the Correctional Ombudsman), rather than Subtitle 4 (Subtitle 4 formerly related 
to the Commission on the Capital City but has been repealed). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 950 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 447 (Senator Gile) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; Office of the 
Correctional Ombudsman; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1326/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
Third Reader - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4