START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1367 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1367 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Commission on Re-Imagining Health Care in Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes a Commission on Re-Imagining Health Care to envision a 
comprehensive health care system for the State, as specified. The commission must study 
numerous issues and make recommendations regarding the establishment of a new health 
care system. The commission must submit to the Governor and the General Assembly 
(1) preliminary reports by December 1, 2027, and December 1, 2028, and (2) a final report 
by December 1, 2029. The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) must provide staff 
for the commission. The bill is contingent on MHCC determining funding levels needed to 
conduct the work of the commission and securing private funding to do so. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026, and terminates May 31, 2030, subject to a specified contingency 
regarding funding. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No likely effect in FY 2026. To the extent MHCC secures private funding 
for the commission, special fund revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate 
amount to fund the work of the commission in FY 2027 through 2030, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of the commission is to envision a comprehensive health care 
system for the State that is (1) entirely patient-centered; (2) an integrated system of care, 
addressing all aspects of health, including somatic, behavioral, dental, vision, and hearing, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1367/ Page 2 
at every stage of life; (3) founded in the concept of quality health care that provides support 
for the development of health care practitioners; (4) accessible to and eliminates barriers 
for all residents of the State; (5) agile enough to evolve as needs of patients evolve; 
(6) financially sustainable; and (7) designed to ensure that health care quality and access is 
stronger than the existing health care system. 
 
The commission comprises (1) three members of the Senate; (2) three members of the 
House of Delegates; (3) the Secretary of Budget and Management (or their designee); 
(4) the Secretary of Health (or their designee); (5) the Maryland Insurance Commissioner 
(or their designee); (6) the Deputy Secretary of Health Care Financing (or their designee); 
(7) the Executive Director of the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (or their designee); 
(8) the Executive Director of MHCC (or their designee); (9) the Executive Director of the 
Health Services Cost Review Commission (or their designee); (10) two representatives of 
the Maryland Association of Counties; (11) two representatives of the Maryland State 
Medical Society; (12) two representatives of the League of Life and Health Insurers of 
Maryland that are health insurers; (13) one representative of the Maryland Hospital 
Association; (14) two consumer members; and (15) additional representatives appointed 
by the Governor, as specified. 
 
The Governor and the Presiding Officers must jointly designate the chair. A member of the 
commission may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
The commission may consult with individuals and entities not represented on it for 
expertise and may also form subcommittees. 
 
The commission must study (1) how health care is delivered in other states and countries 
and how those systems are evolving; (2) the role the elements of the existing health care 
system in the State would play in a patient-centered health care system; (3) the role of the 
worker’s compensation program in an integrated system; (4) how to delineate covered 
health care services; (5) new models of health care practitioner education and development; 
(6) how to balance patient-centered health care and cost; (7) how to provide strong health 
care provider networks throughout the State; (8) how to address low physician 
reimbursement rates relative to other states; (9) what roles hospitals, acute care centers, 
urgent care providers, and other facilities and health care practitioners would play in a new 
health care system; (10) what model health care systems should be considered and how to 
ensure that innovation is not constrained by the current health care system; and (11) how 
high deductibles and limited networks deter care and decrease equal access in the current 
system. 
 
The commission is contingent on MHCC determining funding levels needed to conduct the 
work of the commission and securing private funding for the commission. Within five days 
of receiving sufficient funding, MHCC must notify the Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS). If DLS receives notice by June 1, 2027, the commission takes effect on the date 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1367/ Page 3 
notice is received. If DLS does not receive notice by June 1, 2027, the commission is null 
and void. 
 
State Expenditures:  The commission is contingent on MHCC determining funding needs 
and securing private funding. If DLS receives notice from MHCC that funding has been 
secured by June 1, 2027, the commission takes effect on the date notice is received. If such 
notice is not received by that date, the commission is null and void. 
 
Thus, to the extent MHCC secures private funding and notifies DLS by June 1, 2027, 
MHCC special fund revenues increase to reflect private funding for the commission (in 
one or more of the fiscal years 2027 through 2030 depending on the private funding 
identified). MHCC special fund expenditures increase accordingly in fiscal 2027 through 
2030 to support the work of the commission, likely including at least one contractual 
special fund position to staff the commission and write the three required reports. 
 
This analysis assumes that any impacted State agencies can participate on the commission 
using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3