START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1369 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1369 
(Delegate Solomon)(By Request - Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Department of Budget and Management - Audit and Finance Compliance Unit - 
Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes an Audit and Finance Compliance Unit (AFCU) in the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM) to monitor the efforts of Executive Branch departmental 
units to correct audit findings reported by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA). AFCU 
must assist agencies with resolving audit findings as specified and may implement 
proactive steps to address and prevent audit findings through advice and support provided 
to agencies. AFCU must maintain a dashboard on current and repeat audit findings on its 
website, which must be fully operational by October 1, 2027. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.03 million in FY 2027 for staffing; 
future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. The FY 2027 budget as 
introduced includes $330,000 for two additional AFCU employees. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1.03 
1.23 
1.28 
1.34 
1.40 
Net Effect 
($1.03) 
($1.23) 
($1.28) 
($1.34) 
($1.40)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1369/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Governor must implement systems and processes to monitor the 
efforts of the Executive Branch departmental units to correct audit findings reported by 
OLA. 
 
AFCU must provide direct assistance as specified in the bill to agencies with at least  
four repeat audit findings or as requested by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee 
(JAEC). AFCU must establish a specialized team to provide the required direct assistance, 
which may include current State employees, current contractual employees, and external 
contractors. 
 
The dashboard required by the bill must include all audit findings for agencies under 
examination each year, organized by units of the agency. For each finding, the dashboard 
must include specified information and a graphic representation of the progress of 
corrective actions. AFCU must report to JAEC on the status of the dashboard by  
October 1, 2026, and one year later. 
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may adopt regulations to carry out the bill. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Audits Conducted by the Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Generally, OLA must conduct a fiscal/compliance audit of each unit of the State 
government (except for units of the Legislative Branch) at an interval ranging from  
three to four years, unless the Legislative Auditor determines, on a case-by-case basis, that 
more frequent audits are required. Each agency or program may be audited separately or 
as part of a larger organizational unit of State government. OLA must also conduct 
performance audits or financial statement audits when authorized by the Legislative 
Auditor, directed by the JAEC, or the Executive Director of the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS), or otherwise required by law. A report must include OLA’s findings, any 
appropriate recommendations, and any response from the unit subject to the audit. 
 
The Executive Director of DLS or JAEC may direct OLA to undertake a review to 
determine the extent to which action has been taken by a unit to implement a report 
recommendation. 
 
The Governor and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court must implement systems and 
processes to monitor the efforts of the Executive departmental units and the Judiciary to 
correct audit findings reported by OLA. Within nine months of the most recent audit report, 
any unit with five or more repeat audit findings must report to OLA on the corrective 
actions taken or a schedule for when specific corrective actions will be implemented for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1369/ Page 3 
each finding in the audit report. Each applicable unit must continue to report to OLA on a 
quarterly basis after the initial report until satisfactory progress has been made. 
 
Six State agencies (the Comptroller of Maryland, the Department of Housing and 
Community Development, the Department of Information Technology, the Maryland 
Department of Health – Pharmacy Services, the Maryland Department of Transportation, 
and St. Mary’s College of Maryland) had repeat audit findings in calendar 2024 fiscal 
compliance reports issued by OLA. The 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report restricted  
$250,000 of funds until the State Chief Information Security Officer submits a report to 
OLA on plans to remediate repeat audit findings by February 1, 2026 (which was submitted 
in February 2026), and OLA submits a report on commitment to resolve audit findings by 
May 1, 2026. Representatives from agencies with certain repeat audit findings in  
calendar 2024 were also required to meet with the State Chief Information Security Officer 
to identify and document a path for resolution of any outstanding issues. 
 
Audit and Finance Compliance Unit of DBM  
 
AFCU is an audit unit within DBM focused on enhancing audit compliance and program 
management across State agencies. AFCU was expanded in fiscal 2023 from a small unit 
of four individuals within the Office of the Secretary, Executive Direction to an official 
budgetary subunit of DBM with nine regular positions. AFCU provides enhanced technical 
support to State agencies facing repeat audit findings, fiscal crises, and other financial 
management or audit compliance issues. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced adds  
two additional regular positions to assist AFCU’s work. 
 
Committee narrative in the 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report requested that DBM develop 
new performance measures for AFCU. The department’s fiscal 2026 Managing for Results 
submission included no new measures. In response, language in the fiscal 2026 budget bill 
restricted $150,000 in general funds pending submission of performance measures for 
AFCU. DBM submitted a report containing the requested information on August 20, 2025, 
and the budget committees authorized the release of funds. 
 
Governor’s Directive 
 
On February 6, 2026, Governor Wes Moore released a directive to cabinet secretaries, 
directing them to review their agency processes for monitoring resolution of audit issues 
within 60 days of the order. The secretaries must also review recent audit findings and 
identify areas to address without new resources within the first 60 days. Then, within  
180 days, secretaries must identify areas where additional resources could address the root 
cause of repeat audit findings. The directive stated that the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) will pilot a management tool to track findings, inquiries, and corrective 
actions. AFCU is also highlighted as a resource for agencies in seeking input, as well as 
convening meetings with agencies to develop a culture of best practices. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1369/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  The bill generally codifies what AFCU is already doing to assist 
State agencies in monitoring corrective actions for OLA findings. However, the bill adds 
to AFCU’s responsibilities by:  (1) authorizing JAEC to request AFCU to assist agencies; 
(2) requiring AFCU to perform sample tests of implemented corrective actions;  
(3) requiring AFCU to implement a dashboard to track OLA findings; and (4) establishing 
a specialized team to provide direct assistance to specified agencies. 
 
DBM reports needing 20 additional employees and $500,000 in contractor costs to 
implement the bill, but DLS disagrees with that assessment. The fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced adds two additional regular positions to assist AFCU with monitoring corrective 
actions to resolve OLA findings. To the extent that JAEC requests AFCU to assist an 
agency, DLS assumes that these two additional positions can handle any increased 
workload stemming from JAEC requests. DLS also assumes existing employees can likely 
staff the specialized team. However, DLS concurs that DBM needs additional resources to 
perform sample tests of implemented corrective actions and to establish a dashboard. 
Currently, DBM reports that testing is only done on a limited basis when resources allow 
for it, so it is not typically performed. 
 
The Governor’s directive requires DoIT to develop a tool to track audit findings. Assuming 
DBM is able to use this tool as the dashboard, DBM estimates annual expenditures of 
$10,000 for information technology services related to running the dashboard. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $1,032,070 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring two administrators to assist with audits (as budgeted in the fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced), and three auditors, three informational technology auditors, and  
one supervisor to perform sample tests of implemented corrective actions. It also includes 
$10,000 of annual expenses to establish and maintain the dashboard. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
9.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$939,803 
Dashboard Expenses 
10,000 
Operating Expenses 
      82,267 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$1,032,070 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced contains $329,960 in general funds for the two administrators in AFCU. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1369/ Page 5 
State agencies can report to AFCU on their progress in correcting any audit findings with 
existing resources. To the extent that the specialized team consists of State employees 
outside of DBM, State agencies can likely serve on the team with existing resources. 
 
Additional Comment:  Although the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes  
$5.0 million in the Dedicated Purpose Account to address repeat audit findings, DBM 
advises that those funds are not for AFCU. Rather, they will be used for temporary staff, 
information technology (presumably the tool to track audit findings in the Governor’s 
directive), and consultants. Therefore, those funds are not available for the additional staff 
included in this analysis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 858 (Senator Hettleman)(By Request - Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Commerce; Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department 
of Human Services; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of Service and 
Civic Innovation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5