START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1351 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1351 
(Delegates Amprey and Ruff) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Home Improvement Contractors - Disaster Mitigation Services - Regulation and 
Prohibition 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of “home improvement” to include the provision of 
“disaster mitigating services,” thereby requiring any entities providing those services to be 
licensed and regulated by the Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC). Each 
home improvement contract for disaster mitigating services must contain a notice of the 
owner’s right to rescind the contract, as specified. The bill also authorizes the governing 
body of a county to impose certain limitations on in-person solicitation of a victim of a 
disaster by a contractor offering disaster mitigation services. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase minimally beginning in 
FY 2027 due to additional licensing fee revenues and ongoing administrative costs. As 
revenues and expenditures are expected to largely offset, there is no net effect on 
general fund revenues due to reversions. The increase in special fund licensing revenues 
may be mitigated to the extent disaster mitigating services are already provided by existing 
licensees, which is not known. Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures increase minimally 
beginning in FY 2027 due to additional assessments paid to – and potentially claims paid 
from – the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1351/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Disaster mitigating services” includes (1) boarding up windows or doors 
to secure a building; (2) demolition of a structure to prevent further damage; (3) setting 
water mitigation equipment; (4) tarping or caulking a roof or building after damage; and 
(5) securing a wall or roof to prevent further damage. 
 
An owner may rescind a home improvement contract for disaster mitigating services within 
five days after entering into the contract. An owner who does so may not be required to 
pay more than the amount of the penalty indicated in the contract. A contract must 
(1) comply with specified provisions of the Maryland Door-to-Door Sales Act and 
(2) include a notice informing the owner of the right to rescind within five days. 
 
“Disaster” means a serious event that (1) causes harm to a home, building, or other structure 
and (2) requires emergency response services. The governing body of a county may impose 
limitations on in-person solicitation of a victim of a disaster by a contractor offering 
disaster mitigation services, including limitations on the hours during which (and areas 
within which) in-person solicitation may occur. These provisions do not apply to a 
contractor, or a person acting on behalf of a contractor, who is engaged in an ongoing 
business relationship, other than mere solicitation, with a victim of a disaster before the 
disaster occurs. Additionally, the existence of a disaster is not contingent on the declaration 
of a State of Emergency by the federal government or the Governor, or a local disaster 
declaration, as specified 
 
Current Law:  MHIC in the Maryland Department of Labor licenses and regulates home 
improvement contractors and salespersons, subject to specified requirements for licensure 
and ongoing licensee behavior. MHIC also administers a guaranty fund for the purpose of 
reimbursing homeowners for actual losses due to the errors and omissions of licensed 
contractors and their subcontractors, salespersons, and employees. 
 
“Home improvement” means (1) the addition to or alteration, conversion, improvement, 
modernization, remodeling, repair, or replacement of a building or part of a building that 
is used or designed to be used as a residence or dwelling place or a structure adjacent to 
that building or (2) an improvement to land adjacent to the building. 
 
“Home improvement” includes (1) construction, improvement, or replacement, on land 
adjacent to the building, of a driveway, fall-out shelter, fence, garage, landscaping, deck, 
pier, porch, or swimming pool; (2) a shore erosion control project for a residential property; 
(3) connection, installation, or replacement, in the building or structure, of a dishwasher, 
disposal, or refrigerator with an icemaker to existing exposed household plumbing lines; 
(4) installation, in the building or structure, of an awning, fire alarm, or storm window; and 
(5) work done on individual condominium units. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1351/ Page 3 
The Secretary of Labor must calculate the direct and indirect costs attributable to MHIC 
annually, and MHIC must establish fees based on those calculations. Fees may not be 
increased annually by more than 12.5% of the existing and corresponding fees. Fee 
revenues are deposited into the Maryland Home Improvement Commission Special Fund, 
which covers MHIC’s operating costs. At the end of each fiscal year, any unspent and 
unencumbered balance in the fund in excess of $100,000 reverts to the general fund. 
 
Home Improvement Guaranty Fund 
 
MHIC must establish a Guaranty Fund that must be kept at a minimum level of $1,000,000 
to compensate homeowners for an “actual loss” that results from an act or omission by a 
licensed home improvement contractor or other violations, as discussed in further detail 
below. 
 
Licensees pay a $100 fee to the Guaranty Fund as a condition of getting a license; if the 
balance of the Guaranty Fund is projected to fall below $1,000,000, the commission must 
(1) assess each licensed contractor an additional fee of $50 and (2) submit a report to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. The report must be made within 30 days 
of any such projection and must detail actions that are being taking to restore the balance 
of the fund to a sustainable level. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide residential disaster mitigation 
services will be impacted, as they are subject to MHIC licensing and regulation 
requirements under the bill. Additionally, to the extent payouts increase under the bill, 
MHIC licensees may have to pay higher Guaranty Fund assessments and/or 
reimbursements to maintain the fund at the appropriate level. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1348 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 929 (Senator Harris) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Office of the Attorney General 
(Consumer Protection Division); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1351/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4