START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1364 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1364 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Mammograms - Arterial Calcification Notice 
 
 
This bill requires a center where mammography testing is performed to include, in a 
screening results letter that is sent to the patient as required by federal law, a specified 
notice about breast arterial calcification. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The notice required by the bill must state as follows: 
 
 
If your mammogram shows breast arterial calcification, you should know that breast 
arterial calcification is a common finding. However, breast arterial calcification may 
be an indicator of an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. If you have breast 
arterial calcifications, please discuss this with your physician to assess your 
cardiovascular risks and determine if additional testing may be appropriate for you. 
 
Current Law:  A center where mammography testing is performed is required to include 
in a screening results letter that is sent to a patient, as required by federal law, a specified 
notice that states: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1364/ Page 2 
 
This notice contains the results of your recent mammogram, including information 
about breast density. 
 
If your mammogram shows that your breast tissue is dense, you should know that 
dense breast tissue is a common finding and is not abnormal, with about half of 
women having dense or highly dense breasts. However, dense breast tissue can 
make it harder to find cancer on a mammogram and may also be associated with an 
increased risk of cancer. 
 
This information about the result of your mammogram is given to you to raise your 
awareness and to inform your conversations with your physician. Together, you can 
decide whether additional screening options are right for you based on your 
mammogram results, individual risk factors, or physical examination. A report of 
your results was sent to your physician. 
 
If the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) finds significant differences between the 
content of the notice and current medical evidence on breast density, MDH may adopt 
regulations changing the content of the notice. 
 
Additional Comments:  Breast arterial calcification can be found through a routine 
mammogram and is associated with higher risk for cardiovascular problems such as heart 
disease or stroke. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - February 23, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2