START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1362 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1362 
(Delegate Wivell, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Condominiums and Homeowners Associations - Meetings - Recording 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill generally requires all meetings (and special meetings, as applicable) of specified 
bodies of a condominium or homeowners association (HOA) to be recorded by video with 
audio or by audio only. However, a meeting may not be recorded if a member in good 
standing who is in attendance objects, and the recording requirement does not apply to a 
meeting with a developer. A recording may be paused for the duration of any closed portion 
of the meeting. The recording may not substitute for written, approved minutes, and any 
recording‐related fees must be included in the budget and approved by the governing body. 
Further, the bill also alters existing bookkeeping and inspection requirements for HOAs to 
include meeting recordings.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions set forth procedures for a developer or declarant to 
transition control of a condominium or HOA, respectively, to a governing body. Each year, 
the governing body of a condominium and HOA must convene at least one meeting at 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1362/ Page 2 
which the agenda is open to any matter relating to the entity. Additional requirements 
regarding meetings held by the governing bodies are specified in statute. 
 
Generally, the books and records of a condominium or an HOA must be available for 
examination or copying, or both, by any unit or lot owner, the owner’s mortgagee, or their 
respective agents or attorneys during normal business hours and after reasonable notice. 
The books and records must first be made available to an owner within 15 days after a unit 
or lot is conveyed and the owner makes a request to examine or copy the books and records. 
However, if the books and records contain specified private records, they may be withheld 
from public inspection, except for inspection by the person who is the subject of the record. 
 
For more information on condominiums and homeowner associations (commonly known 
as common ownership communities, along with cooperative housing corporations), see the 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1362/ Page 3 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 3