START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1383 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1383 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Children in Need of Assistance - Permanency Plan Requirements 
 
   
This bill specifies that the court must, in making certain required findings related to a 
child’s permanency plan, explicitly find whether a local department of social services made 
reasonable efforts to meet the individualized needs of the child, including the child’s 
(1) health, medical, and dental needs, including ensuring that the needs are timely met; 
(2) education needs and educational plan, including the timely enrollment of the child in 
an educational program and the efforts to inform the child of postsecondary education or 
vocational programs; (3) safety; (4) emotional stability and the timeliness of therapeutic 
referrals or services provided to the child; (5) physical placement, including the stability 
and appropriateness of the placement and housing needs of the child after the case is 
terminated; (6) socialization needs, including the child’s enrollment in extracurricular 
activities or programs; (7) financial needs, including the child’s need for financial 
awareness to ensure future self-sufficiency; and (8) necessary documents, including the 
child’s birth certificate, social security card, passport, driver’s license, or State-issued 
identification card.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. The 
Department of Human Services (DHS) can likely implement the bill using existing 
budgeted resources, as discussed below. No assumed direct effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1383/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A child in need of assistance (CINA) is a child who requires court 
intervention because (1) the child has been abused or neglected, has a developmental 
disability, or has a mental disorder and (2) the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian are 
unable or unwilling to give proper care and attention to the child and the child’s needs. 
Statutory provisions outline numerous requirements for CINA proceedings. 
 
Out-of-Home Placement Review Hearings:  The court must hold a permanency planning 
hearing to determine the permanency plan for a child in out-of-home placements within 
certain time limits specified in statute. The court must subsequently conduct a hearing to 
review the permanency plan at least every six months until commitment is rescinded or a 
voluntary placement is terminated. Statute requires the court to make certain 
determinations, projections, and evaluations regarding the overall case plan for the child, 
including a determination and documentation of whether reasonable efforts have been 
made to finalize the permanency plan that is in effect, and/or change the permanency plan 
if a change in the plan would be in the child’s best interest.  
 
When the permanency plan is another planned permanent living arrangement, the review 
hearing must include (1) a determination on the adequacy of the steps the local department 
is taking to ensure that the child’s foster family home or child care institution is following 
the reasonable and prudent parent standard; (2) a determination of whether the child has 
regular, ongoing opportunities to engage in age-appropriate activities; and (3) a 
consultation with the child in an age-appropriate manner about the opportunities to 
participate in specified activities. Every reasonable effort must be made to effectuate a 
permanent placement for the child within 24 months after the date of initial placement.  
 
Guardianship Review Hearings:  A juvenile court must hold an initial guardianship review 
hearing to establish a permanency plan for the child and, at least once every year after the 
initial guardianship review hearing until the juvenile court’s jurisdiction terminates, a 
guardianship review hearing. At each review hearing, the juvenile court must determine 
whether (1) the child’s current circumstances and placement are in the child’s best interests; 
(2) the permanency plan that is in effect is in the child’s best interests; and (3) reasonable 
efforts have been made to finalize the permanency plan that is in effect. Statute requires 
the court to evaluate and make specified findings and projections regarding the permanency 
plan for the child.   
 
Required Judicial Findings in Review Hearings 
 
In an out-of-home placement or guardianship review hearing, the court must make a 
finding whether a local department of social services made reasonable efforts to: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1383/ Page 3 
 
finalize the permanency plan in effect for the child; 
 
meet the needs of the child, including the child’s health, education, safety, and 
preparation for independence; and 
 
for a child who is at least age 18:  (1) before the child is emancipated, enroll the 
child in health insurance that will continue after the child is emancipated and screen 
the child for eligibility for public benefits and assist the child with associated 
applications; (2) work with appropriate individuals to establish a plan for stable 
housing that is reasonably expected to remain available to the child for at least 
12 months after the date of emancipation; and (3) work with appropriate individuals 
to engage the child in education, training, and employment activities that will 
prepare the child to have appropriate and sufficient income to live independently 
after emancipation.  
 
In making the above findings, the court must consider specified factors, including 
(1) whether a local department has provided appropriate services that facilitate the 
achievement of a permanency plan for the child, including consideration of in-State and 
out-of-state placement options; (2) whether the child’s placement has been stable and in 
the least restrictive setting appropriate, available, and accessible for the child during the 
period since the most recent hearing held by the court; and (3) whether a local department 
has provided appropriate and timely services to help maintain the child in the child’s 
existing placement, as specified.  
 
If the court finds that reasonable efforts for a child were not made or finds that reasonable 
efforts were made but compliance was not achieved due to specified circumstances, the 
court must promptly send its written findings to the director of the local department; the 
Social Services Administration; the State Citizens Review Board for Children; the local 
citizens review panel; and any individual or agency identified by a local department or the 
court as responsible for monitoring the care and services provided to children in the legal 
custody or guardianship of the local department on a systemic basis. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DHS anticipates the need for 56 additional staff (48 social workers, 
4 human services specialists, and 4 attorneys) at a cost of $10.3 million in fiscal 2027 and 
up to $14.1 million by 2031, supported by 50% general funds/50% federal funds. DHS 
bases its estimate on the court considering and documenting the department’s technical 
compliance with “reasonable efforts” at every review hearing, rather than current practice 
of a flexible approach tailored to each child’s circumstances. Mainly, DHS advises that the 
bill requires additional staff to provide detailed documentation for each new criterion at 
every appearance while maintaining sustainable caseloads for caseworkers.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS), while acknowledging the bill expands upon 
existing required findings in review hearings that are explicitly specified in statute, 
disagrees that additional staff – particularly at the magnitude of that estimated by DHS – 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1383/ Page 4 
are required. According to DHS, existing law, DHS internal policy, and COMAR 
regulations already require reasonable efforts, individualized case planning, and 
preparation for a child’s independence. DHS also advises it currently operates programs, 
such as Ready by 21 and the Social Services Administration Youth Transition Planning, 
that provide youth-driven, individualized support in the service areas required by the bill. 
While the bill expands explicit statutory requirements for DHS staff in review hearings, 
the bill itself does not generate new caseloads, nor do the enumerated criterion of the bill 
significantly depart from existing required services for a child’s needs (related to education, 
health, safety, and independence). In fact, the Judiciary, in advising that it does not 
anticipate any significant increase in workload as a result of the bill, notes that the bill is 
largely consistent with – if not duplicative of – existing law about the court’s obligations 
to make reasonable effort findings after evaluating a child’s needs and best interests. It is 
assumed that local departments already have to appropriately document reasonable efforts 
to facilitate the required court findings under current law/practice.   
 
Therefore, DLS advises that the bill’s implementation can likely be managed with existing 
staff. Should, however, local departments experience a significant administrative burden 
from the bill, additional resources can be requested through the annual budget process. For 
illustrative purposes only, expenditures associated with one social worker are 
approximately $72,372 in fiscal 2027 and up to $106,062 by fiscal 2031 (supported by 
34% general funds/66% federal funds).  
 
Under the federal Social Security Act, DHS receives Title IV-E federal funding to support 
its programs for children in out-of-home placement. DHS advises failure to meet the bill’s 
requirements on time may impact existing Title IV-E finding; it did not provide a specific 
estimate. Any potential reduction in federal funding solely attributable to the bill is, 
therefore, speculative and not accounted for in this analysis.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1383/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5