START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1330 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1330 
(Delegates Hornberger and Wims) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit – Year–Round Application 
 
   
This bill allows homeowners to apply for the homeowners’ property tax credit on a 
year-round basis beginning in fiscal 2028. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies 
to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2027. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for homeowners’ property tax credits increase 
beginning in FY 2028. Under one set of assumptions, general fund expenditures increase 
by approximately $168,200 beginning in FY 2028. State revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that more homeowners become eligible for the homeowners’ 
property tax credit, local governments that provide a supplement to the State homeowners’ 
property tax credit will realize a decrease in revenues.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program is a State-funded program 
that provides credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who 
qualify based on a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. Counties and 
municipalities have the authority to enact local supplements to the program; the cost of 
such supplemental credits must be borne by the local governments. The fiscal 2027 State 
budget includes $56.0 million in funding for the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1330/ Page 2 
Homeowners must apply to the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) 
each year in order to be eligible for the property tax credit. The application is available on 
the department’s website. Approximately 38,500 individuals receive the property tax credit 
each year. 
 
The maximum assessment against which the credit may be granted is $300,000, less the 
amount of any homestead property tax credit received (a State program that provides  
tax credits against State, county, and municipal real property taxes for owner-occupied 
residential properties for the amount of real property taxes resulting from annual 
assessment increases that exceeds a certain percentage or “cap” in any given year). To be 
eligible for the property tax credit, a recipient’s net worth may not exceed $200,000 and 
the combined gross household income may not exceed $60,000. 
 
The total real property tax is the product of the sum of all property tax rates on real property, 
including special district tax rates, for the taxable year on a dwelling multiplied by the 
lesser of $300,000 or the assessed value of the dwelling reduced by the amount of the 
homestead property tax credit. 
 
The amount of the homeowners’ property tax credit is the difference between the total 
property tax and a calculated tax limit. The tax limit is calculated by applying specified 
percentages to the homeowners’ gross income. The percentages applied to the combined 
income that are used to calculate the property tax limit are (1) 0% of the first $8,000 of 
combined income; (2) 4% of the next $4,000 of combined income; (3) 6.5% of the next 
$4,000 of combined income; and (4) 9% of the combined income over $16,000. 
 
Application Process 
 
Generally, homeowners must apply to SDAT each year in order to be eligible for the 
property tax credit. The application must be available on the department’s website by 
February 15; applications may be filed through October 1. 
 
Chapters 528 and 529 of 2023 altered the application requirements for the homeowners’ 
property tax credit program for individuals who receive income only from social security, 
a pension, or an annuity. In these situations, the homeowner must submit a regular 
application in the first year that the individual applies for the property tax credit and a more 
abbreviated certification for the next two years. In the following third year, the homeowner 
will once again have to submit a regular application in order to remain eligible for the 
property tax credit.  
 
Chapter 79 of 2024 authorized an applicant for the homeowners’ property tax credit to 
attest to gross income on an application in lieu of providing an income tax return to SDAT 
under certain circumstances. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1330/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit 
Program increase beginning in fiscal 2028. Based on recent applications received and 
denied for the property tax credit in calendar 2025, general fund expenditures could 
increase by approximately $168,200 annually, beginning in fiscal 2028. The estimate is 
based on the following data provided by SDAT:   
 
 
on average 60,400 annual applications for the property tax credit; 
 
on average 38,500 applications become eligible for the property tax credit; 
 
the number of applications for late filing was 107 in calendar 2025; and 
 
the average homeowners’ property tax credit is $1,572. 
 
However, the actual effect on general fund expenditures could be greater depending on the 
number of homeowners who apply between October 31 and February 14 during each 
application cycle. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments are authorized to grant a local supplement to the 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program. While SDAT administers the local program, 
local governments are responsible for covering the cost of the local supplement. Currently, 
Baltimore City and 13 counties (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Caroline, Carroll, 
Charles, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, and Washington) 
provide a local supplement to the State program.  
 
The overall impact on local revenues cannot be reliably estimated. In general, the 
interaction between the various components of the homeowners’ property tax credit 
calculation (maximum eligible assessment, income, net worth, State and local property tax 
liabilities, as well as other tax credits) effectively results in a maximum tax credit that is 
available to each homeowner. Due to this maximum credit amount, the amount of the local 
tax credit supplement will usually decrease as the amount of the State tax credit increases, 
as the amount of the State tax credit is applied first. However, to the extent that more 
homeowners become eligible for the Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program, local 
governments that provide a supplement to the State homeowners’ property tax credit will 
realize a decrease in revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1330/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4