START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1373 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1373 
(Delegate Martinez) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Department of Education - Independent Regulatory Framework for After 
School and Out of School Time Child Care Programs - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to study and make 
recommendations on a framework for the regulation of child care programs for children 
who are at least five years old that is distinct from the regulation of child care programs for 
children who are younger than age five. The framework is to focus on the unique child care 
needs of after school and out of school time child care. By December 1, 2026, MSDE must 
submit a report of its findings and recommendations to specified committees of the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.    
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in FY 2027 only for 
contractual services. Revenues are not affected.     
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
500,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($500,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study, MSDE must:  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1373/ Page 2 
 
 
investigate the regulatory barriers providers of after school and out of school time 
child care programs face by having to adhere to the same regulatory and licensing 
requirements adopted for full-day, early childhood child care centers; 
 
evaluate the unique needs of after school and out of school time child care programs 
and how they differ from those of traditional, early childhood child care centers, as 
specified; 
 
identify and analyze regulations and licensing requirements in other states that are 
distinctly designed for after school and out of school time child care programs; and 
 
evaluate the administrative approach necessary to oversee the particular needs of 
after school and out of school time child care programs (e.g., whether programs 
should be licensed by or registered with MSDE, the time it would take to transition 
into a new administrative approach and the regulatory framework that should govern 
these programs during that interim, etc.). 
 
The recommendations must include specific recommendations on certain requirements, 
such as those related to staffing, staff to child ratios, background checks, etc. MSDE must 
also consult with stakeholders. 
 
Current Law:  The State oversees a variety of early education services that are provided 
to Maryland children and their families in cooperation with local governments, local school 
systems, and private child care providers. The Division of Early Childhood coordinates the 
State’s early childhood care and education system and is composed of three subdivisions:  
(1) the Office of Child Care; (2) the Office of Early Learning and Instruction; and (3) the 
Office of Family Support Services.  
 
Child Care Centers 
 
Subject to limited exception, child care centers may not operate in the State unless they are 
licensed. The State Board of Education is required to adopt regulations that relate to the 
licensing and operation of child care centers. A child care center is an agency, institution, 
or establishment that, for part or all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, 
and at least twice a week, offers or provides child care to children who do not have the 
same parentage except as otherwise provided for in law or regulation. 
 
Family Child Care Homes and Large Family Child Care Homes 
 
Generally, family child care homes and large family child care homes may not operate in 
the State unless they are registered. The State Board of Education is required to adopt 
regulations that relate to the registration of family child care homes and large family child 
care homes. A family child care home is a residence in which family child care is provided 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1373/ Page 3 
for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in which family child 
care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that it is already engaged in multiple projects that 
align with the timeframe under the bill and must therefore contract with an outside vendor 
to meet the bill’s requirements. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by 
$500,000 in fiscal 2027 for this purpose. The vendor’s responsibilities will include 
studying the possibility of establishing an independent regulatory structure for after school 
and out of school time child care programs, as well as assisting in the preparation of the 
required report.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3